

Skip to Main Page Content

Search

Report an accessibility problem

![A S U](https://www.asu.edu/asuthemes/4.8/assets/full_logo.png)

Menu

Sign In / Sign Out

        
                  * Sign In
        

Navigation for Entire University

        
                  * ASU Home
            * News/Events
            * Academics
            * Research
            * Athletics
            * Alumni
            * Giving
            * President
            * About ASU
          * My ASU
          * Colleges and Schools
            * Arts and Sciences
            * Business
            * Design and the Arts
            * Education
            * Engineering
            * Future of Innovation in Society
            * Graduate
            * Health Solutions
            * Honors
            * Journalism
            * Law
            * Nursing and Health Innovation
            * Public Service and Community Solutions
            * Sustainability
            * University College
            * Thunderbird School of Global Management
          * Map and Locations
            * Map
            * Tempe
            * West
            * Polytechnic
            * Downtown Phoenix
            * Online and Extended
            * Lake Havasu
            * Corporate Engagement and Strategic Partnerships
            * Research Park
            * Washington D.C.
            * China
          * Directory
        

Search

Ask An Anthropologist

__

        
                  * Home 
          * Activities
        
            * Coloring Pages & Worksheets 
            * Puzzles 
            * Quizzes 
            * Teacher Toolbox
        
          * Stories
        
            * World of Anthropology 
            * Meet Our Anthropologists
        
              * A Fossil Named Lucy 
              * The Brainy Branch 
              * Mussels, Migration and Microliths 
              * Ancient Ecosystems
        
            * Listen & Watch 
            * Top Questions 
            * Stories in Other Languages
        
          * Images
        
            * Image Galleries
        
              * Discover: Hadar, Ethiopia 
              * Discover: Mossel Bay
        
          * Links 
          * Contact
        
            * Ask A Question 
            * Guidelines 
            * Permissions 
            * Volunteers 
            * Information Collected 
            * Feedback
        
          * About
        
            * Credits 
            * Contribute 
            * Articles and News 
            * Site Map
        
          * ![Question icon](/sites/default/files/resize/assets/main/comments-75x59.png)
        

Ask A Question

        
                  * ![Teacher Toolbox](/sites/default/files/resize/assets/main/briefcase-70x60.png)
        

Teacher's Toolbox

        
                  * ![Listen &amp; Watch ](/sites/default/files/resize/assets/main/headphones-70x59.png)
        

Listen & Watch

![Ask An Anthropologist

Logo](/sites/default/files/resize/remote/85a2caebb0f866062018cffaf990f6ce-600x55.png)

        
                  * World of Anthropology
            * A Brief History of History
            * Babies, Birth, and Brains
            * Because Your DNA Says So
              * Digging up DNA
              * Sequencing yourself
              * The history written in your genome
            * Brains over Brawn
            * Changing Climates and Changing Faces
            * Chipping Away
            * Chomp Into the Past
            * Controlling the Code
            * Fossil Hunters
            * Fossils Rock
            * Historical Human Habitats
            * Life is Spelled A, T, C, G
            * Off to the Field We Go
            * Our Primate Heritage
            * Team Primates
            * Technology and Human Learning
            * The Setting for Science
            * The Tales of Teeth
            * There's No I in Human
            * To the Laboratory!
            * Walking Upright
            * When Did Our Brains Get Big?
            * Who Are You?
            * On the Origin of Species
          * Meet Our Anthropologists
          * Listen & Watch
          * Top Questions
          * Stories in Other Languages
        

![Because your DNA says so -

illustration](https://askananthropologist.asu.edu/sites/default/files/styles/aaa-

header/public/headers/dna_header.jpg?itok=-Q9yTorp)

Written by:

Genevieve Housman

Illustrated by:

Selina Martinez

## show/hide words to know

**DNA sequencing :** the process by which the order of nucleotides within a
DNA molecule is identified. ... more

**Genetics :** the study of genes, heredity, and DNA variation across
organisms.

**Identical twin :** an individual who shares the exact same DNA with another
individual; this is made possible when a single egg is fertilized to form one
zygote that then divides into two separate embryos creating identical twins
that are also known as monozygotic twins.

**Nucleotide :** the building block of DNA and RNA; consists of a base
(adenine, thymine, guanine, cytosine, or uracil), sugar molecule, and
phosphoric acid molecule. ... more

**Phenotype :** observable traits of an individual.

You look over at your classmate sitting next to you and you notice his brown
hair. You look around the room and see that your other fellow students may
have black, blonde, or red hair. And then there are all the shades in between.
Hair can also be curly or straight, thick or thin. This makes for a lot of
possible hair varieties. Is your hair exactly the same as one of your
classmate’s hair?

Because there are so many types of hair, it would be hard to find two people
with the exact same hair. It would also be hard to find two people who look
exactly the same. Identical twins look very similar because they have the
exact same DNA sequences. Most people are not twins, though. If you are not an
identical twin, your DNA is unique. This means that no one else in the world
has the same DNA sequence as you. Because your DNA is unique, your physical
appearance, or phenotype, is also unique.

Even though you and your classmates look different from one another, it is
easy to tell them apart from cats, birds, and flowers. Your DNA helps make you
look different from other people, but it also ensures that all humans look
like humans and not like any other organism. The study of DNA, including
comparisons between individuals and between different species, is known as
genetics.

## The pea that started it all

![Gregor Mendel was an Austrian monk from the 1800s who  discovered how

organisms pass traits from one generation to the

next.](/sites/default/files/assets/stories/Because_Your_DNA_Says_So/gregor_mendel_monk_250w.jpg)You
are not a cow. You're also not a worm, a bird, or a fish. But why do you look
different from these animals? For most of human history, people did not know
why humans looked like humans and not like other animals. They also didn't
know why kids looked more like their parents than other people. These answers
were unknown because people did not know about DNA. It wasn't until the 1800s
that an Austrian monk, named Gregor Mendel, made huge progress on this
question.

In his spare time, Mendel studied pea plants to find out how organisms pass
traits from one generation to the next. For example, he might have one short
pea plant and one tall pea plant reproduce. He would then see if the offspring
of the pea plants were short or tall. He repeated this type of experiment
hundreds of times to be certain of his results. He also looked at other traits
such as seed color, seed shape, and flower color.

From all these experiments, Mendel discovered that the pea plants had two
"alleles" for each trait he was looking at. An allele is one variant of a
gene. For example, one pea plant could have two short alleles, two tall
alleles, or one short allele and one tall allele. The combination of these two
alleles helped determine the plant’s traits and what traits could be passed on
to the plant’s offspring.

After finding this in the pea plants, Mendel thought that every organism had
two alleles for every trait. He also thought that each parent only passed one
of their two alleles for any particular gene onto the next generation. Thus,
offspring get one allele for each gene from each parent. We now know that
while many traits work this way, most are a lot more complex and involve more
than just two alleles per gene.

![Traits that Gregor Mendel studied in his pea plant experiments. Mendel

wanted to know how organisms pass traits from generation to generation. To do

this he would chose parent plants with one of these specific traits, allow

these plants to reproduce, and then observed the traits in the offspring

plants. Image by Mariana Ruiz

LadyofHats.](/sites/default/files/assets/stories/Because_Your_DNA_Says_So/mendels_peas_540w.jpg)Mendel
defined a gene as a unit of heredity that helped determine an organism’s
traits. However, he did not know what a gene was made of. Today we know that
genes are a functional unit of DNA. Humans have over 20,000 genes in their
DNA.

Mendel initiated this study of genetic inheritance. His work was lost for some
time and then rediscovered in the 1900s. It has helped advance the field of
genetics to what it is today.

## Generation of the genome

Today, people study genetics by sequencing DNA. DNA sequencing was first done
in the 1970s by Frederick Sanger. It involves finding the order of nucleotides
in a DNA molecule.

![Overview of DNA Sequencing. Click for more

detail.](/sites/default/files/assets/stories/Because_Your_DNA_Says_So/slide1_250w_copy.jpg)All
of the DNA in an organism’s cell is known as its genome. Different species
have different genome sizes. The human genome, for example, has over three
billion nucleotide pairs. Imagine trying to write out three billion letters on
a piece of paper! That is essentially what sequencing the human genome
entails.

In order to specifically study human genetics, the human genome had to be
sequenced. The Human Genome Project began in the 1990s, and at that time,
sequencing methods and computers weren't very advanced. Because the human
genome is so big, it took over a decade of work and over $3 billion to
sequence. It was finally completed in 2003.

## What do genetics studies tell us?

Scientists have now sequenced the DNA of many animals. These data show that
DNA does impact traits. DNA helps make the differences we can see between
species. They also help make the differences we can see between individuals of
the same species. Additionally, this genetic information can tell us about our
ancestry and our evolution.

### Read more about Because Your DNA Says So

        
                  * Digging up DNA
          * Sequencing yourself
          * The history written in your genome
        

## View Citation

You may need to edit author's name to meet the style formats, which are in
most cases "Last name, First name."

### Bibliographic Details

        
                  * Article: Because Your DNA Says So
          * Author(s): Genevieve Housman
          * Publisher: Arizona State University Institute of Human Origins Ask An Anthropologist
          * Site name: ASU - Ask An Anthropologist
          * Date published: December 2, 2015
          * Date modified: January 10, 2018
          * Date accessed: June 06, 2019
          * Link: https://askananthropologist.asu.edu/stories/because-your-dna-says-so
        

* * *

### APA Style

> Genevieve Housman. (2015, Dec 02). Because Your DNA Says So. Retrieved June
06, 2019, from https://askananthropologist.asu.edu/stories/because-your-dna-
says-so

American Psychological Association, 6th ed., 2nd printing, 2009.  
For more info, see the APA citation guide.

### Chicago Manual of Style

> Genevieve Housman. "Because Your DNA Says So." ASU - Ask An Anthropologist.
Published December 2, 2015. Last modified January 10, 2018.
https://askananthropologist.asu.edu/stories/because-your-dna-says-so.

Chicago Manual of Style, 17th ed., 2017.  
For more info, see the Chicago Manual citation guide.

### MLA Style

> Genevieve Housman. Because Your DNA Says So. ASU - Ask An Anthropologist.
December 2, 2015, askananthropologist.asu.edu/stories/because-your-dna-says-
so. Accessed 2019 June 06.

Modern Language Association, 8th ed., 2016.  
For more info, see the MLA citation guide.

## dna-500.jpg

![](https://askananthropologist.asu.edu/sites/default/files/styles/panopoly_image_full/public/side-

content/dna-500.jpg?itok=QPz204_f)

Learn more about DNA, genomes, and how they are sequenced in Ask A Biologist's
story What's a Genome?

## Because Your DNA Says So

        
                  * Digging up DNA
          * Sequencing yourself
          * The history written in your genome
        

## Be part of Ask An Anthropologist

By volunteering, or simply sending us feedback on the site. Scientists,
teachers, writers, illustrators, and translators are all important to the
program. If you are interested in helping with the website we have a
volunteers page to get the process started.

![Donate icon](https://dev-ask-an-

anthropologist.ws.asu.edu/sites/default/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public/donate_icon.gif?itok=GpVBwtl5)
Contribute

![iho logo](/sites/default/files/asu_humanorigins_horiz_rgb_white_150ppi.png)  
A research unit of  
The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences

![templeton logo](/sites/default/files/jtf-logo-secondary-cmyk-whitetext.png)  
Funded by the  
John Templeton Foundation

![becoming human logo](/sites/default/files/iho_fh_logo_white.png)  
Ask An Anthropologist  
powered by Becoming Human

Ask An Anthropologist

Contact us

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * YouTube
          * Instagram
        

Contribute

## Content

        
                  * Activities
          * Images
          * Stories
          * Words To Know
          * Ask A Biologist
        

## Tools

        
                  * Ask A Question
          * Contact
          * Feedback
          * Site Map
          * Teacher's Toolbox
        

ASU is #1 in the U.S. for Innovation

![Best Colleges U.S. News Most Innovative

2019](//www.asu.edu/asuthemes/4.8/assets/best-colleges-most-innovative.png)

        
                  * Copyright and Trademark
          * Accessibility
          * Privacy
          * Terms of Use
          * Jobs
          * Emergency
          * Contact ASU
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

