
        
                  * Abortion
        

![\[Photo: Senator Renee Unterman looks at the camera while she sits in the

senate chamber.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/unterman_2-530x350.jpg)

News Politics

## Renee Unterman Helped Bring a Near-Total Abortion Ban to Georgia. Now She's

Running for Congress.

Jun 6, 2019 Ally Boguhn

### Trending on Abortion

        
                    1. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
            2. I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
            3. The Escalation of Anti-Abortion Violence Ten Years After Dr. George Tiller’s Murder
        

More on Abortion

        
                  * Contraception
        

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Contraception

        
                    1. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
            2. An Anti-Choice Group Pledged It Would 'Never' Provide Contraception as It Pursued Title X Funds
            3. Family Research Council: The Extreme Anti-Choice Group Molding Trump's Reproductive Rights Policy
        

More on Contraception

        
                  * Economic Justice
        

![\[Photo: A food service employee works in a fast food

kitchen.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/working_1-530x350.jpg)

News Economic Justice

## There's a New Standard for Paid Family Leave Policy in the United States

Jun 6, 2019 Auditi Guha

### Trending on Economic Justice

        
                    1. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
            2. Pro-Choice Laws Are Winning in These States (Updated)
            3. 'They’ve Moved the Goalpost': How Missouri Lawmakers Are Regulating Legal Abortion Out of Existence
        

More on Economic Justice

        
                  * Politics
        

![\[Photo: Senator Renee Unterman looks at the camera while she sits in the

senate chamber.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/unterman_2-530x350.jpg)

News Politics

## Renee Unterman Helped Bring a Near-Total Abortion Ban to Georgia. Now She's

Running for Congress.

Jun 6, 2019 Ally Boguhn

### Trending on Politics

        
                    1. Biden Lied About the Hyde Amendment. Or He Is Very Confused.
            2. Anti-Choice Democrats Made Louisiana's Near-Total Abortion Ban Possible
            3. Elizabeth Warren Understands Political Power. And She Intends to Use It.
        

More on Politics

        
                  * Race
        

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Race

        
                    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
            2. Meet the Federal Agency Helping to Criminalize Pregnant Migrants
            3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
        

More on Race

        
                  * Law and Policy
        

![\[Photo: A scientists wearing scrubs looks at samples under a

microscope.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/scientist_1-530x350.jpg)

News Law and Policy

## Trump Administration Bans Government Scientists From Using Fetal Tissue

Jun 6, 2019 Sony Salzman

### Trending on Law and Policy

        
                    1. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
            2. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
            3. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
        

More on Law and Policy

        
                  * LGBTQ
        

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on LGBTQ

        
                    1. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
            2. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
            3. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
        

More on LGBTQ

        
                  * Religion
        

Evann Normandin ![Evann Normandin](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Evann-Normandin-Headshot-200x200.png)

Commentary Contraception

## Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.

May 24, 2019

### Trending on Religion

        
                    1. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
        

More on Religion

        
                  * Media
        

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Media

        
                    1. In Tupac's 'Dear Mama,' a Backstory About His Mother's Activism, Mass Incarceration, and Bail
            2. If Meghan Markle Chose a Doula, an OB-GYN's Mocking Proved Her Right
            3. 'Ctrl Alt Delete' Aims to Be 'The Office' of Abortion Providing
        

More on Media

        
                  * Immigration
        

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Immigration

        
                    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
            2. Meet the Federal Agency Helping to Criminalize Pregnant Migrants
            3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
        

More on Immigration

        
                  * Violence
        

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Violence

        
                    1. The Escalation of Anti-Abortion Violence Ten Years After Dr. George Tiller’s Murder
            2. Meet the Federal Agency Helping to Criminalize Pregnant Migrants
            3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
        

More on Violence

        
                  * Human Rights
        

![\[Photo: A food service employee works in a fast food

kitchen.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/working_1-530x350.jpg)

News Economic Justice

## There's a New Standard for Paid Family Leave Policy in the United States

Jun 6, 2019 Auditi Guha

### Trending on Human Rights

        
                    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
            2. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
            3. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
        

More on Human Rights

        
                  * Science
        

![\[Photo: A scientists wearing scrubs looks at samples under a

microscope.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/scientist_1-530x350.jpg)

News Law and Policy

## Trump Administration Bans Government Scientists From Using Fetal Tissue

Jun 6, 2019 Sony Salzman

### Trending on Science

        
                    1. Trump Touted Gilead's Donation of HIV-Prevention Medication, But Doctors Want Generics—Not Charity
        

More on Science

        
                  * Sexual Health
        

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Sexual Health

        
                    1. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
            2. Our So-Called Health Department Is Doing Everything It Can to Deny Care to Millions
            3. Trump Touted Gilead's Donation of HIV-Prevention Medication, But Doctors Want Generics—Not Charity
        

More on Sexual Health

        
                  * Sexuality
        

![\[Photo: Two queer people of color tenderly caress each other in bed. One

looks concerned, the other looks understanding.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/queers-bed_2-530x350.jpg)

Culture & Conversation LGBTQ

## Ask a Queer Chick: How Can I Get Excited About My Sex Life With My

Girlfriend?

Apr 19, 2019 Lindsay King-Miller

        
                  * Health Systems
        

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Health Systems

        
                    1. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
            2. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
            3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
        

More on Health Systems

        
                  * Family
        

![\[Photo: A Black mom tenderly caresses her young

child.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/adoption-1-530x350.jpg)

Culture & Conversation Race

## Adopting While Black

Jun 5, 2019 Sakena Jwan Washington

### Trending on Family

        
                    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
            2. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
            3. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
        

More on Family

        
                  * Maternity and Birthing
        

Jeni Putalavage-Ross ![Jeni Putalavage-Ross](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/indeed-austin-day1-3574-200x133.jpg)

Commentary Abortion

## I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put

Me in Greater Danger.

Jun 4, 2019

### Trending on Maternity and Birthing

        
                    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
            2. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
            3. I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
        

More on Maternity and Birthing

        
                  * Environment
        

![](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2016/03/shutterstock_360509222-530x350.jpg)

Roundups Environment

## On World Water Day, a Spotlight on U.S. Public Water Systems

Mar 22, 2016 Kanya D'Almeida

        
                  * Sections
          * Search
        

Rewire.News

## Stop Saying That Making Abortion Illegal Won't Stop People From Having Them

Jun 06, 2019 Hyde Amendment Fetal Tissue Research

        
                  * SUBSCRIBE
          * Donate
        

### Your Reading List

        
                  1. ![\[PHOTO: Young woman sits dejectedly on floor of a nursery, in front of a cradle holding a smiling infant.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/shutterstock_614707292-320x320.jpg) Stop Saying That Making Abortion Illegal Won't Stop People From Having Them
          2. ![\[Photo: Close-up of the dome at the Texas Capitol building.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/TX-legislature-320x320.jpg) I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
          3. ![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-320x320.jpg) Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
        

Search Rewire.News Go __

Commentary Abortion

# Stop Saying That Making Abortion Illegal Won't Stop People From Having Them

Oct 4, 2018, 4:34pm Diana Greene Foster

Criminalizing abortion or making it less accessible means that some women
carry unwanted pregnancies to term.

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Linked In
          * Email
          * Permalink
          * Instapaper
          * Print
        

![\[PHOTO: Young woman sits dejectedly on floor of a nursery, in front of a

cradle holding a smiling infant.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/shutterstock_614707292-740x525.jpg) Women denied an
abortion are more likely to resent their child, have pregnancy complications,
and be unable to meet short-term aspirations.  
__Shutterstock

### Trending

        
                  * Today
          * This Week
        
          1. ![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-530x350.jpg) Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
          2. 20 Years for Giving Water to Migrants? A Religious Freedom Case of Little Interest to 'Religious Freedom' Industry
          3. Biden Lied About the Hyde Amendment. Or He Is Very Confused.
          4. Why 'Do You Believe in God?' Is at the Heart of Our Religious Problem
          5. I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
          6. What It's Like to Be a Disabled Parent in an Inaccessible World
          7. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
          8. Protecting and Expanding Social Security Doesn't Mean Policing Reproduction
        
          1. ![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-530x350.jpg) Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
          2. 20 Years for Giving Water to Migrants? A Religious Freedom Case of Little Interest to 'Religious Freedom' Industry
          3. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
          4. When It Comes to Birth Control and Eugenics, Clarence Thomas Gets It All Wrong
          5. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
          6. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
          7. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
          8. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
        

### **The Breach**

A podcast about pregnancy and drug use, Native people and tribal sovereignty.
It’s a story nobody has told beyond a small community, but one everybody needs
to hear.

__

Making abortion illegal doesn’t stop women from having them. You may have
heard this argument before, often from someone wielding a symbolic coat hanger
at a protest.

It’s surfacing again as the United States reckons with the very real
possibility of the dismantling of _Roe v. Wade_. Supporters of this argument
correctly note that women have been ending their pregnancies for centuries,
and laws designed to stop abortions can drive women to get illegal ones.

It is time to stop making this argument.

As we debate the future of abortion access in the United States, reproductive
health advocates need to hold policymakers accountable for the full range of
consequences of restricting abortion. It is not the case that in the absence
of legal abortion, all women who want an abortion get one anyway. There is no
magical inevitability of abortion access.

### Get the facts, direct to your inbox.

Want more Rewire.News? Get the facts, direct to your inbox.

SIGN UP

Research in the United States and abroad shows that when women are denied
legal abortions, many carry their unwanted pregnancies to term and give birth.
In the University of California San Francisco study I lead of women who tried
to get abortions but were turned away from facilities across the country (the
Turnaway Study), more than two-thirds of women who were denied abortions
because they were too late in pregnancy carried their unwanted pregnancies to
term. Scientists in other countries where abortion is legal—Bangladesh, Nepal,
South Africa, and Tunisia—have found that among women who are denied legal
abortion, about half get an abortion somewhere else and half carry the
unwanted pregnancy to term.

States that pass laws making it harder to obtain abortion care show a similar
pattern. Abortion restrictions which cause the closure of clinics, bans on
public insurance coverage of abortion care, and gestational limits all prevent
women from getting abortions. When abortion regulations forced the closure of
19 of the 41 clinics in Texas, the abortion rate went down 13 percent the
following year. Estimates of what happens when public insurance no longer
covers abortion indicate that about a quarter of low-income women who would
otherwise get an abortion if it was paid for instead give birth. And even
before the imposition of most of the current state gestational limits, 4,000
women gave birth each year because they were turned away from clinics due to
advanced gestation.

Nobody knows how many women never make it to the clinic because they can’t
raise the money, can’t get a ride, don’t know where to go, or are deterred by
protesters. Making abortion even harder to get will reduce the chance that
women get abortions.

So why do advocates keep saying that women are able to get their abortions
even if abortion is restricted or illegal? The evidence comes from comparisons
of country-level estimates of abortion rates in countries with legal abortion
and countries where it is illegal under all circumstances. The average number
of abortions is roughly the same in these two sets of countries—34 and 37 per
1,000 women, respectively.

But what is not the same is the demand for abortion. The unintended pregnancy
rate is significantly higher in countries where abortion is illegal—probably
because contraceptives are also difficult to access. That only 48 percent of
unintended pregnancies are aborted in countries where abortion is illegal
compared to 69 percent where it is legal indicates that many women have to
carry unwanted pregnancies to term.

There are serious consequences to women who are denied a legal abortion. The
Turnaway Study has demonstrated that women who are denied wanted abortions are
worse off than women who receive them. Compared to women who receive a wanted
abortion, women who are denied experience more immediate anxiety; more serious
health complications from pregnancy such as hemorrhage, eclampsia, and death;
higher likelihood of continued violence from the man involved in the
pregnancy; lower full-time employment; and, despite increased use of public
assistance, greater poverty. Being denied a wanted abortion also reduces the
chance that women achieve aspirational life goals in the next year such as
getting a better job and finishing school. Nearly every aspect of her life is
compromised.

And it is not just women who are affected. Denying a woman a wanted abortion
makes it more likely she will have a child that she lacks the financial and
emotional resources to raise. In the Turnaway Study, we compared the outcomes
of children born because their mother was denied an abortion to children born
later to women who received an abortion. Children born later to women who were
able to get an abortion are more likely to live in households where there is
enough money to pay for basic living expenses such as food, housing, and
transportation than children born because abortion was denied. Abortion denial
also affects maternal bonding. Women are much more likely to report feeling
trapped as a mother, resenting their baby, or wishing for the old days when
they had no baby after abortion denial than with the next child born after
receiving an abortion.

The biggest problem with the argument that abortion criminalization doesn’t
stop abortion, apart from it being an oversimplification of how difficult it
can be to access abortion care, is that it implies that no matter what the
government does, women will find a way. Policymakers should be on the hook for
the full consequences of making abortion more difficult to get, consequences
which may reverberate for generations. Some women may find a way; young women,
poor women, and other disadvantaged groups will disproportionately carry
unwanted pregnancies to term.

Reckoning with abortion in America after _Roe v. Wade_ means understanding the
real physical health risk, economic hardship, and destabilization of families
that comes from depriving women of the fundamental rights of bodily autonomy
and freedom to determine their futures.

### Topics and Tags:

Abortion, Abortion Access, Abortion Bans, abortion research, Abortion
restrictions, Abortion Restrictions, Access to abortion, ANSIRH, Children,
Family, Global Abortion, Illegal abortion, Law and Policy, Maternity and
Birthing, Parenting, Reproductive rights, Women's rights

### Related Articles

![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-530x350.jpg)

Investigations Immigration

### Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns

Before Returning Them to Detention

May 28, 8:32am Tina Vasquez

![\[Photo: Representative David Eastman smiles at the camera before an

interview.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/David-

Eastman_1-530x350.jpg)

Roundups Abortion

### Legislative Lowlights: Alaska Republicans Join the Campaign to End Legal

Abortion

May 21, 10:48am Brie Shea

![\[Photo: Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards listens on during a press

conference.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/John-Bel-

Edwards_2-530x350.jpg)

News Abortion

### Pro-Choice Advocates Don't Expect Louisiana's Democratic Governor to Stop

Near Total Abortion Ban

May 7, 5:04pm Auditi Guha

![\[Photo: Governor Brian Kemp listens on during an

event.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/kemp_2-530x350.jpg)

News Abortion

### People Support Fetal 'Heartbeat' Legislation Until You Tell Them What It

Does

May 7, 10:20am Dennis Carter

Load More

        
                  * Abortion
          * Contraception
          * Economic Justice
          * Environment
          * Family
          * Family Planning
          * Health Systems
          * Human Rights
          * Immigration
          * Law and Policy
          * LGBTQ
          * Maternity and Birthing
          * Media
          * Politics
          * Race
          * Religion
          * Science
          * Sexual Health
          * Sexuality
          * Violence
        
          * False Witnesses
          * State of Abortion
          * Tracking Texas Abortion Access
          * Legislative Tracker
            * Laws
            * Cases
            * States
            * Topics
          * Multimedia
            * Videos
            * Podcasts
            * Photos
          * About Us
            * About Rewire.News
            * Staff
            * Jobs
            * Contributors
            * Pitching Guidelines
            * Board of Directors
            * Finances
            * Privacy Policy
            * Terms of Service
            * RSS
            * Subscribe
            * Contact Us
        

### Rewire.News

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Instagram
        

© 2019 Rewire.News. All rights reserved.

        
                  * SUBSCRIBE
          * Donate
        

Front page

#### Sections

        
                  * Editorial
          * News
          * Commentary
          * Analysis
          * Investigations
          * Religion Dispatches
          * Culture & Conversation
          * ABLC Blog
          * Roundups
          * Archive
        
          * Legislative Tracker
            * Cases
            * Laws
            * Organizations
            * People
            * States
            * Topics
          * Multimedia
            * Podcasts
            * Videos
            * Photos
          * About Us
            * About Rewire.News
            * Staff
            * Jobs
            * Contributors
            * Pitching Guidelines
            * Press Releases
            * Board of Directors
            * Finances
            * Privacy Policy
            * Cookie Policy
            * Terms of Service
            * RSS
            * Subscribe
            * Contact Us
        
          * Appalachia Reporting Project
          * False Witnesses
          * State of Abortion
          * Tracking Texas Abortion Access
        
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Instagram
        

#### Topics

        
                  * Abortion
          * Contraception
          * Economic Justice
          * Politics
          * Race
          * Law and Policy
          * LGBTQ
          * Religion
          * Media
          * Sexual Health
          * Immigration
          * Violence
          * Human Rights
          * Science
          * Family Planning
          * Sexuality
          * Health Systems
          * Family
          * Maternity and Birthing
          * Environment
        

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-GJfaG9CUSLudj.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

