

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

CDC Features

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email
  * Syndicate

# Drowsy Driving: Asleep at the Wheel

Minus

Related Pages

![Photo of Caucasian male driving at

night](/features/dsdrowsydriving/dsdrowsydriving_456px.jpg)

**Drive alert and stay unhurt. Learn the risks of drowsy driving and how to
protect yourself.**

### The Drowsy Driving Problem

Drowsy driving is a major problem in the United States. The risk, danger, and
often tragic results of drowsy driving are alarming. Drowsy driving is the
dangerous combination of driving and sleepiness or fatigue. This usually
happens when a driver has not slept enough, but it can also happen due to
untreated sleep disorders, medications, drinking alcohol, or shift work.

No one knows the exact moment when sleep comes over their body. Falling asleep
at the wheel is clearly dangerous, but being sleepy affects your ability to
drive safely even if you don't fall asleep. Drowsiness--

  * Makes drivers less able to pay attention to the road.
  * Slows reaction time if you have to brake or steer suddenly.
  * Affects a driver's ability to make good decisions.

![Infographic: Drowsy Driving - Asleep at the

Wheel](/features/dsdrowsydriving/dsdrowsydriving_a350px.png)

Researchers estimate that more than 70 million Americans suffer from a sleep
disorder (Institute of Medicine, 2005). 6 View full infographic. Cdc-pdf[PDF -
152 KB]

### Did You Know?

  * An estimated 1 in 25 adult drivers (aged 18 years or older) report having fallen asleep while driving in the previous 30 days.1,2 
  * The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimates that drowsy driving was responsible for 72,000 crashes, 44,000 injuries, and 800 deaths in 2013.3 However, these numbers are underestimated and up to 6,000 fatal crashes each year may be caused by drowsy drivers.4-5

### Who's more likely to drive drowsy?

  * **Drivers who do not get enough sleep.**
  * Commercial drivers who operate vehicles such as tow trucks, tractor trailers, and buses.
  * Shift workers (work the night shift or long shifts).
  * Drivers with untreated sleep disorders such as one where breathing repeatedly stops and starts (sleep apnea).
  * Drivers who use medications that make them sleepy.

### Learn the warning signs of drowsy driving--

  * Yawning or blinking frequently.
  * Difficulty remembering the past few miles driven.
  * Missing your exit.
  * Drifting from your lane.
  * Hitting a rumble strip on the side of the road.

If you experience any of these warnings signs, **pull over to rest or change
drivers**. Simply turning up the radio or opening the window are not effective
ways to keep you alert. For more warning signs visit American Academy of Sleep
Medicine. External

### How often do Americans fall asleep while driving?

According to a survey among nearly 150,000 adults in 19 states and the
District of Columbia:

  * 4% reported that they had fallen asleep while driving at least once in the previous 30 days.1
  * Individuals who snored or usually slept 6 or fewer hours per day were more likely to report falling asleep while driving.1

### Prevent drowsy driving before taking the wheel

  * Get enough sleep! Most adults need at least 7 hours of sleep a day, while teens need at least 8 hours.
  * Develop good sleeping habits such as sticking to a sleep schedule.
  * If you have a sleep disorder or have symptoms of a sleep disorder such as snoring or feeling sleepy during the day, talk to your physician about treatment options.
  * Avoid drinking alcohol or taking medications that make you sleepy. _Be sure to check the label on any medications or talk to your pharmacist_.

More Information

  * Sleep Education: Drowsy DrivingExternal
  * CDC's Sleep and Sleep Disorders
  * National Sleep Foundation: Drowsy DrivingExternal

References

  1. Wheaton AG, Chapman DP, Presley-Cantrell LR, Croft JB, Roehler DR. Drowsy driving - 19 states and the District of Columbia, 2009-2010. Cdc-pdf[630 KB] MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013; 61:1033.
  2. Wheaton AG, Shults RA, Chapman DP, Ford ES, Croft JB. Drowsy driving and risk behaviors--10 states and Puerto Rico, 2011-2012. Cdc-pdf[817 KB] MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014; 63:557-562.
  3. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Research on Drowsy DrivingExternal. Accessed October 20, 2015.
  4. Klauer SG, Dingus TA, Neale VL, Sudweeks JD, Ramsey DJ. _The Impact of Driver Inattention on Near-Crash/Crash Risk: An Analysis Using the 100-Car Naturalistic Study Data, 2006_. External Springfield, VA: DOT; year. DOT HS 810 594.
  5. Tefft BC, AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. Prevalence of Motor Vehicle Crashes Involving Drowsy Drivers, United States, 2009 - 2013 [457 KB]External.Washington, DC: AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety; 2014. October 19, 2015.
  6. Institute of Medicine. _Sleep Disorders and Sleep Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health Problem External_.External Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2006.

Page last reviewed: November 7, 2018

Content source:

National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Division
of Population Health

home CDC Features

  * Data & Statistics
  * Diseases & Conditions
  * Emergency Preparedness & Response
  * Environmental Health
  * Healthy Living
  * Injury, Violence & Safety
  * Life Stages & Populations
  * Travelers’ Health
  * Workplace Safety & Health

Features Media

Social_round_rss RSS Sign up for Features

Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:

Email Address

What's this?

Submit

![Step It Up! Surgeon General's Call to Action to Promote Walking and Walkable

Communities](/physicalactivity/images/cta/CDC-web-button-v5.jpg)
![24/7](/features/images/24-7_i150x120html.gif)

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

  * About CDC
  * Jobs
  * Funding
  * Policies
  * File Viewers & Players

  * Privacy

  * FOIA
  * No Fear Act
  * OIG
  * Nondiscrimination
  * Accessibility

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Youtube
  * Instagram

  * Syndicate

  * CDC TV
  * RSS
  * Email

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

PDF file_external

#### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

  * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
  * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
  * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
  * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

