

![The University of Arizona](/images/page_design/UA_A-line-css_BLU.gif)

![MethOIDE - methamphetamine and other illicit drug

education](/images/page_design/content_bg_motif_methoide_logo_TEST.jpg)![FCM -

Family and Community

Medicine](/images/page_design/content_bg_motif_fcm_logo.jpg)

  * Home
  * Info Center
  * CE/CME Courses
  * Policy Research
  * Data Reports

  * **History, Pharmacology, and Prevalence**

    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Methamphetamine Overview ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Methamphetamine Overview 
    * Origin and History
    * Chemistry
    * Pharmacology
    * Prevalence
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Cocaine Overview ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Cocaine Overview 
    * Origin and History
    * Chemistry
    * Pharmacology
    * Prevalence
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Differences between Stimulants ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Differences between Stimulants 
    * Methamphetamine and Amphetamines 
    * Methamphetamine and Cocaine
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Heroin Overview ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Heroin Overview 
    * Origin and History
    * Chemistry
    * Pharmacology
    * Prevalence
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Overview of Various Other Illicit Drugs ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Overview of Various Other Illicit Drugs 
    * Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD)
    * Marijuana
    * MDMA (Ecstasy)
    * Phencyclidine (PCP)
    * Ketamine
    * Gamma Hydroxybutyric Acid (GHB) 
    * Rohypnol
  * **Clandestine Labs and Forms of Methamphetamine**
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Clandestine Drug Labs ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Clandestine Drug Labs 
    * What are Clandestine Labs
    * Prevalence and Location of Clandestine Labs
    * Damage Caused by Clandestine Labs
    * Types of Clandestine Labs
    * Chemicals Used in Clandestine Labs
    * Methods of Production in Clandestine Labs
    * Economic Benefits of Clandestine Labs
    * Signs of Clandestine Labs
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Forms of Methamphetamine ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Forms of Methamphetamine 
    * Introduction
    * Ice
    * Powder
    * Liquid
    * Base
    * Tablets
  * **Levels of Illicit Drug Use and Factors Contributing to Use**
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Levels of Use ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Levels of Use 
    * Introduction
    * Illicit Drug Use
    * Drug Use vs. Drug Abuse
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Levels of Dependency ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Levels of Dependency 
    * Introduction
    * Categories of Dependence
    * Distinction between Dependence and Addiction
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Factors Underlying Use and Abuse ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Factors Underlying Use and Abuse 
    * Introduction
    * Risk Factors for Initiation/Low Use
    * Risk Factors for Abuse/Addiction
    * Routes of Administration and Drug Dependence
  * **Health Consequences of Illicit Drug Use**
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Methamphetamine ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Methamphetamine 
    * General Health Effects
    * Medical Complications
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Cocaine ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Cocaine 
    * General Health Effects 
    * Medical Complications
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Heroin ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Health Effects of Heroin 
    * General Health Effects
    * Medical Complications
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Overdose ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Overdose 
    * Introduction
    * Methamphetamine Overdose
    * Cocaine Overdose
    * Heroin Overdose
  * **Treatment Modalities and Treatment Settings for Illicit Drug Abuse**
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Psychosocial Treatment ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Psychosocial Treatment 
    * Introduction
    * Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET)
    * Behavioral Therapy
    * Cognitive Behavioral Therapies (CBTs)
    * Psychodynamic and Interpersonal Therapies
    * Group Therapy
    * Family Therapy
    * Self-Help Groups and 12-Step Oriented Approaches
    * Matrix Model: An Example of Combined Psychosocial Treatments
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Pharmacological Treatments ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Pharmacological Treatments 
    * Introduction
    * Opioid Agonist Maintenance Therapies 
    * Opioid Antagonists
    * Opioid Treatment Centers and Other Therapies
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Treatment Settings ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Treatment Settings 
    * Introduction
    * Factors that Affect Choice of Treatment Settings
    * Treatment Settings
  * **Illicit Drug Screening, Brief Intervention, and Treatment Placement**
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Screening in Primary Care Settings ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Screening in Primary Care Settings 
    * The Debate
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Screening Methods ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Screening Methods 
    * Introduction
    * Observation/General Indicators
    * Informal Discussion
    * Drug Use Questionnaire Assessment
    * Biological Tests
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Brief Interventions ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Brief Interventions 
    * Introduction
    * FRAMES Model
    * Use of Motivational Interviewing
    * Motivational Interviewing and Stages of Change
    * ![expand](../images/page_design/left_column_plus_sign.jpg) Referring Users to Treatment ![collapse](../images/page_design/left_column_minus_sign.jpg) Referring Users to Treatment 
    * Linking Clients to Services in Arizona

## History, Pharmacology, and Prevalence

Methamphetamine Overview: Origin and History

Amphetamine was first synthesized by a Romanian chemist named Lazar Edeleanu
(a.k.a. Edeleano) at the University of Berlin in 1887, but was not used
clinically until Gordon A. Alles re-synthesized the drug in the 1920s for use
in medical settings to treat asthma, hayfever, and colds.[1-5] **** In 1932,
Smith, Kline, and French Laboratories marketed the first amphetamine product,
an amphetamine-based inhaler (trade name, Benzedrine) to treat nasal
congestion.[6] During the remaining 1930s, amphetamines were promoted by U.S.
pharmaceutical companies as treatments for ailments such as rhinitis and
asthma.[1-7] ****

Methamphetamine (MA), a variant of amphetamine, was first synthesized in Japan
in 1893 by Nagayoshi Nagai from the precursor chemical ephedrine.[8-10] MA was
not widely used until World War II (1940s), at which time German, English,
American, and Japanese governments began giving their military personnel the
drug to enhance endurance and alertness and ward off fatigue.[2,6,9,10] (Note:
Even today, amphetamines are sometimes used by the U.S. military. In 2002,
U.S. pilots in Afghanistan killed and wounded Canadian soldiers in "friendly
fire." The defending lawyers argued that the pilots' use of amphetamines,
which is sanctioned by the Air Force, may have affected the pilots'
judgment.[6]

In addition to military usage, Japanese factory workers were known to use MA
to work longer hours. Post World War II, former Japanese military warehouses
had an abundant amount of the drug in storage and as a result, large
quantities of over-the-counter methamphetamine pills were produced for
domestic consumption by Japanese pharmaceutical companies. It was in Japan
that the first MA epidemic occurred.[1]

In the U.S. a prescription was needed to access amphetamines, thus slowing the
onset of an epidemic. Nevertheless, by the 1950s, the prevalence of
amphetamine use was on the rise among civilians, including groups such as
college students, truck drivers, athletes, housewives, and individuals
performing monotonous jobs.[1,11] By 1959, the FDA banned amphetamine-based
inhalers due to increases in their abuse.[12] However, at the same time,
amphetamine and its various forms were promoted as therapeutic agents for
health problems such as hyperactivity, obesity, narcolepsy, and depression. In
the 1960s, administering amphetamines, including MA, by intravenous injection
gained popularity, especially among individuals already using illicit drugs.
It was this group that may have first used amphetamines solely for their
euphoric effects.[1]

Most of the amphetamines available at that time were diverted from
pharmaceutical companies. The Controlled Substance Act of 1970 largely ended
that diversion, and thus helped reduce problems associated with the drug.[13]
All forms of amphetamines were classified as DEA Schedule II drugs in 1971.[6]
(Schedule II drugs have an accepted medical use, high potential for abuse, may
lead to psychological or physical dependence, and are available only by
prescription.) Public health efforts that included education and treatment
were also implemented to help address the problems related to amphetamines.[1]

Despite these efforts, the use of MA began rising again in the 1980s, due in
large part to production of the drug in clandestine labs.[14] To help counter
this resurgence, the federal government regulated the precursor chemicals--
ephedrine and pseudoephedrine--commonly used in the illicit production of
MA.[15] These efforts led to substantial temporary reductions in MA-related
problems.[15-17] However, they also inadvertently helped open the U.S. MA
market to foreign producers, as domestic producers had difficulty obtaining
the precursor chemicals needed to produce the drug.[17-18] Foreign producers
now supply much of the U.S. MA market, and attempts to bring that production
under control have been problematic.[19]

Street names for MA include crystal, crank, ice, glass, go, meth, speed, and
zoom.

### References

  * (1) Wolkoff DA. Methamphetamine abuse: an overview for health care professionals. Hawaii Medical Journal 1997 Feb;56(2):34-6.
  * (2) MacKenzie RG, Heischober B. Methamphetamine. Pediatrics in Review 1997 Sep 1;18(9):305-9.
  * (3) Sulzer D, Mark SS, Poulsen NW, Galli A. Mechanisms of neurotransmitter release by amphetamines: A review. Progress in Neurobiology 2005;75:403-33.
  * (4) Alles GA. The comparative physiological actions of the DL-B-phenylisopropylamines. I. Pressor effect and toxicity. The Journal of Pharmacology And Experimental Therapeutics 1993;47:339-54.
  * (5) Edeleano L. Über einige derivative der Phenylmethacrylsaure und der Phenylisobuttersaure. Berl Dtsch Chem Ges 1887;20:616-22.
  * (6) McGuinness T. Methamphetamine abuse. American Journal of Nursing 2006 Dec;106(12):54-9.
  * (7) Derlet RW, Heischober B. Methamphetamine. Stimulant of the 1990s? Western Journal of Medicine 1990 Dec;153(6):625-8.
  * (8) Nagai T, Kamiyama S. Forensic toxicologic analysis of methamphetamine and amphetamine optical isomers by high performance liquid chromatography. International Journal of Legal Medicine 1988 Sep;101(3):151-9.
  * (9) Lineberry TW. Methamphetamine Abuse: A Perfect Storm of Complications. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 2006 Jan 1;81(1):77-84.
  * (10) Meredith CW, Jaffe C, Ang-Lee K, Saxon AJ. Implications of Chronic Methamphetamine Use: A Literature Review. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 2005 May;13(3):141-54.
  * (11) Donaldson M, Goodchild JH. Oral health of the methamphetamine abuser. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy 2006 Nov 1;63(21):2078-82.
  * (12) Roll JM, Petry NM, Stitzer ML, Brecht ML, Peirce JM, McCann MJ, et al. Contingency management for the treatment of methamphetamine use disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry 2006 Nov;163(11):1993-9.
  * (13) Beebe DK, Walley E. Smokable methamphetamine ('ice'): an old drug in a different form. American Family Physician 1995 Feb 1;51(2):449-53.
  * (14) Cunningham JK, Thielemeir MA. Amphetamine-Related Emergency Admissions: Trends and Regional Variations in California (1985-1994). Public Statistics Institute; 1996. 
  * (15) Cunningham JK, Liu LM. Impacts of federal ephedrine and pseudoephedrine regulations on methamphetamine-related hospital admissions.[see comment]. Addiction 2003 Sep;98(9):1229-37.
  * (16) Cunningham JK, Liu LM. Impacts of federal precursor chemical regulations on methamphetamine arrests. Addiction 2005 Apr;100(4):479-88.
  * (17) Cunningham JK, Liu LM, Muramoto M. Methamphetamine suppression and route of administration: precursor regulation impacts on snorting, smoking, swallowing and injecting. Addiciton 2008 Apr 16.
  * (18) Cunningham JK, Liu LM. Impact of methamphetamine precursor legislation, a suppression policy, on the demand for drug treatment. Social Science & Medicine 2008;66:1463-73.
  * (19) National Drug Intelligence Center. National Drug Threat Assessment 2007. Johnstown, PA; 2006 Oct. 

### Illustrations![Illustrations](../images/page_design/illustrations.JPG)

  * ![BenzInhaler](../images/mthM1T1S1_BenzInhaler.jpg)

BenzInhaler

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

