

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

Reproductive Health: Teen Pregnancy

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Email
          * Syndicate
        

# About Teen Pregnancy

Minus

Related Pages

In 2017, a total of 194,377 babies were born to women aged 15-19 years, for a
birth rate of 18.8 per 1,000 women in this age group. This is another record
low for U.S. teens and a drop of 7% from 2016.1 Birth rates fell 10% for women
aged 15-17 years and 6% for women aged 18-19 years.2

Although reasons for the declines are not totally clear, evidence suggests
these declines are due to more teens abstaining from sexual activity, and more
teens who are sexually active using birth control than in previous years.3, 4

Still, the U.S. teen pregnancy rate is substantially higher than in other
western industrialized nations5, and racial/ethnic and geographic disparities
in teen birth rates persist.6

## Disparities in Teen Birth Rates

Teen birth rates declined from 2016 to 2017 for most racial groups and for
Hispanics.2 Among 15- to 19-year-olds, teen birth rates decreased:

        
                  * 15% for non-Hispanic Asians
          * 9% for Hispanics
          * 8% for non-Hispanic whites
          * 6% for non-Hispanic blacks
          * 6% for American Indian/Alaska Natives (AI/AN)1
        

In 2017, the birth rates of Hispanic teens (28.9) and non-Hispanic black teens
(27.5) were more than two times higher than the rate for non-Hispanic white
teens (13.2). The birth rate of American Indian/Alaska Native teens (32.9) was
highest among all race/ethnicities.1 Geographic differences in teen birth
rates persist, both within and across states. Among some states with low
overall teen birth rates, some counties have high teen birth rates.6

### Birth rates for females aged 15-19, by race and Hispanic origin of mother:

United States, 2016 and 2017

![Birth rates for females aged 15-19, by race and Hispanic origin of mother:

United States, 2016 and 2017. See alternative text link

below.](/teenpregnancy/images/about/graphs-maps/birth-rates-

females-15-19-race.png)

Text version of this graph

Top of Page

Less favorable socioeconomic conditions, such as low education and low income
levels of a teen's family, may contribute to high teen birth rates.7 Teens in
child welfare systems are at higher risk of teen pregnancy and birth than
other groups. For example, young women living in foster care are more than
twice as likely to become pregnant than those not in foster care.8

To improve the life opportunities of adolescents facing significant health
disparities and to have the greatest impact on overall U.S. teen birth rates,
CDC uses data to inform and direct interventions and resources to areas with
the greatest need.

![female and male teen](/teenpregnancy/images/about/about.htm-black-

teens_200px.jpg)

## The Importance of Prevention

Teen pregnancy and childbearing bring substantial social and economic costs
through immediate and long-term impacts on teen parents and their children.

        
                  * Pregnancy and birth are significant contributors to high school dropout rates among girls. Only about 50% of teen mothers receive a high school diploma by 22 years of age, whereas approximately 90% of women who do not give birth during adolescence graduate from high school.10
          * The children of teenage mothers are more likely to have lower school achievement and to drop out of high school, have more health problems, be incarcerated at some time during adolescence, give birth as a teenager, and face unemployment as a young adult.11
          * On a positive note, between 1991 and 2015, the teen birth rate dropped 64%, which resulted in $4.4 billion in public savings in 2015 alone.12
        

![two caucasian teens](/teenpregnancy/images/about/about.htm-reducing-teen-

pregnancy_200px.jpg)

Evidence-based teen pregnancy prevention programs have been identified by the
_US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) TPP Evidence Review
External_ , which used a systematic process for reviewing evaluation studies
against a rigorous standard. Currently, the Evidence Review covers a variety
of diverse programs, including sexuality education programs, youth development
programs, abstinence education programs, clinic-based programs, and programs
specifically designed for diverse populations and settings. In addition to
evidence-based prevention programs, teens need access to _youth-friendly
contraceptive and reproductive health services_ and support from _parents and
other trusted adults, who can play an important role_ in helping teens make
healthy choices about relationships, sex, and birth control. Efforts at the
community level that address social and economic factors associated with teen
pregnancy also play a critical role in addressing racial/ethnic and
geographical disparities observed in teen births in the US.

Top of Page

### Citations

        
                  1. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK. Births in the United States, 2017. NCHS data brief. 2018 (318):1-8.
          2. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK, Drake P. Births: Final Data for 2017. National vital statistics reports : from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System Cdc-pdf[988KB]. 2018;67(8):1-50.
          3. Santelli J, Lindberg L, Finer L, Singh S. Explaining recent declines in adolescent pregnancy in the United States: the contribution of abstinence and improved contraceptive use. Am J Public Health. 2007;97(1):150-6.
          4. Lindberg LD, Santelli JS, Desai, S. Understanding the Decline in Adolescent Fertility in the United States, 2007-2012. J Adolesc Health. 2016: 1-7
          5. Sedgh G, Finer LB, Bankole A, Eilers MA, Singh S. Adolescent pregnancy, birth, and abortion rates across countries: levels and recent trends. J Adolesc Health. 2015;56(2):223-30.
          6. Romero L, Pazol K, Warner L, et al. Reduced Disparities in Birth Rates Among Teens Aged 15-19 Years - United States, 2006-2007 and 2013-2014. MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2016;65(16):409-414.
          7. Penman-Aguilar A, Carter M, Snead MC, Kourtis AP. Socioeconomic disadvantage as a social determinant of teen childbearing in the U.S. Public Health Rep. 2013;128(suppl 1):5-22.
          8. Boonstra HD. Teen pregnancy among women in foster care: a primer. Guttmacher Policy Review. 2011; 14(2).
          9. National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy,  _Counting It Up: The Public Costs of Teen Childbearing 2013 External_. Accessed March 31, 2016.
          10. Perper K, Peterson K, Manlove J. Diploma Attainment Among Teen Mothers. Child Trends, Fact Sheet Publication #2010-01: Washington, DC: Child Trends; 2010.
          11. Hoffman SD. Kids Having Kids: Economic Costs and Social Consequences of Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press; 2008.
          12. Power to Decide, Progress Pays OffCdc-pdfExternal. Accessed January 10, 2019.
        

Top of Page

Page last reviewed: March 1, 2019

Content source: Division of Reproductive Health , National Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion

home Teen Pregnancy

        
                  * About Teen Pregnancy expand
            * Social Determinants and Eliminating Disparities in Teen Pregnancy expand
              * Reduced Disparities in Birth Rates among Teens Aged 15–19 Years in the United States
            * Engaging Young Men expand
              * Grantees Rigorously Evaluating Innovations Focused on Young Males
              * Evaluating Innovative Approaches
          * Projects and Initiatives expand
            * Health Centers
            * Evaluating Male-focused Programs
            * Clinical Services for Young Men
            * Communitywide Initiatives expand
              * Communitywide Teen Pregnancy Prevention Initiative Partners
            * Contraceptive Action Plan
          * Program Tools and Resources expand
            * Community Mobilization
            * Evidence-Based Teen Pregnancy Prevention Programs
            * Contraceptive and Reproductive Health Services for Teens
            * Stakeholder Education
            * Working with Diverse Communities
            * Promoting Science-Based Approaches to Teen Pregnancy Prevention Using Getting to Outcomes (PSBA-GTO)
          * News, Links & Related Publications
          * Parent and Guardian Resources
          * Health Care Providers expand
            * Teen-Friendly Reproductive Health Visit
            * Tools for Increasing Contraceptive Access
            * Health Center Tools
            * Repeat Teen Births
          * For Teens
          * Multimedia
        

More Related Links

        
                  * Reproductive Health
          * Healthy Youth
          * Preventing Pregnancies in Younger Teens
          * Winnable Battles
          * Social Media at CDC
        

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

        
                  * About CDC
          * Jobs
          * Funding
          * Policies
          * File Viewers & Players
        
          * Privacy
          * FOIA
          * No Fear Act
          * OIG
          * Nondiscrimination
          * Accessibility
        

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Youtube
          * Instagram
        
        
          * Syndicate
          * CDC TV
          * RSS
          * Email
        

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Email
        

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

PDF file_external

#### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

        
                  * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
          * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
          * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
          * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.
        

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

