

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## This article is part of a series on the

Constitution of the  
United States of America  
![Greater coat of arms of the United

States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg/160px-

Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg.png)  
Preamble and Articles  
of the Constitution  
* Preamble
        
                  * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
        

Amendments to the Constitution  
* **Bill of Rights**
        
                  * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
          * VIII
          * IX
          * X
        

* * *
        
                  * XI
          * XII
          * XIII
          * XIV
          * XV
          * XVI
          * XVII
          * XVIII
          * XIX
          * XX
          * XXI
          * XXII
          * XXIII
          * XXIV
          * XXV
          * XXVI
          * XXVII
        

Unratified Amendments

        
                  * Congressional Apportionment
          * Titles of Nobility
          * Corwin
          * Child Labor
          * Equal Rights
          * D.C. Voting Rights
        

History

        
                  * Drafting and ratification timeline
          * Convention
          * Signing
          * Federalism
          * Republicanism
        

Full text of the Constitution and Amendments  
* Preamble and Articles I–VII * Amendments I–X * Amendments XI–XXVII * Unratified Amendments  
* ![Flag of the United States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States portal * U.S. Government portal * Law portal * Wikipedia book 
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

The **Fourteenth Amendment** ( **Amendment XIV** ) to the United States
Constitution was adopted on July 9, 1868, as one of the Reconstruction
Amendments. Arguably one of the most consequential amendments to this day, the
amendment addresses citizenship rights and equal protection of the laws and
was proposed in response to issues related to former slaves following the
American Civil War. The amendment was bitterly contested, particularly by the
states of the defeated Confederacy, which were forced to ratify it in order to
regain representation in Congress. The amendment, particularly its first
section, is one of the most litigated parts of the Constitution, forming the
basis for landmark decisions such as _Brown v. Board of Education_ (1954)
regarding racial segregation, _Roe v. Wade_ (1973) regarding abortion, _Bush
v. Gore_ (2000) regarding the 2000 presidential election, and _Obergefell v.
Hodges_ (2015) regarding same-sex marriage. The amendment limits the actions
of all state and local officials, including those acting on behalf of such an
official.

The amendment's first section includes several clauses: the Citizenship
Clause, Privileges or Immunities Clause, Due Process Clause, and Equal
Protection Clause. The Citizenship Clause provides a broad definition of
citizenship, nullifying the Supreme Court's decision in _Dred Scott v.
Sandford_ (1857), which had held that Americans descended from African slaves
could not be citizens of the United States. Since the _Slaughter-House Cases_
(1873), the Privileges or Immunities Clause has been interpreted to do very
little.

The Due Process Clause prohibits state and local governments from depriving
persons of life, liberty, or property without a fair procedure. The Supreme
Court has ruled this clause makes most of the Bill of Rights as applicable to
the states as it is to the federal government, as well as to recognize
substantive and procedural requirements that state laws must satisfy. The
Equal Protection Clause requires each state to provide equal protection under
the law to all people, including all non-citizens, within its jurisdiction.
This clause has been the basis for many decisions rejecting irrational or
unnecessary discrimination against people belonging to various groups.

The second, third, and fourth sections of the amendment are seldom litigated.
However, the second section's reference to "rebellion, or other crime" has
been invoked as a constitutional ground for felony disenfranchisement. The
fourth section was held, in _Perry v. United States_ (1935), to prohibit a
current Congress from abrogating a contract of debt incurred by a prior
Congress. The fifth section gives Congress the power to enforce the
amendment's provisions by "appropriate legislation"; however, under _City of
Boerne v. Flores_ (1997), this power may not be used to contradict a Supreme
Court decision interpreting the amendment.

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Text
          * 2 Adoption
            * 2.1 Proposal by Congress
            * 2.2 Ratification by the states
          * 3 Citizenship and civil rights
            * 3.1 Background
            * 3.2 Citizenship Clause
              * 3.2.1 Native Americans
              * 3.2.2 Children born to foreign nationals
              * 3.2.3 Loss of citizenship
            * 3.3 Privileges or Immunities Clause
            * 3.4 Due Process Clause
              * 3.4.1 Substantive due process
              * 3.4.2 Procedural due process
              * 3.4.3 Incorporation
            * 3.5 Equal Protection Clause
            * 3.6 State actor doctrine
          * 4 Apportionment of representation in House of Representatives
            * 4.1 Enforcement
            * 4.2 Influence on voting rights
            * 4.3 Criticism
          * 5 Participants in rebellion
          * 6 Validity of public debt
          * 7 Power of enforcement
          * 8 Selected Supreme Court cases
            * 8.1 Citizenship
            * 8.2 Privileges or immunities
            * 8.3 Incorporation
            * 8.4 Substantive due process
            * 8.5 Equal protection
            * 8.6 Felon disenfranchisement
            * 8.7 Power of enforcement
          * 9 See also
          * 10 References
            * 10.1 Notes
            * 10.2 Citations
            * 10.3 Bibliography
          * 11 Further reading
          * 12 External links
        

## Text

> **Section 1.** All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of
the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which
shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States;
nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws.

>

> **Section 2.** Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States
according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in
each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any
election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the
United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial
officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to
any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and
citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for
participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation
therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male
citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of
age in such State.

>

> **Section 3.** No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress,
or elector of President and Vice President, or hold any office, civil or
military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously
taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States,
or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial
officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall
have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or
comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of
each House, remove such disability.

>

> **Section 4.** The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and
bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be
questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay
any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against
the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but
all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.

>

> **Section 5.** The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.[1]

## Adoption

### Proposal by Congress

See also: Presidency of Andrew Johnson

In the final years of the American Civil War and the Reconstruction Era that
followed, Congress repeatedly debated the rights of black former slaves freed
by the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation and the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment, the
latter of which had formally abolished slavery. Following the passage of the
Thirteenth Amendment by Congress, however, Republicans grew concerned over the
increase it would create in the congressional representation of the
Democratic-dominated Southern States. Because the full population of freed
slaves would now be counted for determining congressional representation,
rather than the three-fifths previously mandated by the Three-Fifths
Compromise, the Southern States would dramatically increase their power in the
population-based House of Representatives, regardless of whether the former
slaves were allowed to vote.[2][3] Republicans began looking for a way to
offset this advantage, either by protecting and attracting votes of former
slaves, or at least by discouraging their disenfranchisement.[2][4][5]

In 1865, Congress passed what would become the Civil Rights Act of 1866,
guaranteeing citizenship without regard to race, color, or previous condition
of slavery or involuntary servitude. The bill also guaranteed equal benefits
and access to the law, a direct assault on the Black Codes passed by many
post-war states. The Black Codes attempted to return ex-slaves to something
like their former condition by, among other things, restricting their
movement, forcing them to enter into year-long labor contracts, prohibiting
them from owning firearms, and preventing them from suing or testifying in
court.[6]

Although strongly urged by moderates in Congress to sign the bill, President
Andrew Johnson vetoed it on March 27, 1866. In his veto message, he objected
to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when
11 out of 36 states were unrepresented in the Congress, and that it
discriminated in favor of African-Americans and against whites.[7][8] Three
weeks later, Johnson's veto was overridden and the measure became law.[9]
Despite this victory, even some Republicans who had supported the goals of the
Civil Rights Act began to doubt that Congress really possessed constitutional
power to turn those goals into laws.[10][11] The experience also encouraged
both radical and moderate Republicans to seek Constitutional guarantees for
black rights, rather than relying on temporary political majorities.[12]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/14th_Amendment_Senate_%26_House_votes_June%2C_1866.jpg/220px-14th_Amendment_Senate_%26_House_votes_June%2C_1866.jpg)

Senate and House votes on the Fourteenth Amendment

Over 70 proposals for an amendment were drafted.[13] In late 1865, the Joint
Committee on Reconstruction proposed an amendment stating that any citizens
barred from voting on the basis of race by a state would not be counted for
purposes of representation of that state.[14] This amendment passed the House,
but was blocked in the Senate by a coalition of Radical Republicans led by
Charles Sumner, who believed the proposal a "compromise with wrong", and
Democrats opposed to black rights.[15] Consideration then turned to a proposed
amendment by Representative John A. Bingham of Ohio, which would enable
Congress to safeguard "equal protection of life, liberty, and property" of all
citizens; this proposal failed to pass the House.[15] In April 1866, the Joint
Committee forwarded a third proposal to Congress, a carefully negotiated
compromise that combined elements of the first and second proposals as well as
addressing the issues of Confederate debt and voting by ex-Confederates.[15]
The House of Representatives passed _House Resolution 127, 39th Congress_
several weeks later and sent to the Senate for action. The resolution was
debated and several amendments to it were proposed. Amendments to Sections 2,
3, and 4 were adopted on June 8, 1866, and the modified resolution passed by a
33 to 11 vote (5 absent, not voting). The House agreed to the Senate
amendments on June 13 by a 138–36 vote (10 not voting). A concurrent
resolution requesting the President to transmit the proposal to the executives
of the several states was passed by both houses of Congress on June
18.[16][17]

The Radical Republicans were satisfied that they had secured civil rights for
blacks, but were disappointed that the amendment would not also secure
political rights for blacks; in particular, the right to vote.[18] For
example, Thaddeus Stevens, a leader of the disappointed Radical Republicans,
said: "I find that we shall be obliged to be content with patching up the
worst portions of the ancient edifice, and leaving it, in many of its parts,
to be swept through by the tempests, the frosts, and the storms of
despotism."[18][19] Abolitionist Wendell Phillips called it a "fatal and total
surrender".[19] This point would later be addressed by the Fifteenth
Amendment.

### Ratification by the states

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1d/14th_amendment_ratification.svg/400px-14th_amendment_ratification.svg.png)

Ratified amendment pre-certification, 1866–1868

Ratified amendment pre-certification after first rejecting it, 1868

Ratified amendment post-certification after first rejecting it, 1869–1976

Ratified amendment post-certification, 1959

Ratified amendment, withdrew ratification (rescission), then re-ratified.
Oregon rescinded ratification post-certification and was included in the
official count

Territories of the United States in 1868, not yet states

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/Letter_of_Transmittal_of_14th_Amemdment_to_the_Several_States.jpg/400px-

Letter_of_Transmittal_of_14th_Amemdment_to_the_Several_States.jpg)

Form of the Letter of Transmittal of the Fourteenth Amendment to the several
states for its ratification

On June 16, 1866, Secretary of State William Seward transmitted the Fourteenth
Amendment to the governors of the several states for its ratification. State
legislatures in every formerly Confederate state, with the exception of
Tennessee, refused to ratify it. This refusal led to the passage of the
Reconstruction Acts. Ignoring the existing state governments, military
government was imposed until new civil governments were established and the
Fourteenth Amendment was ratified.[20] It also prompted Congress to pass a law
on March 2, 1867, requiring that a former Confederate state must ratify the
Fourteenth Amendment before "said State shall be declared entitled to
representation in Congress".[21]

The first twenty-eight states to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment were:[22]

        
                  * Connecticut – June 30, 1866
          * New Hampshire – July 6, 1866
          * Tennessee – July 18, 1866
          * New Jersey – September 11, 1866 (rescinded ratification – February 20, 1868/March 24, 1868; re-ratified – April 23, 2003)
          * Oregon – September 19, 1866 (rescinded ratification – October 16, 1868; re-ratified – April 25, 1973)
          * Vermont – October 30, 1866
          * New York – January 10, 1867
          * Ohio – January 11, 1867 (rescinded ratification – January 13, 1868; re-ratified – March 12, 2003)
          * Illinois – January 15, 1867
          * West Virginia – January 16, 1867
          * Michigan – January 16, 1867
          * Minnesota – January 16, 1867
          * Kansas – January 17, 1867
          * Maine – January 19, 1867
          * Nevada – January 22, 1867
          * Indiana – January 23, 1867
          * Missouri – January 25, 1867
          * Pennsylvania – February 6, 1867
          * Rhode Island – February 7, 1867
          * Wisconsin – February 13, 1867
          * Massachusetts – March 20, 1867
          * Nebraska – June 15, 1867
          * Iowa – March 16, 1868
          * Arkansas – April 6, 1868
          * Florida – June 9, 1868
          * North Carolina – July 4, 1868 (after rejection – December 14, 1866)
          * Louisiana – July 9, 1868 (after rejection – February 6, 1867)
          * South Carolina – July 9, 1868 (after rejection – December 20, 1866)
        

If rescission by Ohio and New Jersey were invalid, South Carolina would have
been the 28th State. Rescission by Oregon did not occur until later. These
rescissions caused significant controversy. However, ratification by other
states continued during the course of the debate:

        
                  * Alabama – July 13, 1868
        

On July 20, 1868, Secretary of State William H. Seward certified that if
withdrawals of ratification by New Jersey and Ohio were ineffective, then the
amendment had become part of the Constitution on July 9, 1868, with
ratification by South Carolina.[23] The following day, Congress adopted and
transmitted to the Department of State a concurrent resolution declaring the
Fourteenth Amendment to be a part of the Constitution and directing the
Secretary of State to promulgate it as such.[24] Both New Jersey and Ohio were
named in the congressional resolution as having ratified the amendment,
although Alabama was also named, making 29 states total.[25][26]

On the same day, one more State ratified:

        
                  * Georgia – July 21, 1868 (after rejection – November 9, 1866)
        

On July 27, Secretary Seward received the formal ratification from
Georgia.[27] The following day, July 28, Secretary Seward issued his official
proclamation certifying the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment.[25]
Secretary Seward stated that his proclamation was "in conformance" to the
resolution by Congress, but his official list of States included both Alabama
and Georgia, as well as Ohio and New Jersey.[26][28]

The inclusion of Ohio and New Jersey has led some to question the validity of
rescission of a ratification. The inclusion of Alabama and Georgia has called
that conclusion into question. While there have been Supreme Court cases
dealing with ratification issues, this particular question has never been
adjudicated.

The Fourteenth Amendment was subsequently ratified:[22]

        
                  * Virginia – October 8, 1869 (after rejection – January 9, 1867)
          * Mississippi – January 17, 1870
          * Texas – February 18, 1870 (after rejection – October 27, 1866)
          * Delaware – February 12, 1901 (after rejection – February 8, 1867)
          * Maryland – April 4, 1959[29] (after rejection – March 23, 1867)
          * California – May 6, 1959
          * Kentucky – March 30, 1976 (after rejection – January 8, 1867)
        

Since Ohio and New Jersey re-ratified the Fourteenth Amendment in 2003, all
U.S. states that existed during Reconstruction have ratified the amendment.

## Citizenship and civil rights

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7b/14th_Amendment_Pg1of2_AC.jpg/190px-14th_Amendment_Pg1of2_AC.jpg)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/14th_Amendment_Pg2of2_AC.jpg/190px-14th_Amendment_Pg2of2_AC.jpg)

The two pages of the Fourteenth Amendment in the National Archives

### Background

Section 1 of the amendment formally defines United States citizenship and also
protects various civil rights from being abridged or denied by any state or
state actor. Abridgment or denial of those civil rights by private persons is
not addressed by this amendment; the Supreme Court held in the _Civil Rights
Cases_ (1883)[30] that the amendment was limited to "state action" and,
therefore, did not authorize the Congress to outlaw racial discrimination by
private individuals or organizations (though Congress can sometimes reach such
discrimination via other parts of the Constitution). U.S. Supreme Court
Justice Joseph P. Bradley commented in the Civil Rights Cases that "individual
invasion of individual rights is not the subject-matter of the [Fourteenth]
Amendment. It has a deeper and broader scope. It nullifies and makes void all
state legislation, and state action of every kind, which impairs the
privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, or which injures
them in life, liberty or property without due process of law, or which denies
to any of them the equal protection of the laws."[31]

The Radical Republicans who advanced the Thirteenth Amendment hoped to ensure
broad civil and human rights for the newly freed people—but its scope was
disputed before it even went into effect.[32] The framers of the Fourteenth
Amendment wanted these principles enshrined in the Constitution to protect the
new Civil Rights Act from being declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court
and also to prevent a future Congress from altering it by a mere majority
vote.[33][34] This section was also in response to violence against black
people within the Southern States. The Joint Committee on Reconstruction found
that only a Constitutional amendment could protect black people's rights and
welfare within those states.[35]

Section 1 has been the most frequently litigated part of the amendment,[36]
and this amendment in turn has been the most frequently litigated part of the
Constitution.[37]

### Citizenship Clause

Main article: Citizenship Clause

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ea/Jacob_M._Howard_-

_Brady-Handy.jpg/220px-Jacob_M._Howard_-_Brady-Handy.jpg)

U.S. Senator from Michigan Jacob M. Howard, author of the Citizenship Clause

The Citizenship Clause overruled the Supreme Court's _Dred Scott_ decision
that black people were not citizens and could not become citizens, nor enjoy
the benefits of citizenship.[38][39] Some members of Congress voted for the
Fourteenth Amendment in order to eliminate doubts about the constitutionality
of the Civil Rights Act of 1866,[40] or to ensure that no subsequent Congress
could later repeal or alter the main provisions of that Act.[41] The Civil
Rights Act of 1866 had granted citizenship to all persons born in the United
States if they were not subject to a foreign power, and this clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment constitutionalized this rule.

There are varying interpretations of the original intent of Congress and of
the ratifying states, based on statements made during the congressional debate
over the amendment, as well as the customs and understandings prevalent at
that time.[42][43] Some of the major issues that have arisen about this clause
are the extent to which it included Native Americans, its coverage of non-
citizens legally present in the United States when they have a child, whether
the clause allows revocation of citizenship, and whether the clause applies to
illegal immigrants.[44]

Historian Eric Foner, who has explored the question of U.S. birthright
citizenship to other countries, argues that:

> Many things claimed as uniquely American—a devotion to individual freedom,
for example, or social opportunity—exist in other countries. But birthright
citizenship does make the United States (along with Canada) unique in the
developed world. [...] Birthright citizenship is one expression of the
commitment to equality and the expansion of national consciousness that marked
Reconstruction. [...] Birthright citizenship is one legacy of the titanic
struggle of the Reconstruction era to create a genuine democracy grounded in
the principle of equality.[45]

#### Native Americans

During the original congressional debate over the amendment Senator Jacob M.
Howard of Michigan—the author of the Citizenship Clause[46]—described the
clause as having the same content, despite different wording, as the earlier
Civil Rights Act of 1866, namely, that it excludes Native Americans who
maintain their tribal ties and "persons born in the United States who are
foreigners, aliens, who belong to the families of ambassadors or foreign
ministers".[47] According to historian Glenn W. LaFantasie of Western Kentucky
University, "A good number of his fellow senators supported his view of the
citizenship clause."[46] Others also agreed that the children of ambassadors
and foreign ministers were to be excluded.[48][49]

Senator James Rood Doolittle of Wisconsin asserted that all Native Americans
were subject to United States jurisdiction, so that the phrase "Indians not
taxed" would be preferable,[50] but Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Lyman
Trumbull and Howard disputed this, arguing that the federal government did not
have full jurisdiction over Native American tribes, which govern themselves
and make treaties with the United States.[51][52] In _Elk v. Wilkins_
(1884),[53] the clause's meaning was tested regarding whether birth in the
United States automatically extended national citizenship. The Supreme Court
held that Native Americans who voluntarily quit their tribes did not
automatically gain national citizenship.[54] The issue was resolved with the
passage of the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, which granted full U.S.
citizenship to indigenous peoples.[55]

#### Children born to foreign nationals

The Fourteenth Amendment provides that children born in the United States and
subject to its jurisdiction become American citizens at birth. At the time of
the amendment's passage, President Andrew Johnson and three Senators,
including Trumbull, the author of the Civil Rights Act, asserted that both the
Civil Rights Act[56][57] and the Fourteenth Amendment would confer citizenship
to children born to foreign nationals in the United States.[58][59] Senator
Edgar Cowan of Pennsylvania had a decidedly different opinion.[60] Some
scholars dispute whether the Citizenship Clause should apply to the children
of unauthorized immigrants today, as "the problem ... did not exist at the
time".[61] In the 21st century, Congress has occasionally discussed passing a
statute or a constitutional amendment to reduce the practice of "birth
tourism", in which a foreign national gives birth in the United States to gain
the child's citizenship.[62]

The clause's meaning with regard to a child of immigrants was tested in
_United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898).[63] The Supreme Court held that under
the Fourteenth Amendment, a man born within the United States to Chinese
citizens who have a permanent domicile and residence in the United States and
are carrying out business in the United States—and whose parents were not
employed in a diplomatic or other official capacity by a foreign power—was a
citizen of the United States. Subsequent decisions have applied the principle
to the children of foreign nationals of non-Chinese descent.[64]

According to the Foreign Affairs Manual, which is published by the Department
of State, "Despite widespread popular belief, U.S. military installations
abroad and U.S. diplomatic or consular facilities abroad are not part of the
United States within the meaning of the [Fourteenth] Amendment."[65]

#### Loss of citizenship

Loss of national citizenship is possible only under the following
circumstances:

        
                  * Fraud in the naturalization process. Technically, this is not a loss of citizenship but rather a voiding of the purported naturalization and a declaration that the immigrant _never was_ a citizen of the United States.[66]
          * Affiliation with "anti-American" organizations (e.g., the Communist party, terrorist organizations, etc.) within 5 years of naturalization. The State Department views such affiliations as sufficient evidence that an applicant must have lied or concealed evidence in the naturalization process.[66]
          * Other-than-honorable discharge from the U.S. armed forces before 5 years of honorable service, if honorable service was the basis for the naturalization.[66]
          * Voluntary relinquishment of citizenship. This may be accomplished either through renunciation procedures specially established by the State Department or through other actions that demonstrate desire to give up national citizenship.[67]
        

For much of the country's history, voluntary acquisition or exercise of a
foreign citizenship was considered sufficient cause for revocation of national
citizenship.[68] This concept was enshrined in a series of treaties between
the United States and other countries (the Bancroft Treaties). However, the
Supreme Court repudiated this concept in _Afroyim v. Rusk_ (1967),[69] as well
as _Vance v. Terrazas_ (1980),[70] holding that the Citizenship Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment barred the Congress from revoking citizenship. However,
Congress can revoke citizenship that it has previously granted to a person not
born in the United States.[71]

### Privileges or Immunities Clause

Main article: Privileges or Immunities Clause

The Privileges or Immunities Clause, which protects the privileges and
immunities of national citizenship from interference by the states, was
patterned after the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV, which
protects the privileges and immunities of state citizenship from interference
by other states.[72] In the _Slaughter-House Cases_ (1873),[72] the Supreme
Court concluded that the Constitution recognized two separate types of
citizenship—"national citizenship" and "state citizenship"—and the Court held
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause prohibits states from interfering
only with privileges and immunities possessed by virtue of national
citizenship.[72][73] The Court concluded that the privileges and immunities of
national citizenship included only those rights that "owe their existence to
the Federal government, its National character, its Constitution, or its
laws".[72] The Court recognized few such rights, including access to seaports
and navigable waterways, the right to run for federal office, the protection
of the federal government while on the high seas or in the jurisdiction of a
foreign country, the right to travel to the seat of government, the right to
peaceably assemble and petition the government, the privilege of the writ of
habeas corpus, and the right to participate in the government's
administration.[72][73] This decision has not been overruled and has been
specifically reaffirmed several times.[74] Largely as a result of the
narrowness of the _Slaughter-House_ opinion, this clause subsequently lay
dormant for well over a century.[75]

In _Saenz v. Roe_ (1999),[76] the Court ruled that a component of the "right
to travel" is protected by the Privileges or Immunities Clause:

> Despite fundamentally differing views concerning the coverage of the
Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, most notably
expressed in the majority and dissenting opinions in the _Slaughter-House
Cases_ (1873), it has always been common ground that this Clause protects the
third component of the right to travel. Writing for the majority in the
_Slaughter-House Cases_ , Justice Miller explained that one of the privileges
_conferred by this Clause_ "is that a citizen of the United States can, of his
own volition, become a citizen of any State of the Union by a bona fide
residence therein, with the same rights as other citizens of that State".
(emphasis added)

Justice Miller actually wrote in the _Slaughter-House Cases_ that the right to
become a citizen of a state (by residing in that state) "is conferred by _the
very article_ under consideration" (emphasis added), rather than by the
"clause" under consideration.[72][77]

In _McDonald v. Chicago _ (2010), Justice Clarence Thomas, while concurring
with the majority in incorporating the Second Amendment against the states,
declared that he reached this conclusion through the Privileges or Immunities
Clause instead of the Due Process Clause. Randy Barnett has referred to
Justice Thomas's concurring opinion as a "complete restoration" of the
Privileges or Immunities Clause.[78]

### Due Process Clause

Main article: Due Process Clause

In the 1884 case of _Hurtado v. California_ , the U.S. Supreme Court said:[79]

> Due process of law in the [Fourteenth Amendment] refers to that law of the
land in each state which derives its authority from the inherent and reserved
powers of the state, exerted within the limits of those fundamental principles
of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all our civil and political
institutions, and the greatest security for which resides in the right of the
people to make their own laws, and alter them at their pleasure.

The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applies only against the
states, but it is otherwise textually identical to the Due Process Clause of
the Fifth Amendment, which applies against the federal government; both
clauses have been interpreted to encompass identical doctrines of procedural
due process and substantive due process.[80] Procedural due process is the
guarantee of a fair legal process when the government tries to interfere with
a person's protected interests in life, liberty, or property, and substantive
due process is the guarantee that the fundamental rights of citizens will not
be encroached on by government.[81] The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment also incorporates most of the provisions in the Bill of Rights,
which were originally applied against only the federal government, and applies
them against the states.[82]

#### Substantive due process

Main article: Substantive due process

Beginning with _Allgeyer v. Louisiana_ (1897),[83] the Court interpreted the
Due Process Clause as providing substantive protection to private contracts,
thus prohibiting a variety of social and economic regulation; this principle
was referred to as "freedom of contract".[84] Thus, the Court struck down a
law decreeing maximum hours for workers in a bakery in _Lochner v. New York_
(1905)[85] and struck down a minimum wage law in _Adkins v. Children's
Hospital_ (1923).[86] In _Meyer v. Nebraska_ (1923),[87] the Court stated that
the "liberty" protected by the Due Process Clause

> [w]ithout doubt ... denotes not merely freedom from bodily restraint but
also the right of the individual to contract, to engage in any of the common
occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to marry, establish a home
and bring up children, to worship God according to the dictates of his own
conscience, and generally to enjoy those privileges long recognized at common
law as essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men.[88]

However, the Court did uphold some economic regulation, such as state
Prohibition laws ( _Mugler v. Kansas_ , 1887),[89] laws declaring maximum
hours for mine workers ( _Holden v. Hardy_ , 1898),[90] laws declaring maximum
hours for female workers ( _Muller v. Oregon_ , 1908),[91] and President
Woodrow Wilson's intervention in a railroad strike ( _Wilson v. New_ ,
1917),[92] as well as federal laws regulating narcotics ( _United States v.
Doremus_ , 1919).[93] The Court repudiated, but did not explicitly overrule,
the "freedom of contract" line of cases in _West Coast Hotel v. Parrish_
(1937).[94]

In _Poe v. Ullman_ (1961), dissenting judge John Marshall Harlan II adopted a
broad view of the "liberty" protected by the Fourteenth Amendment Due Process
clause:

> [T]he full scope of the liberty guaranteed by the Due Process Clause cannot
be found in or limited by the precise terms of the specific guarantees
elsewhere provided in the Constitution. This 'liberty' is not a series of
isolated points pricked out in terms of the taking of property; the freedom of
speech, press, and religion; the right to keep and bear arms; the freedom from
unreasonable searches and seizures; and so on. It is a rational continuum
which, broadly speaking, includes a freedom from all substantial arbitrary
impositions and purposeless restraints, ... and which also recognizes, what a
reasonable and sensitive judgment must, that certain interests require
particularly careful scrutiny of the state needs asserted to justify their
abridgment.[95]

This broad view of liberty was adopted by the Supreme Court in _Griswold v.
Connecticut_ [96] (for further information see below). Although the "freedom
of contract" described above has fallen into disfavor, by the 1960s, the Court
had extended its interpretation of substantive due process to include other
rights and freedoms that are not enumerated in the Constitution but that,
according to the Court, extend or derive from existing rights.[84] For
example, the Due Process Clause is also the foundation of a constitutional
right to privacy. The Court first ruled that privacy was protected by the
Constitution in _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965), which overturned a
Connecticut law criminalizing birth control.[97] While Justice William O.
Douglas wrote for the majority that the right to privacy was found in the
"penumbras" of various provisions in the Bill of Rights, Justices Arthur
Goldberg and John Marshall Harlan II wrote in concurring opinions that the
"liberty" protected by the Due Process Clause included individual privacy.[98]

The right to privacy was the basis for _Roe v. Wade_ (1973),[99] in which the
Court invalidated a Texas law forbidding abortion except to save the mother's
life. Like Goldberg's and Harlan's concurring opinions in _Griswold_ , the
majority opinion authored by Justice Harry Blackmun located the right to
privacy in the Due Process Clause's protection of liberty. The decision
disallowed many state and federal abortion restrictions, and it became one of
the most controversial in the Court's history.[100] In _Planned Parenthood v.
Casey_ (1992),[101] the Court decided that "the essential holding of _Roe v.
Wade_ should be retained and once again reaffirmed".[102]

In _Lawrence v. Texas_ (2003),[103] the Court found that a Texas law against
same-sex sexual intercourse violated the right to privacy.[104] In _Obergefell
v. Hodges_ (2015), the Court ruled that the fundamental right to marriage
included same-sex couples being able to marry.[105]

#### Procedural due process

When the government seeks to burden a person's protected liberty interest or
property interest, the Supreme Court has held that procedural due process
requires that, at a minimum, the government provide the person notice, an
opportunity to be heard at an oral hearing, and a decision by a neutral
decision maker. For example, such process is due when a government agency
seeks to terminate civil service employees, expel a student from public
school, or cut off a welfare recipient's benefits.[106][107] The Court has
also ruled that the Due Process Clause requires judges to recuse themselves in
cases where the judge has a conflict of interest. For example, in _Caperton v.
A.T. Massey Coal Co._ (2009),[108] the Court ruled that a justice of the
Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia had to recuse himself from a case
involving a major contributor to his campaign for election to that court.[109]

#### Incorporation

Main article: Incorporation of the Bill of Rights

While many state constitutions are modeled after the United States
Constitution and federal laws, those state constitutions did not necessarily
include provisions comparable to the Bill of Rights. In _Barron v. Baltimore_
(1833),[110] the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the Bill of Rights
restrained only the federal government, not the states.[111] However, the
Supreme Court has subsequently held that most provisions of the Bill of Rights
apply to the states through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
under a doctrine called "incorporation".[82]

Whether incorporation was intended by the amendment's framers, such as John
Bingham, has been debated by legal historians.[112] According to legal scholar
Akhil Reed Amar, the framers and early supporters of the Fourteenth Amendment
believed that it would ensure that the states would be required to recognize
the same individual rights as the federal government; all of these rights were
likely understood as falling within the "privileges or immunities" safeguarded
by the amendment.[113]

By the latter half of the 20th century, nearly all of the rights in the Bill
of Rights had been applied to the states.[114] The Supreme Court has held that
the amendment's Due Process Clause incorporates all of the substantive
protections of the First, Second, Fourth, Fifth (except for its Grand Jury
Clause) and Sixth Amendments, along with the Excessive Fines Clause and Cruel
and Unusual Punishment Clause of the Eighth Amendment.[115] While the Third
Amendment has not been applied to the states by the Supreme Court, the Second
Circuit ruled that it did apply to the states within that circuit's
jurisdiction in _Engblom v. Carey_.[116] The Seventh Amendment right to jury
trial in civil cases has been held not to be applicable to the
states,[115][117] but the amendment's Re-Examination Clause does apply to "a
case tried before a jury in a state court and brought to the Supreme Court on
appeal".[118]

On February 20, 2019, the Supreme Court ruled in _Timbs v. Indiana_ that the
Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment applied to the states.[119]

### Equal Protection Clause

Main article: Equal Protection Clause

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/38/BinghamFacingForward.jpg/220px-

BinghamFacingForward.jpg)

Representative John Bingham of Ohio, principal author of the Equal Protection
Clause

The Equal Protection Clause was created largely in response to the lack of
equal protection provided by law in states with Black Codes. Under Black
Codes, blacks could not sue, give evidence, or be witnesses. They also were
punished more harshly than whites.[120] In 1880, the Supreme Court stated in
_Strauder v. West Virginia_ that the Equal Protection Clause was

> designed to assure to the colored race the enjoyment of all the civil rights
that under the law are enjoyed by white persons, and to give to that race the
protection of the general government, in that enjoyment, whenever it should be
denied by the States.

The Clause mandates that individuals in similar situations be treated equally
by the law.[121] Although the text of the Fourteenth Amendment applies the
Equal Protection Clause only against the states, the Supreme Court, since
_Bolling v. Sharpe_ (1954), has applied the Clause against the federal
government through the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment under a
doctrine called "reverse incorporation".[122][123]

In _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ (1886), the Supreme Court has clarified that the
meaning of "person" and "within its jurisdiction" in the Equal Protection
Clause would not be limited to discrimination against African Americans, but
would extend to other races, colors, and nationalities such as (in this case)
legal aliens in the United States who are Chinese citizens:[124][125]

> These provisions are universal in their application to all persons within
the territorial jurisdiction, without regard to any differences of race, of
color, or of nationality, and the equal protection of the laws is a pledge of
the protection of equal laws.

Persons "within its jurisdiction" are entitled to equal protection from a
state. Largely because the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV has
from the beginning guaranteed the privileges and immunities of citizens in the
several states, the Supreme Court has rarely construed the phrase "within its
jurisdiction" in relation to natural persons.[125] In _Plyler v. Doe_ (1982),
where the Court held that aliens illegally present in a state are _within its
jurisdiction_ and may thus raise equal protection claims[125][126] the Court
explicated the meaning of the phrase "within its jurisdiction" as follows:
"[U]se of the phrase 'within its jurisdiction' confirms the understanding that
the Fourteenth Amendment's protection extends to anyone, citizen or stranger,
who is subject to the laws of a State, and reaches into every corner of a
State's territory."[126] The Court reached this understanding among other
things from Senator Howard, a member of the Joint Committee of Fifteen, and
the floor manager of the amendment in the Senate. Senator Howard was explicit
about the broad objectives of the Fourteenth Amendment and the intention to
make its provisions applicable to all who "may happen to be" within the
jurisdiction of a state:[126]

> The last two clauses of the first section of the amendment disable a State
from depriving not merely a citizen of the United States, but _any person,
whoever he may be_ , of life, liberty, or property without due process of law,
or from denying to him the equal protection of the laws of the State. This
abolishes all class legislation in the States and does away with the injustice
of subjecting one caste of persons to a code not applicable to another. ... It
will, if adopted by the States, forever disable every one of them from passing
laws trenching upon those fundamental rights and privileges which pertain to
citizens of the United States, _and to all person who may happen to be within
their jurisdiction._ [emphasis added by the U.S. Supreme Court][127]

The relationship between the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments was addressed by
Justice Field in _Wong Wing v. United States_ (1896).[128] He observed with
respect to the phrase "within its jurisdiction": "The term 'person', used in
the Fifth Amendment, is broad enough to include any and every human being
within the jurisdiction of the republic. A resident, alien born, is entitled
to the same protection under the laws that a citizen is entitled to. He owes
obedience to the laws of the country in which he is domiciled, and, as a
consequence, he is entitled to the equal protection of those laws. ... The
contention that persons within the territorial jurisdiction of this republic
might be beyond the protection of the law was heard with pain on the argument
at the bar—in face of the great constitutional amendment which declares that
no State shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection
of the laws."[129]

The Supreme Court also decided whether foreign corporations are also _within
the jurisdiction_ of a state, ruling that a foreign corporation which sued in
a state court in which it was not licensed to do business to recover
possession of property wrongfully taken from it in another state was _within
the jurisdiction_ and could not be subjected to unequal burdens in the
maintenance of the suit.[125] When a state has admitted a foreign corporation
to do business within its borders, that corporation is entitled to equal
protection of the laws but not necessarily to identical treatment with
domestic corporations.[125]

In _Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad_ (1886), the court
reporter included a statement by Chief Justice Morrison Waite in the
decision's headnote:

> The court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the
provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which forbids a
State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of
the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of the opinion that it
does.[130]

This dictum, which established that corporations enjoyed personhood under the
Equal Protection Clause, was repeatedly reaffirmed by later courts.[130] It
remained the predominant view throughout the twentieth century, though it was
challenged in dissents by justices such as Hugo Black and William O.
Douglas.[131] Between 1890 and 1910, Fourteenth Amendment cases involving
corporations vastly outnumbered those involving the rights of blacks, 288 to
19.[132]

In the decades following the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme
Court overturned laws barring blacks from juries ( _Strauder v. West Virginia_
, 1880)[133] or discriminating against Chinese Americans in the regulation of
laundry businesses ( _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ , 1886),[124] as violations of the
Equal Protection Clause. However, in _Plessy v. Ferguson_ (1896),[134] the
Supreme Court held that the states could impose racial segregation so long as
they provided similar facilities—the formation of the "separate but equal"
doctrine.[135]

The Court went even further in restricting the Equal Protection Clause in
_Berea College v. Kentucky_ (1908),[136] holding that the states could force
private actors to discriminate by prohibiting colleges from having both black
and white students. By the early 20th century, the Equal Protection Clause had
been eclipsed to the point that Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. dismissed
it as "the usual last resort of constitutional arguments".[137]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Thurgoodmarshall1967.jpg/200px-

Thurgoodmarshall1967.jpg)

Thurgood Marshall served as chief counsel in the landmark Fourteenth Amendment
decision _Brown v. Board of Education_ (1954).

The Court held to the "separate but equal" doctrine for more than fifty years,
despite numerous cases in which the Court itself had found that the segregated
facilities provided by the states were almost never equal, until _Brown v.
Board of Education_ (1954) reached the Court.[138] In _Brown_ the Court ruled
that even if segregated black and white schools were of equal quality in
facilities and teachers, segregation was inherently harmful to black students
and so was unconstitutional. _Brown_ met with a campaign of resistance from
white Southerners, and for decades the federal courts attempted to enforce
_Brown_ 's mandate against repeated attempts at circumvention.[139] This
resulted in the controversial desegregation busing decrees handed down by
federal courts in various parts of the nation.[140] In _Parents Involved in
Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1_ (2007), the Court ruled
that race could not be the determinative factor in determining to which public
schools parents may transfer their children.[141][142]

In _Plyler v. Doe_ (1982) the Supreme Court struck down a Texas statute
denying free public education to illegal immigrants as a violation of the
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because discrimination on
the basis of illegal immigration status did not further a substantial state
interest. The Court reasoned that illegal aliens and their children, though
not citizens of the United States or Texas, are people "in any ordinary sense
of the term" and, therefore, are afforded Fourteenth Amendment
protections.[126][143]

In _Hernandez v. Texas_ (1954), the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment
protects those beyond the racial classes of white or "Negro" and extends to
other racial and ethnic groups, such as Mexican Americans in this case.[144]
In the half-century following _Brown_ , the Court extended the reach of the
Equal Protection Clause to other historically disadvantaged groups, such as
women and illegitimate children, although it has applied a somewhat less
stringent standard than it has applied to governmental discrimination on the
basis of race ( _United States v. Virginia_ (1996);[145] _Levy v. Louisiana_
(1968)[146] ).[147]

The Supreme Court ruled in _Regents of the University of California v. Bakke_
(1978)[148] that affirmative action in the form of racial quotas in public
university admissions was a violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964; however, race could be used as one of several factors without violating
of the Equal Protection Clause or Title VI.[149] In _Gratz v. Bollinger_
(2003)[150] and _Grutter v. Bollinger_ (2003),[151] the Court considered two
race-conscious admissions systems at the University of Michigan. The
university claimed that its goal in its admissions systems was to achieve
racial diversity.[152] In _Gratz_ , the Court struck down a points-based
undergraduate admissions system that added points for minority status, finding
that its rigidity violated the Equal Protection Clause; in _Grutter_ , the
Court upheld a race-conscious admissions process for the university's law
school that used race as one of many factors to determine admission.[153] In
_Fisher v. University of Texas_ (2013), the Court ruled that before race can
be used in a public university's admission policy, there must be no workable
race-neutral alternative.[154][155] In _Schuette v. Coalition to Defend
Affirmative Action_ (2014), the Court upheld the constitutionality of a state
constitutional prohibition on the state or local use of affirmative
action.[156][157]

_Reed v. Reed_ (1971),[158] which struck down an Idaho probate law favoring
men, was the first decision in which the Court ruled that arbitrary gender
discrimination violated the Equal Protection Clause.[159] In _Craig v. Boren_
(1976),[160] the Court ruled that statutory or administrative sex
classifications had to be subjected to an intermediate standard of judicial
review.[161] _Reed_ and _Craig_ later served as precedents to strike down a
number of state laws discriminating by gender.[159]

Since _Wesberry v. Sanders_ (1964)[162] and _Reynolds v. Sims_ (1964),[163]
the Supreme Court has interpreted the Equal Protection Clause as requiring the
states to apportion their congressional districts and state legislative seats
according to "one man, one vote".[164] The Court has also struck down
redistricting plans in which race was a key consideration. In _Shaw v. Reno_
(1993),[165] the Court prohibited a North Carolina plan aimed at creating
majority-black districts to balance historic underrepresentation in the
state's congressional delegations.[166]

The Equal Protection Clause served as the basis for the decision in _Bush v.
Gore_ (2000),[167] in which the Court ruled that no constitutionally valid
recount of Florida's votes in the 2000 presidential election could be held
within the needed deadline; the decision effectively secured Bush's victory in
the disputed election.[168] In _League of United Latin American Citizens v.
Perry_ (2006),[169] the Court ruled that House Majority Leader Tom DeLay's
Texas redistricting plan intentionally diluted the votes of Latinos and thus
violated the Equal Protection Clause.[170]

### State actor doctrine

Main article: State actor

Individual liberties guaranteed by the United States Constitution, other than
the Thirteenth Amendment's ban on slavery, protect not against actions by
private persons or entities, but only against actions by government
officials.[171] Regarding the Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme Court ruled in
_Shelley v. Kraemer_ (1948):[172] "[T]he action inhibited by the first section
of the Fourteenth Amendment is only such action as may fairly be said to be
that of the States. That Amendment erects no shield against merely private
conduct, however discriminatory or wrongful." The court added in _Civil Rights
Cases_ (1883):[30] "It is State action of a particular character that is
prohibited. Individual invasion of individual rights is not the subject matter
of the amendment. It has a deeper and broader scope. It nullifies and makes
void all State legislation, and State action of every kind, which impairs the
privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, or which injures
them in life, liberty, or property without due process of law, or which denies
to any of them the equal protection of the laws."

Vindication of federal constitutional rights are limited to those situations
where there is "state action" meaning action of government officials who are
exercising their governmental power.[171] In _Ex parte Virginia_ (1880),[173]
the Supreme Court found that the prohibitions of the Fourteenth Amendment
"have reference to actions of the political body denominated by a State, by
whatever instruments or in whatever modes that action may be taken. A State
acts by its legislative, its executive, or its judicial authorities. It can
act in no other way. The constitutional provision, therefore, must mean that
no agency of the State, or of the officers or agents by whom its powers are
exerted, shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection
of the laws. Whoever, by virtue of public position under a State government,
deprives another of property, life, or liberty, without due process of law, or
denies or takes away the equal protection of the laws, violates the
constitutional inhibition; and as he acts in the name and for the State, and
is clothed with the State's power, his act is that of the State."[174]

There are however instances where people are the victims of civil-rights
violations that occur in circumstances involving both government officials and
private actors.[171] In the 1960s, the United States Supreme Court adopted an
expansive view of state action opening the door to wide-ranging civil-rights
litigation against private actors when they act as state actors[171] (i.e.,
acts done or otherwise "sanctioned in some way" by the state). The Court found
that the state action doctrine is equally applicable to denials of privileges
or immunities, due process, and equal protection of the laws.[125]

The critical factor in determining the existence of state action is not
governmental involvement with private persons or private corporations, but
"the inquiry must be whether there is a sufficiently close nexus between the
State and the challenged action of the regulated entity so that the action of
the latter may be fairly treated as that of the State itself".[174] "Only by
sifting facts and weighing circumstances can the nonobvious involvement of the
State in private conduct be attributed its true significance."[175]

The Supreme Court asserted that plaintiffs must establish not only that a
private party "acted under color of the challenged statute, but also that its
actions are properly attributable to the State".[176] "And the actions are to
be attributable to the State apparently only if the State compelled the
actions and not if the State merely established the process through statute or
regulation under which the private party acted."[125]

The rules developed by the Supreme Court for business regulation are that (1)
the "mere fact that a business is subject to state regulation does not by
itself convert its action into that of the State for purposes of the
Fourteenth Amendment",[a] and (2) "a State normally can be held responsible
for a private decision only when it has exercised coercive power or has
provided such significant encouragement, either overt or covert, that the
choice must be deemed to be that of the State".[b]

## Apportionment of representation in House of Representatives

Under Article I, Section 2, Clause 3, the basis of representation of each
state in the House of Representatives was determined by adding three-fifths of
each state's slave population to its free population. Because slavery (except
as punishment for crime) had been abolished by the Thirteenth Amendment, the
freed slaves would henceforth be given full weight for purposes of
apportionment.[177] This situation was a concern to the Republican leadership
of Congress, who worried that it would increase the political power of the
former slave states, even as they continued to deny freed slaves the right to
vote.[177]

Two solutions were considered:

        
                  * reduce the Congressional representation of the former slave states (for example, by basing representation on the number of legal voters rather than the number of inhabitants)
          * guarantee freed slaves the right to vote
        

On January 31, 1866, the House of Representatives voted in favor of a proposed
constitutional amendment that would reduce a state's representation in the
House in proportion to which that state used "race or color" as a basis to
deny the right to vote in that state.[177] The amendment failed in the Senate,
partly because radical Republicans foresaw that states would be able to use
ostensibly race-neutral criteria, such as educational and property
qualifications, to disenfranchise the freed slaves without negative
consequence. So the amendment was changed to penalize states in which the vote
was denied to male citizens over twenty-one for _any_ reason other than
participation in crime. Later, the Fifteenth Amendment was adopted to
guarantee the right to vote could not be denied based on race or color.

The effect of Section 2 was twofold:

        
                  * Although the three-fifths clause was not formally repealed, it was effectively removed from the Constitution. In the words of the Supreme Court in _Elk v. Wilkins_ , Section 2 "abrogated so much of the corresponding clause of the original Constitution as counted only three-fifths of such persons [slaves]".
          * It was intended to penalize, by means of reduced Congressional representation, states that withheld the franchise from adult male citizens for any reason other than participation in crime. This, it was hoped, would induce the former slave states to recognize the political rights of the former slaves, without directly forcing them to do so—something that it was thought the states would not accept.[177]
        

### Enforcement

The first reapportionment after the enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment
occurred in 1873, based on the 1870 census. Congress appears to have attempted
to enforce the provisions of Section 2, but was unable to identify enough
disenfranchised voters to make a difference to any state's
representation.[177] In the implementing statute, Congress added a provision
stating that

> should any state, after the passage of this Act, deny or abridge the right
of any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age,
and citizens of the United States, to vote at any election named in the
amendments to the Constitution, article fourteen, section two, except for
participation in rebellion or other crime, the number of Representatives
apportioned in this act to such State shall be reduced in the proportion which
the number of such male citizens shall have to the whole number of male
citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.[178]

A nearly identical provision remains in federal law to this day.[179]

Despite this legislation, in subsequent reapportionments, no change has ever
been made to any state's Congressional representation on the basis of the
Amendment.[177] Bonfield, writing in 1960, suggested that "[t]he hot political
nature of such proposals has doomed them to failure".[177] Aided by this lack
of enforcement, southern states continued to use pretexts to prevent many
blacks from voting until the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.[180]

In the Fourth Circuit case of _Saunders v Wilkins_ (1945),[181] Saunders
claimed that Virginia should have its Congressional representation reduced
because of its use of a poll tax and other voting restrictions. The plaintiff
sued for the right to run for Congress at large in the state, rather than in
one of its designated Congressional districts. The lawsuit was dismissed as a
political question.[177]

### Influence on voting rights

Some have argued that Section 2 was implicitly repealed by the Fifteenth
Amendment,[182] but the Supreme Court acknowledged Section 2 in later
decisions.

In _Minor v. Happersett_ (1875), the Supreme Court cited Section 2 as
supporting its conclusion that the right to vote was not among the "privileges
and immunities of citizenship" protected by Section 1.[183] This decision was
overruled in 1920 by the Nineteenth Amendment.

In _Richardson v. Ramirez_ (1974), the Court cited Section 2 as justifying the
states disenfranchising felons.[184]

In _Hunter v. Underwood_ (1985), a case involving disenfranchising black
misdemeanants, the Supreme Court concluded that the Tenth Amendment cannot
save legislation prohibited by the subsequently enacted Fourteenth Amendment.
More specifically the Court concluded that laws passed with a discriminatory
purpose are not excepted from the operation of the Equal Protection Clause by
the "other crime" provision of Section 2. The Court held that Section 2 "was
not designed to permit the purposeful racial discrimination [...] which
otherwise violates [Section] 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment."[185]

### Criticism

Abolitionist leaders criticized the amendment's failure to specifically
prohibit the states from denying people the right to vote on the basis of
race.[186]

Section 2 protects the right to vote only of adult males, not adult females,
making it the only provision of the Constitution to explicitly discriminate on
the basis of sex.[34] Section 2 was condemned by women's suffragists, such as
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, who had long seen their cause as
linked to that of black rights. The separation of black civil rights from
women's civil rights split the two movements for decades.[187]

## Participants in rebellion

Section 3 prohibits the election or appointment to any federal or state office
of any person who had held any of certain offices and then engaged in
insurrection, rebellion, or treason. However, a two-thirds vote by each House
of the Congress can override this limitation. In 1898, the Congress enacted a
general removal of Section 3's limitation.[188] In 1975, the citizenship of
Confederate general Robert E. Lee was restored by a joint congressional
resolution, retroactive to June 13, 1865.[189] In 1978, pursuant to Section 3,
the Congress posthumously removed the service ban from Confederate president
Jefferson Davis.[190]

Section 3 was used to prevent Socialist Party of America member Victor L.
Berger, convicted of violating the Espionage Act for his anti-militarist
views, from taking his seat in the House of Representatives in 1919 and
1920.[191]

## Validity of public debt

Section 4 confirmed the legitimacy of all public debt appropriated by the
Congress. It also confirmed that neither the United States nor any state would
pay for the loss of slaves or debts that had been incurred by the Confederacy.
For example, during the Civil War several British and French banks had lent
large sums of money to the Confederacy to support its war against the
Union.[192] In _Perry v. United States_ (1935), the Supreme Court ruled that
under Section 4 voiding a United States bond "went beyond the congressional
power."[193]

The debt-ceiling crises of 2011 and 2013 raised the question of what is the
President's authority under Section 4.[194][195] Some, such as legal scholar
Garrett Epps, fiscal expert Bruce Bartlett and Treasury Secretary Timothy
Geithner, have argued that a debt ceiling may be unconstitutional and
therefore void as long as it interferes with the duty of the government to pay
interest on outstanding bonds and to make payments owed to pensioners (that
is, Social Security and Railroad Retirement Act recipients).[196][197] Legal
analyst Jeffrey Rosen has argued that Section 4 gives the President unilateral
authority to raise or ignore the national debt ceiling, and that if challenged
the Supreme Court would likely rule in favor of expanded executive power or
dismiss the case altogether for lack of standing.[198] Erwin Chemerinsky,
professor and dean at University of California, Irvine School of Law, has
argued that not even in a "dire financial emergency" could the President raise
the debt ceiling as "there is no reasonable way to interpret the Constitution
that [allows him to do so]".[199] Jack Balkin, Knight Professor of
Constitutional Law at Yale University, opined that like Congress the President
is bound by the Fourteenth Amendment, for otherwise, he could violate any part
of the amendment at will. Because the President must obey the Section 4
requirement not to put the validity of the public debt into question, Balkin
argued that President Obama is obliged "to prioritize incoming revenues to pay
the public debt: interest on government bonds and any other 'vested'
obligations. What falls into the latter category is not entirely clear, but a
large number of other government obligations—and certainly payments for future
services—would not count and would have to be sacrificed. This might include,
for example, Social Security payments."[195]

## Power of enforcement

Main article: Congressional power of enforcement

Section 5, also known as the Enforcement Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,
enables Congress to pass laws enforcing the amendment's other
provisions.[200][201] In the _Civil Rights Cases_ (1883),[30] the Supreme
Court interpreted Section 5 narrowly, stating that "the legislation which
Congress is authorized to adopt in this behalf is not general legislation upon
the rights of the citizen, but corrective legislation". In other words, the
amendment authorizes Congress to pass laws only to combat violations of the
rights protected in other sections.[202]

In _Katzenbach v. Morgan_ (1966),[203] the Court upheld Section 4(e) of the
Voting Rights Act of 1965, which prohibits certain forms of literacy
requirements as a condition to vote, as a valid exercise of Congressional
power under Section 5 to enforce the Equal Protection Clause. The Court ruled
that Section 5 enabled Congress to act both remedially and prophylactically to
protect the rights guaranteed by the amendment.[204] However, in _City of
Boerne v. Flores_ (1997),[205] the Court narrowed Congress's enforcement
power, holding that Congress may not enact legislation under Section 5 that
substantively defines or interprets Fourteenth Amendment rights.[200] The
Court ruled that legislation is valid under Section 5 only if there is a
"congruence and proportionality" between the injury to a person's Fourteenth
Amendment right and the means Congress adopted to prevent or remedy that
injury.[206]

## Selected Supreme Court cases

### Citizenship

        
                  * 1884: _Elk v. Wilkins_
          * 1898: _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_
          * 1967: _Afroyim v. Rusk_
          * 1980: _Vance v. Terrazas_
          * 1982: _Plyler v. Doe_
        

### Privileges or immunities

        
                  * 1873: _Slaughter-House Cases_
          * 1875: _Minor v. Happersett_
          * 1908: _Twining v. New Jersey_
          * 1920: _United States v. Wheeler_
          * 1948: _Oyama v. California_
          * 1999: _Saenz v. Roe_
        

### Incorporation

        
                  * 1833: _Barron v. Baltimore_
          * 1873: _Slaughter-House Cases_
          * 1883: _Civil Rights Cases_
          * 1884: _Hurtado v. California_
          * 1897: _Chicago, Burlington& Quincy Railroad v. Chicago_
          * 1900: _Maxwell v. Dow_
          * 1908: _Twining v. New Jersey_
          * 1925: _Gitlow v. New York_
          * 1932: _Powell v. Alabama_
          * 1937: _Palko v. Connecticut_
          * 1947: _Adamson v. California_
          * 1952: _Rochin v. California_
          * 1961: _Mapp v. Ohio_
          * 1962: _Robinson v. California_
          * 1963: _Gideon v. Wainwright_
          * 1964: _Malloy v. Hogan_
          * 1967: _Reitman v. Mulkey_
          * 1968: _Duncan v. Louisiana_
          * 1969: _Benton v. Maryland_
          * 1970: _Goldberg v. Kelly_
          * 1972: _Furman v. Georgia_
          * 1974: _Goss v. Lopez_
          * 1975: _O'Connor v. Donaldson_
          * 1976: _Gregg v. Georgia_
          * 2010: _McDonald v. Chicago_
          * 2019: _Timbs v. Indiana_
        

### Substantive due process

        
                  * 1876: _Munn v. Illinois_
          * 1887: _Mugler v. Kansas_
          * 1897: _Allgeyer v. Louisiana_
          * 1905: _Lochner v. New York_
          * 1908: _Muller v. Oregon_
          * 1923: _Adkins v. Children's Hospital_
          * 1923: _Meyer v. Nebraska_
          * 1925: _Pierce v. Society of Sisters_
          * 1934: _Nebbia v. New York_
          * 1937: _West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish_
          * 1965: _Griswold v. Connecticut_
          * 1973: _Roe v. Wade_
          * 1992: _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_
          * 1996: _BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore_
          * 1997: _Washington v. Glucksberg_
          * 2003: _State Farm v. Campbell_
          * 2003: _Lawrence v. Texas_
          * 2015: _Obergefell v. Hodges_
        

### Equal protection

        
                  * 1880: _Strauder v. West Virginia_
          * 1886: _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_
          * 1886: _Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad_
          * 1896: _Plessy v. Ferguson_
          * 1908: _Berea College v. Kentucky_
          * 1917: _Buchanan v. Warley_
          * 1942: _Skinner v. Oklahoma_
          * 1944: _Korematsu v. United States_
          * 1948: _Shelley v. Kraemer_
          * 1954: _Hernandez v. Texas_
          * 1954: _Brown v. Board of Education_
          * 1962: _Baker v. Carr_
          * 1967: _Loving v. Virginia_
          * 1971: _Reed v. Reed_
          * 1971: _Palmer v. Thompson_
          * 1972: _Eisenstadt v. Baird_
          * 1973: _San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez_
          * 1976: _Examining Board v. Flores de Otero_
          * 1978: _Regents of the University of California v. Bakke_
          * 1982: _Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan_
          * 1986: _Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico_
          * 1996: _United States v. Virginia_
          * 1996: _Romer v. Evans_
          * 2000: _Bush v. Gore_
        

### Felon disenfranchisement

        
                  * 1974: _Richardson v. Ramirez_
          * 1985: _Hunter v. Underwood_
        

### Power of enforcement

        
                  * 1883: _Civil Rights Cases_
          * 1966: _Katzenbach v. Morgan_
          * 1997: _City of Boerne v. Flores_
          * 1999: _Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank_
          * 2000: _United States v. Morrison_
          * 2000: _Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents_
          * 2001: _Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett_
          * 2003: _Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs_
          * 2004: _Tennessee v. Lane_
          * 2013: _Shelby County v. Holder_
        

## See also

        
                  * United States constitutional criminal procedure
          * United States labor law
        

## References

### Notes

        
                  1. **^** _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co._ , 419 U.S. 345, 350 (1974); _Blum v. Yaretsky_ , 457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982). Cf. _Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis_ , 407 U.S. 163 (1972).
          2. **^** _Yaretsky_ , 457 U.S., at 1004; _Flagg Bros._ , 436 U.S., at 166; _Metropolitan Edison Co._ , 419 U.S., at 357.
        

### Citations

        
                  1. **^** "Constitution of the United States: Amendments 11–27". National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved  June 11, 2013.
          2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Goldstone 2011, p. 22.
          3. **^** Stromberg, "A Plain Folk Perspective" (2002), p. 111.
          4. **^** Nelson, William E. (1988). _The Fourteenth Amendment: From Political Principle to Judicial Doctrine_. Harvard University Press. p. 47. ISBN 9780674041424. Retrieved June 6, 2013.
          5. **^** Stromberg, "A Plain Folk Perspective" (2002), p. 112.
          6. **^** Foner, Eric (June 1, 1997). _Reconstruction_. pp. 199–200. ISBN 978-0-8071-2234-1.
          7. **^** Foner 1988, pp. 250–251.
          8. **^** Castel, Albert E. (1979). _The Presidency of Andrew Johnson_. American Presidency. Lawrence, Kan.: The Regents Press of Kansas. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-7006-0190-5.
          9. **^** Castel, Albert E. (1979). _The Presidency of Andrew Johnson_. American Presidency. Lawrence, Kan.: The Regents Press of Kansas. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-7006-0190-5.
          10. **^** Rosen, Jeffrey. _The Supreme Court: The Personalities and Rivalries That Defined America_ , p. 79 (MacMillan 2007).
          11. **^** Newman, Roger. _The Constitution and its Amendments_ , Vol. 4, p. 8 (Macmillan 1999).
          12. **^** Goldstone 2011, pp. 22–23.
          13. **^** Soifer, "Prohibition of Voluntary Peonage" (2012), p. 1614.
          14. **^** Foner 1988, p. 252.
          15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Foner 1988, p. 253.
          16. **^** James J. Kilpatrick, ed. (1961). _The Constitution of the United States and Amendments Thereto_. Virginia Commission on Constitutional Government. p. 44.
          17. **^** McPherson, Edward LL.D., (Clerk of the House of Representatives of the United States) _"A Handbook of Politics for 1868"_ , Part I - Political Manual for 1866, VI - Votes on Proposed Constitutional Amendments. Washington City: Philp & Solomons. 1868, p. 102
          18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Carter, Dan. _When the War Was Over: The Failure of Self-Reconstruction in the South, 1865–1867_ , pp. 242–243 (LSU Press 1985).
          19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Graber, "Subtraction by Addition?" (2012), pp. 1501–1502.
          20. **^** "The Civil War And Reconstruction". Retrieved  January 8, 2016.
          21. **^** An Act to provide for the more efficient Government of the Rebel States, enacted March 2, 1867, 14 Stat. 428, 429
          22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Amendment XIV". US Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved  June 23, 2013.
          23. **^** _A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774–1875_. Library of Congress. p. 707.
          24. **^** Killian, Johnny H.; et al. (2004). _The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation: Analysis of Cases Decided by the Supreme Court of the United States to June 28, 2002_. Government Printing Office. p. 31. ISBN 9780160723797.
          25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774–1875_. Library of Congress. p. 709.
          26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774–1875_. Library of Congress. p. 710.
          27. **^** _A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774–1875_. Library of Congress. p. 708.
          28. **^** _A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774–1875_. Library of Congress. p. 711.
          29. **^** "Amendment of 1868 Ratified by Maryland". _The New York Times_. April 5, 1959. p. 71.
          30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _Civil Rights Cases_ , 109 U.S. 3 (1883).
          31. **^** " _Civil Rights Cases_ (1883)". _Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Pearson Prentice Hall_. Pearson Education. 2005. Retrieved  October 23, 2013.
          32. **^** Graber, "Subtraction by Addition?" (2012), p. 1523.
          33. **^** Goldstone 2011, pp. 23–24.
          34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Eric Foner, "The Second American Revolution", _In These Times_ , September 1987; reprinted in _Civil Rights Since 1787_ , ed. Jonathan Birnbaum & Clarence Taylor, NYU Press, 2000. ISBN 0814782493
          35. **^** Finkelman, Paul (2003). "John Bingham and the Background to the Fourteenth Amendment" (PDF). _Akron Law Review_. **36** (671). Retrieved  April 2, 2009.
          36. **^** Harrell, David and Gaustad, Edwin. _Unto A Good Land: A History Of The American People_ , Volume 1, p. 520 (Eerdmans Publishing, 2005): "The most important, and the one that has occasioned the most litigation over time as to its meaning and application, was Section One."
          37. **^** Stephenson, D. _The Waite Court: Justices, Rulings, and Legacy_ , p. 147 (ABC-CLIO, 2003).
          38. **^** "Tsesis, Alexander, The Inalienable Core of Citizenship: From Dred Scott to the Rehnquist Court". _Arizona State Law Journal_. **39**. 2008. SSRN 1023809.
          39. **^** _McDonald v. Chicago_ , 130 S. Ct. 3020, 3060 (2010) ("This [clause] unambiguously overruled this Court's contrary holding in _Dred Scott_.")
          40. **^** _Jones v. Mayer_ , 392 U.S. 409 (1968).
          41. **^** Yen, Chin-Yung. _Rights of citizens and persons under the Fourteenth amendment_ , page 7 (New Era Printing Company 1905).
          42. **^** Messner, Emily. "Born in the U.S.A. (Part I)", _The Debate_ , _The Washington Post_ (March 30, 2006). Archived November 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine
          43. **^** Pear, Robert (August 7, 1996). "Citizenship Proposal Faces Obstacle in the Constitution". _The New York Times_.
          44. **^** Magliocca, Gerard N. (2007). "Indians and Invaders: The Citizenship Clause and Illegal Aliens". _University of Pennsylvania Journal of Constitutional Law_. **10** : 499–526. SSRN 965268.
          45. **^** Foner, Eric (August 27, 2015). "Birthright Citizenship Is the Good Kind of American Exceptionalism". _The Nation_. The Nation. Retrieved  November 12, 2015.
          46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ LaFantasie, Glenn (March 20, 2011) The erosion of the Civil War consensus, _Salon_ Archived March 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine
          47. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, p. 2893 Senator Reverdy Johnson said in the debate: "Now, all this amendment provides is, that all persons born in the United States and not subject to some foreign Power—for that, no doubt, is the meaning of the committee who have brought the matter before us—shall be considered as citizens of the United States ... If there are to be citizens of the United States entitled everywhere to the character of citizens of the United States, there should be some certain definition of what citizenship is, what has created the character of citizen as between himself and the United States, and the amendment says citizenship may depend upon birth, and I know of no better way to give rise to citizenship than the fact of birth within the territory of the United States, born of parents who at the time were subject to the authority of the United States."
          48. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, p. 2897.
          49. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 1, p. 572.
          50. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, pp. 2890,2892–4,2896.
          51. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, p. 2893. Trumbull, during the debate, said, "What do we [the committee reporting the clause] mean by 'subject to the jurisdiction of the United States'? Not owing allegiance to anybody else. That is what it means." He then proceeded to expound upon what he meant by "complete jurisdiction": "Can you sue a Navajoe Indian in court? ... We make treaties with them, and therefore they are not subject to our jurisdiction.... If we want to control the Navajoes or any other Indians of which the Senator from Wisconsin has spoken, how do we do it? Do we pass a law to control them? Are they subject to our jurisdiction in that sense? ... Would he [Sen. Doolittle] think of punishing them for instituting among themselves their own tribal regulations? Does the Government of the United States pretend to take jurisdiction of murders and robberies and other crimes committed by one Indian upon another? ... It is only those persons who come completely within our jurisdiction, who are subject to our laws, that we think of making citizens."
          52. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, p. 2895. Howard additionally stated the word jurisdiction meant "the same jurisdiction in extent and quality as applies to every citizen of the United States now" and that the U.S. possessed a "full and complete jurisdiction" over the person described in the amendment.
          53. **^** _Elk v. Wilkins_ , 112 U.S. 94 (1884).
          54. **^** Urofsky, Melvin I.; Finkelman, Paul (2002). _A March of Liberty: A Constitutional History of the United States_. **1** (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512635-8.
          55. **^** Reid, Kay (September 22, 2012). "Multilayered loyalties: Oregon Indian women as citizens of the land, their tribal nations, and the united States". _Oregon Historical Quarterly_. Archived from the original on September 4, 2013. Retrieved  July 18, 2013.
          56. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 1, p. 2893. From the debate on the Civil Rights Act:
        

Mr. Johnson: "... Who is a citizen of the United States is an open question.
The decision of the courts and doctrine of the commentators is, that every man
who is a citizen of the State becomes ipso facto a citizen of the United
States; but there is no definition as to how citizenship can exist in the
United States except through the medium of a citizenship in a State ..."

        
                  57. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 1, p. 498. The debate on the Civil Rights Act contained the following exchange:
        

Mr. Cowan: "I will ask whether it will not have the effect of naturalizing the
children of Chinese and Gypsies born in this country?"  
Mr. Trumbull: "Undoubtedly."  
...  
Mr. Trumbull: "I understand that under the naturalization laws the children
who are born here of parents who have not been naturalized are citizens. This
is the law, as I understand it, at the present time. Is not the child born in
this country of German parents a citizen? I am afraid we have got very few
citizens in some of the counties of good old Pennsylvania if the children born
of German parents are not citizens."  
Mr. Cowan: "The honorable Senator assumes that which is not the fact. The
children of German parents are citizens; but Germans are not Chinese; Germans
are not Australians, nor Hottentots, nor anything of the kind. That is the
fallacy of his argument."  
Mr. Trumbull: "If the Senator from Pennsylvania will show me in the law any
distinction made between the children of German parents and the children of
Asiatic parents, I may be able to appreciate the point which he makes; but the
law makes no such distinction; and the child of an Asiatic is just as much of
a citizen as the child of a European."

        
                  58. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 4, pp. 2891–2892 During the debate on the Amendment, Senator John Conness of California declared, "The proposition before us, I will say, Mr. President, relates simply in that respect to the children begotten of Chinese parents in California, and it is proposed to declare that they shall be citizens. We have declared that by law [the Civil Rights Act]; now it is proposed to incorporate that same provision in the fundamental instrument of the nation. I am in favor of doing so. I voted for the proposition to declare that the children of all parentage, whatever, born in California, should be regarded and treated as citizens of the United States, entitled to equal Civil Rights with other citizens."
          59. **^** "Veto of the Civil Rights Bill | Teaching American History".
          60. **^** Congressional Globe, 1st Session, 39th Congress, pt. 1, p. 2891. From the debate on the Civil Rights Act:
        

Mr. Cowan: "Therefore I think, before we assert broadly that everybody who
shall be born in the United States shall be taken to be citizen of the United
States, we ought to exclude others besides Indians not taxed, because I look
upon Indians not taxed as being much less dangerous and much less pestiferous
to a society than I look upon Gypsies. I do not know how many my honorable
friend from California looks upon Chinese, but I do know how some of his
fellow citizens regard them. I have no doubt that now they are useful, and I
have no doubt that within proper restraints, allowing that State and the other
Pacific States to manage them as they may see fit, they may be useful; but I
would not tie their hands by the Constitution of the United States so as to
prevent them hereafter from dealing with them as in their wisdom they see fit
..."

        
                  61. **^** Lee, Margaret. "Birthright Citizenship Under the 14th Amendment of Persons Born in the United States to Alien Parents", Congressional Research Service (August 12, 2010): "Over the last decade or so, concern about illegal immigration has sporadically led to a re-examination of a long-established tenet of U.S. citizenship, codified in the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and §301(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) (8 U.S.C. §1401(a)), that a person who is born in the United States, subject to its jurisdiction, is a citizen of the United States regardless of the race, ethnicity, or alienage of the parents. ... some scholars argue that the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment should not apply to the children of unauthorized aliens because the problem of unauthorized aliens did not exist at the time the Fourteenth Amendment was considered in Congress and ratified by the states."
          62. **^** Peter Grier (August 10, 2010). "14th Amendment: why birthright citizenship change 'can't be done'". _Christian Science Monitor_. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved  June 12, 2013.
          63. **^** _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ , 169 U.S. 649 (1898).
          64. **^** Rodriguez, C.M. (2009). "The Second Founding: The Citizenship Clause, Original Meaning, and the Egalitarian Unity of the Fourteenth Amendment [PDF]" (PDF). _U. Pa. J. Const. L_. **11** : 1363–1475. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2011. Retrieved January 20, 2011.
          65. **^** "8 FAM 301.1-3 Not Included in the Meaning of 'In the United States '". United States Department of State. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
          66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Current policies are at [1].
          67. **^** U.S. Department of State (February 1, 2008). "Advice about Possible Loss of U.S. Citizenship and Dual Nationality". Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved April 17, 2009.
          68. **^** For example, see _Perez v. Brownell_ , 356 U.S. 44 (1958), overruled by _Afroyim v. Rusk_ , 387 U.S. 253 (1967).
          69. **^** _Afroyim v. Rusk_ , 387 U.S. 253 (1967).
          70. **^** _Vance v. Terrazas_ , 444 U.S. 252 (1980).
          71. **^** Yoo, John. Survey of the Law of Expatriation, Memorandum Opinion for the Solicitor General (June 12, 2002). Archived June 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
          72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _Slaughter-House Cases_ , 83 U.S. 36 (1873).
          73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Beatty, Jack (April 8, 2008). _Age of Betrayal: The Triumph of Money in America, 1865–1900_. New York: Vintage Books. p. 135. ISBN 978-1400032426. Retrieved July 19, 2013.
          74. **^** e.g., _United States v. Morrison_ , 529 U.S. 598 (2000).
          75. **^** Shaman, Jeffrey. _Constitutional Interpretation: Illusion and Reality_ , p. 248 (Greenwood Publishing 2001).
          76. **^** _Saenz v. Roe_ , 526 U.S. 489 (1999).
          77. **^** Bogen, David. _Privileges and Immunities: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution_ , p. 104 (Greenwood Publushing 2003).
          78. **^** Barnett, Randy. Privileges or Immunities Clause alive again.
          79. **^** Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S. 516 (1884).
          80. **^** Curry, James A.; Riley, Richard B.; Battiston, Richard M. (2003). "6". _Constitutional Government: The American Experience_. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-7872-9870-8. Retrieved July 14, 2013.
          81. **^** Gupta, Gayatri (2009). "Due process". In Folsom, W. Davis; Boulware, Rick (eds.). _Encyclopedia of American Business_. Infobase. p. 134.
          82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cord, Robert L. (1987). "The Incorporation Doctrine and Procedural Due Process Under the Fourteenth Amendment: An Overview". _Brigham Young University Law Review_ (3): 868. Retrieved  July 14, 2013.
          83. **^** _Allgeyer v. Louisiana_ , 169 U.S. 649 (1897).
          84. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Due Process of Law – Substantive Due Process". _West's Encyclopedia of American Law_. Thomson Gale. 1998.
          85. **^** _Lochner v. New York_ , 198 U.S. 45 (1905).
          86. **^** _Adkins v. Children's Hospital_ , 261 U.S. 525 (1923).
          87. **^** _Meyer v. Nebraska_ , 262 U.S. 390 (1923).
          88. **^** "CRS Annotated Constitution". Cornell University Law School Legal Information Institute. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved  June 12, 2013.
          89. **^** _Mugler v. Kansas_ , 123 U.S. 623 (1887).
          90. **^** _Holden v. Hardy_ , 169 U.S. 366 (1898).
          91. **^** _Muller v. Oregon_ , 208 U.S. 412 (1908).
          92. **^** _Wilson v. New_ , 243 U.S. 332 (1917).
          93. **^** _United States v. Doremus_ , 249 U.S. 86 (1919).
          94. **^** _West Coast Hotel v. Parrish_ , 300 U.S. 379 (1937).
          95. **^** _Poe v. Ullman_ , 367 U.S. 497 (1961), at 543
          96. **^** _Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833, at 849
          97. **^** _Griswold v. Connecticut_ , 381 U.S. 479 (1965)
          98. **^** _Griswold v. Connecticut_. _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013.
          99. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
          100. **^** _Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973) Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179 (1973)_. _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2013.
          101. **^** _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833 (1992).
          102. **^** Casey, 505 U.S. at 845–846.
          103. **^** _Lawrence v. Texas_ , 539 U.S. 558 (2003).
          104. **^** Spindelman, Marc (June 1, 2004). "Surviving Lawrence v. Texas". _Michigan Law Review_. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved  June 16, 2013.
          105. **^** Howe, Amy (June 26, 2015). "In historic decision, Court strikes down state bans on same-sex marriage: In Plain English". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved July 8, 2015.
          106. **^** White, Bradford (2008). _Procedural Due Process in Plain English_. National Trust for Historic Preservation. ISBN 978-0-89133-573-3.
          107. **^** See also _Mathews v. Eldridge_ (1976).
          108. **^** _Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co._ , 556 U.S. 868 (2009).
          109. **^** Jess Bravin; Kris Maher (June 8, 2009). "Justices Set New Standard for Recusals". _The Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved  June 9, 2009.
          110. **^** _Barron v. Baltimore_ , 32 U.S. 243 (1833).
          111. **^** Levy, Leonard W. (January 2000). _Barron v. City of Baltimore 7 Peters 243 (1833)_. _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
          112. **^** Foster, James C. (2006). "Bingham, John Armor". In Finkelman, Paul (ed.). _Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties_. CRC Press. p. 145. ISBN 9780415943420.
          113. **^** Amar, Akhil Reed (1992). "The Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment". _Yale Law Journal_. **101** (6): 1193–1284. doi:10.2307/796923. JSTOR 796923. Archived from the original on October 19, 2008.
          114. **^** " _Duncan v. Louisiana_ (Mr. Justice Black, joined by Mr. Justice Douglas, concurring)". Cornell Law School – Legal Information Institute. May 20, 1968. Retrieved  April 26, 2009.
          115. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Levy, Leonard (1970). _Fourteenth Amendment and the Bill of Rights: The Incorporation Theory (American Constitutional and Legal History Series)_. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-70029-3.
          116. **^** 677 F.2d 957 (1982)
          117. **^** " _Minneapolis & St. Louis R. Co. v. Bombolis_ (1916)". Justia. May 22, 1916. Retrieved August 1, 2010.
          118. **^** "The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis, and Interpretation – 1992 Edition --> Amendments to the Constitution --> Seventh Amendment – Civil Trials". _U.S. Government Printing Office_. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1992. p. 1464. Retrieved July 4, 2013.
          119. **^** Amy Howe (February 20, 2019). "Opinion analysis: Eighth Amendment's ban on excessive fines applies to the states". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved February 20, 2019.
          120. **^** Goldstone 2011, pp. 20, 23–24.
          121. **^** Failinger, Marie (2009). "Equal protection of the laws". In Schultz, David Andrew (ed.). _The Encyclopedia of American Law_. Infobase. pp. 152–53. ISBN 9781438109916.
          122. **^** Primus, Richard (May 2004). "Bolling Alone". _Columbia Law Review_. SSRN 464847.
          123. **^** _Bolling v. Sharpe_ , 347 U.S. 497 (1954)
          124. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ , 118 U.S. 356 (1886).
          125. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ "Annotation 18 – Fourteenth Amendment: Section 1 – Rights Guaranteed: Equal Protection of the Laws: Scope and application state action". FindLaw for Legal Professionals – Law & Legal Information by FindLaw, a Thomson Reuters business. Retrieved  November 23, 2013.
          126. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _Plyler v. Doe_ , 457 U.S. 202, 210–16 (1982).
          127. **^** Congressional Globe, 39th Congress, 1st Session, 1033 (1866), page 2766
          128. **^** _Wong Wing v. United States_ , 163 U.S. 228 (1896).
          129. **^** _Wong Wing_ , 163 U.S. at 242–243 (Justice Field, concurring in part and dissenting in part).
          130. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Johnson, John W. (January 1, 2001). _Historic U.S. Court Cases: An Encyclopedia_. Routledge. pp. 446–47. ISBN 978-0-415-93755-9. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
          131. **^** Vile, John R., ed. (2003). "Corporations". _Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments, Proposed Amendments, and Amending Issues: 1789 – 2002_. ABC-CLIO. p. 116.
          132. **^** Logan, Rayford Whittingham (1965). _The betrayal of the Negro, from Rutherford B. Hayes to Woodrow Wilson_. New York: Collier Books. p. 100.
          133. **^** _Strauder v. West Virginia_ , 100 U.S. 303 (1880).
          134. **^** _Plessy v. Ferguson_ , 163 U.S. 537 (1896).
          135. **^** Abrams, Eve (February 12, 2009). "Plessy/Ferguson plaque dedicated". WWNO (University New Orleans Public Radio). Retrieved April 17, 2009.
          136. **^** _Berea College v. Kentucky_ , 211 U.S. 45 (1908).
          137. **^** Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr. "274 U.S. 200: Buck v. Bell". Cornell University Law School Legal Information Institute. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2013.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
          138. **^** _Brown v. Board of Education_ , 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
          139. **^** Patterson, James (2002). __Brown v. Board of Education _: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy (Pivotal Moments in American History)_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-515632-4.
          140. **^** "Forced Busing and White Flight". _Time_. September 25, 1978. Retrieved  June 17, 2009.
          141. **^** _Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1_ , 551 U.S. 701 (2007).
          142. **^** Greenhouse, Linda (June 29, 2007). "Justices Limit the Use of Race in School Plans for Integration". The New York Times. Retrieved June 30, 2013.
          143. **^** "Plyler v. Doe". _The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law_. The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law. Retrieved  November 23, 2013.
          144. **^** _Hernandez v. Texas_ , 347 U.S. 475 (1954).
          145. **^** _United States v. Virginia_ , 518 U.S. 515 (1996).
          146. **^** _Levy v. Louisiana_ , 361 U.S. 68 (1968).
          147. **^** Gerstmann, Evan (1999). _The Constitutional Underclass: Gays, Lesbians, and the Failure of Class-Based Equal Protection_. University Of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-28860-4.
          148. **^** _Regents of the University of California v. Bakke_ , 438 U.S. 265 (1978).
          149. **^** Daniel E. Brannen; Richard Hanes (2001). __Regents of the University of California v. Bakke _1978_. _Supreme Court Drama: Cases that Changed America_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved June 27, 2013.
          150. **^** _Gratz v. Bollinger_ , 539 U.S. 244 (2003).
          151. **^** _Grutter v. Bollinger_ , 539 U.S. 306 (2003).
          152. **^** Alger, Jonathan (October 11, 2003). " _Gratz_ / _Grutter_ and Beyond: the Diversity Leadership Challenge". University of Michigan. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011. Retrieved  June 30, 2013.
          153. **^** Eckes, Susan B. (January 1, 2004). "Race-Conscious Admissions Programs: Where Do Universities Go From _Gratz_ and _Grutter_?". _Journal of Law and Education_. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved  June 27, 2013.
          154. **^** _Fisher v. University of Texas_ , No. 11-345, 570 U.S. ___ (2013).
          155. **^** Howe, Amy (June 24, 2013). "Finally! The _Fisher_ decision in Plain English". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved  June 30, 2013.
          156. **^** _Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action_ , No. 12-682, 572 U.S. ___ (2014).
          157. **^** Denniston, Lyle (April 22, 2014). "Opinion analysis: Affirmative action — up to the voters". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved April 22, 2014.
          158. **^** _Reed v. Reed_ , 404 U.S. 71 (1971).
          159. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ __Reed v. Reed _1971_. _Supreme Court Drama: Cases that Changed America_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2001. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
          160. **^** _Craig v. Boren_ , 429 U.S. 190 (1976).
          161. **^** Karst, Kenneth L. (January 1, 2000). __Craig v. Boren _, 429 U.S. 190 (1976)_. _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2013.
          162. **^** _Wesberry v. Sanders_ , 376 U.S. 1 (1964).
          163. **^** _Reynolds v. Sims_ , 377 U.S. 533 (1964).
          164. **^** Epstein, Lee; Walker, Thomas G. (2007). _Constitutional Law for a Changing America: Rights, Liberties, and Justice_ (6th ed.). Washington, D.C.: CQ Press. p. 775. ISBN 978-0-87187-613-3. "_Wesberry_ and _Reynolds_ made it clear that the Constitution demanded population-based representational units for the U.S. House of Representatives and both houses of state legislatures."
          165. **^** _Shaw v. Reno_ , 509 U.S. 630 (1993).
          166. **^** Aleinikoff, T. Alexander; Samuel Issacharoff (1993). "Race and Redistricting: Drawing Constitutional Lines after Shaw v. Reno". _Michigan Law Review_. **92** (3): 588–651. doi:10.2307/1289796. JSTOR 1289796.
          167. **^** _Bush v. Gore_ , 531 U.S. 98 (2000).
          168. **^** "Bush v. Gore". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Retrieved  June 12, 2013.
          169. **^** _League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry_ , 548 U.S. 399 (2006).
          170. **^** Daniels, Gilda R. (March 22, 2012). "Fred Gray: life, legacy, lessons". _Faulkner Law Review_. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved  June 12, 2013.
          171. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Dunn, Christopher (April 28, 2009). "Column: Applying the Constitution to Private Actors (New York Law Journal)". New York Civil Liberties Union (NYCLU) – American Civil Liberties Union of New York State. Retrieved November 23, 2013.
          172. **^** _Shelley v. Kraemer_ , 334 U.S. 1 (1948).
          173. **^** _Ex Parte Virginia_ , 100 U.S. 339 (1880).
          174. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co_ , 419 U.S. 345 (1974).
          175. **^** _Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority_ , 365 U.S. 715 (1961).
          176. **^** _Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks_ , 436 U.S. 149 (1978).
          177. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ Bonfield, Arthur Earl (1960). "The Right to Vote and Judicial Enforcement of Section Two of the Fourteenth Amendment". _Cornell Law Review_. **46** (1).
          178. **^** " "An Act for the Apportionment of Representatives to Congress among the States according to the ninth Census", Forty-Second Congress, Sess. ii, Ch. xi, section 6. February 2, 1872".
          179. **^** "2 U.S. Code § 6 - Reduction of representation". _LII / Legal Information Institute_.
          180. **^** Friedman, Walter (January 1, 2006). _Fourteenth Amendment_. _Encyclopedia of African-American Culture and History_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
          181. **^** "Casetext". _casetext.com_.
          182. **^** Chin, Gabriel J. (2004). "Reconstruction, Felon Disenfranchisement, and the Right to Vote: Did the Fifteenth Amendment Repeal Section 2 of the Fourteenth?". _Georgetown Law Journal_. **92** : 259.
          183. **^**
        

> Why this if it was not in the power of the legislature to deny the right of
suffrage to some male inhabitants? And if suffrage was necessarily one of the
absolute rights of citizenship, why confine the operation of the limitation to
male inhabitants? Women and children are, as we have seen, "persons." They are
counted in the enumeration upon which the apportionment is to be made, but if
they were necessarily voters because of their citizenship unless clearly
excluded, why inflict the penalty for the exclusion of males alone? Clearly,
no such form of words would have been elected to express the idea here
indicated if suffrage was the absolute right of all citizens.

        
                  184. **^** _Richardson v. Ramirez_ , 418 U.S. 24 (1974).
          185. **^** _Hunter v. Underwood_ , 471 U.S. 222 (1985).
          186. **^** Foner 1988, p. 255.
          187. **^** Foner 1988, pp. 255–256.
          188. **^** "Sections 3 and 4: Disqualification and Public Debt". Caselaw.lp.findlaw.com. June 5, 1933. Retrieved  August 1, 2010.
          189. **^** "Pieces of History: General Robert E. Lee's Parole and Citizenship". _Prologue Magazine_. **37** (1). 2005.
          190. **^** Goodman, Bonnie K. (2006). "History Buzz: October 16, 2006: This Week in History". _History News Network_. Archived from the original on October 19, 2007. Retrieved  June 18, 2009.
          191. **^** "Chapter 157: The Oath As Related To Qualifications", _Cannon's Precedents of the U.S. House of Representatives_ , **6** , January 1, 1936
          192. **^** "Annotation 37 – Fourteenth Amendment Sections 3 and 4 Disqualification and Public Debt". FindLaw. Retrieved  October 17, 2013.
          193. **^** "Perry v. United States 294 U.S. 330 (1935) at 354". Findlaw.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved  August 1, 2010.
          194. **^** Liptak, Adam (July 24, 2011). "The 14th Amendment, the Debt Ceiling and a Way Out". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  July 30, 2011. "In recent weeks, law professors have been trying to puzzle out the meaning and relevance of the provision. Some have joined Mr. Clinton in saying it allows Mr. Obama to ignore the debt ceiling. Others say it applies only to Congress and only to outright default on existing debts. Still, others say the President may do what he wants in an emergency, with or without the authority of the 14th Amendment."
          195. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Balkin, Jack M. "3 ways Obama could bypass Congress". CNN. Retrieved  October 16, 2013.
          196. **^** "Our National Debt 'Shall Not Be Questioned,' the Constitution Says". _The Atlantic_. May 4, 2011.
          197. **^** Sahadi, Jeanne. "Is the debt ceiling unconstitutional?". CNN Money. Retrieved January 2, 2013.
          198. **^** Rosen, Jeffrey (July 29, 2011). "How Would the Supreme Court Rule on Obama Raising the Debt Ceiling Himself?". _The New Republic_. Retrieved  July 29, 2011.
          199. **^** Chemerinsky, Erwin (July 29, 2011). "The Constitution, Obama and raising the debt ceiling". _Los Angeles Times_. Retrieved  July 30, 2011.
          200. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Engel, Steven A. (October 1, 1999). "The McCulloch theory of the Fourteenth Amendment: _City of Boerne v. Flores_ and the original understanding of section 5". _Yale Law Journal_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on December 18, 2006. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
          201. **^** Kovalchick, Anthony (February 15, 2007). "Judicial Usurpation of Legislative Power: Why Congress Must Reassert its Power to Determine What is Appropriate Legislation to Enforce the Fourteenth Amendment". _Chapman Law Review_. **10** (1). Retrieved  July 19, 2013.
          202. **^** "FindLaw: U.S. Constitution: Fourteenth Amendment, p. 40". Caselaw.lp.findlaw.com. Retrieved  August 1, 2010.
          203. **^** _Katzenbach v. Morgan_ , 384 U.S. 641 (1966).
          204. **^** Eisenberg, Theodore (January 1, 2000). __Katzenbach v. Morgan _384 U.S. 641 (1966)_. _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
          205. **^** _City of Boerne v. Flores_ , 521 U.S. 507 (1997).
          206. **^** _Flores_ , 521 U.S., at 507.
        

### Bibliography

        
                  * Foner, Eric (1988). _Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877_. HarperCollins. ISBN 9780062035868. Preview.
          * Goldstone, Lawrence (2011). _Inherently Unequal: The Betrayal of Equal Rights by the Supreme Court, 1865–1903_. Walker  & Company. ISBN 9780802717924. Preview.
          * Graber, Mark A. (November 2012). "Subtraction by addition?: The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments". _Columbia Law Review_. **112** (7): 1501–1549. JSTOR 41708157. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Pdf.
          * Soifer, Aviam (November 2012). "Federal protection, paternalism, and the virtually forgotten prohibition of voluntary peonage". _Columbia Law Review_. **112** (7): 1607–1639. JSTOR 41708160. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Pdf.
        

## Further reading

        
                  * Bogen, David S. (April 30, 2003). _Privileges and Immunities: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution_. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780313313479. Retrieved March 19, 2013.
          * Garber, Mark A. (2011). "Foreword: Plus or minus one: the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments". _Maryland Law Review, Special Issue: Symposium – the Maryland Constitutional Law Schmooze_. **71** (1): 12–20. Pdf.
        
        
          * _See also_ : Symposium: the Maryland Constitutional Law Schmooze special issue of the _Maryland Law Review_.
          * Halbrook, Stephen P. (1998). _Freedmen, the 14th Amendment, and the Right to Bear Arms, 1866–1876_. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780275963316. Retrieved March 29, 2013. at Questia
          * tenBroek, Jacobus (June 1951). "Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States: Consummation to Abolition and Key to the Fourteenth Amendment". _California Law Review_. **39** (2): 171–203. doi:10.2307/3478033. JSTOR 3478033. Pdf.
          * McConnell, Michael W. (May 1995). "Originalism and the desegregation decisions". _Virginia Law Review_. **81** (4): 947–1140. doi:10.2307/1073539. JSTOR 1073539.
        
        
          * _Response to McConnell:_ Klarman, Michael J. (October 1995). " _Response_ : _Brown_ , originalism, and constitutional theory: a response to Professor Mcconnell". _Virginia Law Review_. **81** (7): 1881–1936. doi:10.2307/1073643. JSTOR 1073643.
        
        
          * _Response to Klarman:_ McConnell, Michael W. (October 1995). " _Reply_ : The originalist justification for Brown: a reply to Professor Klarman". _Virginia Law Review_. **81** (7): 1937–1955. doi:10.2307/1073644. JSTOR 1073644.
        

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Fourteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution**_.  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-

logo.svg/38px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) | Wikisource has original text related
to this article:

**Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution**

---|---  
* "Amendments to the Constitution of the United States" (PDF). _GPO Access_. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 18, 2005. Retrieved September 11, 2005. (PDF, providing text of amendment and dates of ratification) * CRS Annotated Constitution: Fourteenth Amendment * Fourteenth Amendment and related resources at the Library of Congress
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Constitution of the United States

* * *

Articles|

        
                  * Preamble
          * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
        

Amendments|

| Ratified|

| Bill of Rights|

        
                  * 1
          * 2
          * 3
          * 4
          * 5
          * 6
          * 7
          * 8
          * 9
          * 10
        

---|---  
1795 - 1804|

        
                  * 11
          * 12
        

Reconstruction|

        
                  * 13
          * 14
          * 15
        

Twentieth century|

        
                  * 16
          * 17
          * 18
          * 19
          * 20
          * 21
          * 22
          * 23
          * 24
          * 25
          * 26
          * 27
        

Pending|

        
                  * Congressional Apportionment
          * Titles of Nobility
          * Corwin Amendment
          * Child Labor
        

Unsuccessful|

        
                  * Equal Rights
          * District of Columbia Voting Rights
        
          * Amendment proposals in Congress
          * Convention to propose amendments
          * State ratifying conventions
        

Formation|

        
                  * History
          * Articles of Confederation
          * Mount Vernon Conference
          * Annapolis Convention
          * Philadelphia Convention
            * Virginia Plan
            * New Jersey Plan
            * Connecticut Compromise
            * Three-Fifths Compromise
            * Committee of Detail
            * Signing
            * Independence Hall
            * Syng inkstand
          * _The Federalist Papers_
          * Anti-Federalist Papers
          * Massachusetts Compromise
          * Virginia Ratifying Convention
          * Hillsborough Convention
          * Rhode Island ratification
          * Drafting and ratification timeline
        

Clauses|

        
                  * Appointments
          * Appropriations
          * Assistance of Counsel
          * Case or Controversy
          * Citizenship
          * Commerce
          * Compact
          * Compulsory Process
          * Confrontation
          * Congressional enforcement
          * Contract
          * Copyright and Patent
          * Double Jeopardy
          * Due Process
          * Elections
          * Equal Protection
          * Establishment
          * Exceptions
          * Excessive Bail
          * _Ex post facto_
          * Extradition
          * Free Exercise
          * Free Speech
          * Fugitive Slave
          * Full Faith and Credit
          * General Welfare
          * Guarantee
          * Impeachment
          * Import-Export
          * Ineligibility
          * Militia
          * Natural-born citizen
          * Necessary and Proper
          * New States
          * No Religious Test
          * Oath or Affirmation
          * Origination
          * Pardon
          * Petition
          * Postal
          * Presentment
          * Presidential succession
          * Privileges and Immunities
          * Privileges or Immunities
          * Recess appointment
          * Recommendation
          * Self-Incrimination
          * Speech or Debate
          * Speedy Trial
          * State of the Union
          * Supremacy
          * Suspension
          * Take Care
          * Takings
          * Taxing and Spending
          * Territorial
          * Title of Nobility
          * Treaty
          * Trial by Jury
          * Vesting
          * Vicinage
          * War Powers
          * List of clauses
        

Interpretation|

        
                  * Concurrent powers
          * Constitutional law
          * Criminal procedure
          * Criminal sentencing
          * Dormant Commerce Clause
          * Enumerated powers
          * Equal footing
          * Executive privilege
          * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
          * Judicial review
          * Nondelegation doctrine
          * Preemption
          * Saxbe fix
          * Separation of church and state
          * Separation of powers
          * Taxation power
          * Unitary executive theory
        

Display  
and legacy|

        
                  * National Archives
            * Charters of Freedom Rotunda
          * Independence Mall
          * Constitution Day
          * Constitution Gardens
          * National Constitution Center
          * _Scene at the Signing of the Constitution_ (painting)
          * _A More Perfect Union_ (film)
          * USS _Constitution_
          * Worldwide influence
        

**US Government Portal** • **Law Portal** • **Wikipedia book**

        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

United States Fourteenth Amendment case law

* * *

|

Citizenship Clause

* * *
        
                  * _Slaughter-House Cases_ (1873)
          * _Elk v. Wilkins_ (1884)
          * _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898)
          * _Perez v. Brownell_ (1958)
          * _Afroyim v. Rusk_ (1967)
          * _Rogers v. Bellei_ (1971)
          * _Saenz v. Roe_ (1999)
        

|

Due Process Clause

* * *

| Economic substantive  
due process|

        
                  * _Mugler v. Kansas_ (1887)
          * _Allgeyer v. Louisiana_ (1897)
          * _Lochner v. New York_ (1905)
          * _Coppage v. Kansas_ (1915)
          * _Adams v. Tanner_ (1917)
          * _Adkins v. Children's Hospital_ (1923)
        

---|---  
Right to privacy|

        
                  * _Meyer v. Nebraska_ (1923)
          * _Pierce v. Society of Sisters_ (1925)
          * _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965)
          * _Doe v. Bolton_ (1973)
          * _Roe v. Wade_ (1973)
          * _Bowers v. Hardwick_ (1986)
          * _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ (1989)
          * _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)
          * _Lawrence v. Texas_ (2003)
          * _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ (2016)
        

Right to abortion|

        
                  * _United States v. Vuitch_ (1971)
          * _Doe v. Bolton_ (1973)
          * _Roe v. Wade_ (1973)
          * _H. L. v. Matheson_ (1981)
          * _City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health_ (1983)
          * _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ (1989)
          * _Hodgson v. Minnesota_ (1990)
          * _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)
          * _Stenberg v. Carhart_ (2000)
          * _Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England_ (2006)
          * _Gonzales v. Carhart_ (2007)
          * _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ (2016)
        

Civil rights liability  
under Section 1983|

        
                  * _Monroe v. Pape_ (1961)
          * _McNeese v. Board of Educ._ (1963)
          * _Pierson v. Ray_ (1967)
          * _Jenkins v. McKeithen_ (1969)
          * _Scheuer v. Rhodes_ (1974)
          * _Wood v. Strickland_ (1975)
          * _O'Connor v. Donaldson_ (1975)
          * _Paul v. Davis_ (1976)
          * _Imbler v. Pachtman_ (1976)
          * _Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York_ (1978)
          * _Procunier v. Navarette_ (1978)
          * _Owen v. City of Independence_ (1980)
          * _Harlow v. Fitzgerald_ (1982)
          * _Felder v. Casey_ (1988)
          * _Will v. Michigan Department of State Police_ (1989)
          * _Gonzaga University v. Doe_ (2002)
          * _Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community_ (2003)
          * _City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams_ (2005)
          * _Fitzgerald v. Barnstable School Committee_ (2009)
          * _Ashcroft v. Iqbal_ (2009)
          * _Los Angeles County v. Humphries_ (2010)
          * _Connick v. Thompson_ (2011)
        

Other|

        
                  * _Holden v. Hardy_ (1898)
          * _Muller v. Oregon_ (1908)
          * _Buck v. Bell_ (1927)
          * _Powell v. Alabama_ (1932)
          * _West Coast Hotel v. Parrish_ (1937)
          * _NAACP v. Alabama_ (1958)
          * _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965)
          * _Loving v. Virginia_ (1967)
          * _Epperson v. Arkansas_ (1968)
          * _In re Winship_ (1971)
          * _Kolender v. Lawson_ (1983)
          * _Edwards v. Aguillard_ (1987)
          * _Troxel v. Granville_ (2000)
          * _Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co._ (2009)
          * _Obergefell v. Hodges_ (2015)
        

|

Equal Protection Clause

* * *
        
                  * _United States v. Cruikshank_ (1876)
          * _Pace v. Alabama_ (1883)
          * _Civil Rights Cases_ (1883)
          * _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ (1886)
          * _Plessy v. Ferguson_ (1896)
          * _Buchanan v. Warley_ (1917)
          * _Lum v. Rice_ (1927)
          * _Skinner v. Oklahoma_ (1942)
          * _Perez v. Sharp_ (1948)
          * _Goesaert v. Cleary_ (1948)
          * _Shelley v. Kraemer_ (1948)
          * _Sipuel v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Okla._ (1948)
          * _Sweatt v. Painter_ (1950)
          * _McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents_ (1950)
          * _Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka_ (1954)
          * _Hernandez v. Texas_ (1954)
          * _Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County_ (1964)
          * _Katzenbach v. Morgan_ (1966)
          * _Loving v. Virginia_ (1967)
          * _Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education_ (1971)
          * _Guey Heung Lee v. Johnson_ (1971)
          * _Reed v. Reed_ (1971)
          * _Frontiero v. Richardson_ (1973)
          * _Craig v. Boren_ (1976)
          * _Milliken v. Bradley_ (1974)
          * _Rostker v. Goldberg_ (1981)
          * _Plyler v. Doe_ (1982)
          * _Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan_ (1982)
          * _United States v. Virginia_ (1996)
          * _Romer v. Evans_ (1996)
          * _Grutter v. Bollinger_ (2003)
          * _Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1_ (2007)
          * _Obergefell v. Hodges_ (2015)
          * _National Coalition for Men v. Selective Service System_ (S.D. Tex, 2019)
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

United States criminal due process case law

* * *

|

Reasonable doubt

* * *
        
                  * _Leland v. Oregon_ (1952)
          * _Holland v. United States_ (1954)
          * _Leary v. United States_ (1969)
          * _In re Winship_ (1970)
          * _Cool v. United States_ (1972)
          * _Mullaney v. Wilbur_ (1975)
          * _Patterson v. New York_ (1977)
          * _Taylor v. Kentucky_ (1978)
          * _County Court of Ulster Cty. v. Allen_ (1979)
          * _Sandstrom v. Montana_ (1979)
          * _Jackson v. Virginia_ (1979)
          * _Murray v. Carrier_ (1986)
          * _Cage v. Louisiana_ (1990)
          * _Sullivan v. Louisiana_ (1993)
          * _Victor v. Nebraska_ (1994)
          * _Schlup v. Delo_ (1995)
        

|

_Brady_ disclosure

* * *
        
                  * _Brady v. Maryland_ (1963)
          * _Giglio v. United States_ (1972)
          * _Moore v. Illinois_ (1972)
          * _United States v. Agurs_ (1976)
          * _California v. Trombetta_ (1984)
          * _United States v. Bagley_ (1985)
          * _Arizona v. Youngblood_ (1988)
          * _Kyles v. Whitley_ (1995)
          * _Wood v. Bartholomew_ (1995)
          * _Strickler v. Greene_ (1999)
          * _United States v. Ruiz_ (2002)
          * _Illinois v. Fisher_ (2004)
          * _Banks v. Dretke_ (2004)
          * _Youngblood v. West Virginia_ (2006)
          * _Cone v. Bell_ (2009)
          * _Smith v. Cain_ (2012)
        

|

Mental competence

* * *
        
                  * _Bishop v. United States_ (1956)
          * _Dusky v. United States_ (1960)
          * _Pate v. Robinson_ (1966)
          * _Drope v. Missouri_ (1975)
          * _Riggins v. Nevada_ (1992)
          * _Medina v. California_ (1992)
          * _Godinez v. Moran_ (1993)
          * _Cooper v. Oklahoma_ (1996)
          * _Sell v. United States_ (2003)
          * _Indiana v. Edwards_ (2008)
        

|

Prosecutorial misconduct

* * *
        
                  * _Mooney v. Holohan_ (1935)
          * _Hysler v. Florida_ (1942)
          * _Pyle v. Kansas_ (1942)
          * _New York ex rel. Whitman v. Wilson_ (1943)
          * _White v. Ragen_ (1945)
          * _Mesarosh v. United States_ (1956)
          * _Alcorta v. Texas_ (1957)
          * _Napue v. Illinois_ (1959)
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Immigration to the United States and related topics

* * *

Relevant colonial era,  
United States and  
international laws

|

| Colonial era|

        
                  * Nationality law in the American Colonies
          * Plantation Act 1740
        

---|---  
18th century|

        
                  * Naturalization Act 1790 / 1795 / 1798
        

19th century|

        
                  * Naturalization Law 1802
          * Civil Rights Act of 1866
          * 14th Amendment (1868)
          * Naturalization Act 1870
          * Page Act (1875)
          * Immigration Act of 1882
          * Chinese Exclusion (1882)
          * Scott Act (1888)
          * Immigration Act of 1891
          * Geary Act (1892)
        

1900-1949|

        
                  * Naturalization Act 1906
          * Gentlemen's Agreement (1907)
          * Immigration Act of 1907
          * Immigration Act 1917 (Asian Barred Zone)
          * Emergency Quota Act (1921)
          * Cable Act (1922)
          * Immigration Act 1924
          * Tydings–McDuffie Act (1934)
          * Filipino Repatriation Act (1935)
          * Nationality Act of 1940
          * Bracero Program (1942-1964)
          * Magnuson Act (1943)
          * War Brides Act (1945)
          * Luce–Celler Act (1946)
        

1950-1999|

        
                  * UN Refugee Convention (1951)
          * Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965
          * Refugee Act (1980)
          * Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986)
          * American Homecoming Act (1989)
          * Immigration Act 1990
          * Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) (1996)
          * Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA) (1997)
          * American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act (ACWIA) (1998)
        

21st century|

        
                  * American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21) (2000)
          * Legal Immigration Family Equity Act (LIFE Act) (2000)
          * H-1B Visa Reform Act (2004)
          * REAL ID Act (2005)
          * Secure Fence Act (2006)
          * DACA (2012)
          * Executive Order 13769 (2017)
          * Executive Order 13780 (2017)
        

Visas and policies|

        
                  * Visa policy
            * Permanent residence
            * Visa Waiver Program
            * Temporary protected status
            * Asylum
            * Green Card Lottery
            * Central American Minors
          * US-VISIT
          * Security Advisory Opinion
          * E-Verify
          * Section 287(g)
          * National Origins Formula
          * Expedited removal
          * Detention
          * Trump administration family separation policy
        

Government  
organizations

|

        
                  * Department of Homeland Security
          * Immigration and Customs Enforcement
          * U.S. Border Patrol
          * U.S. Customs and Border Protection
          * U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
          * Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
          * Executive Office for Immigration Review
          * Board of Immigration Appeals
          * Office of Refugee Resettlement
        

Supreme Court cases|

        
                  * _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898)
          * _United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind_ (1923)
          * _United States v. Brignoni-Ponce_ (1975)
          * Zadvydas v. Davis (2001)
          * _Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting_ (2011)
        

Related issues  
and events

|

        
                  * Economic impact
          * Eugenics in the United States
          * Guest worker program
          * Human trafficking
          * Human smuggling
            * Coyotaje
          * Immigration reform
          * Immigration reduction
          * Mexico–United States barrier
          * Labor shortage
          * March for America
          * Illegal immigrant population
          * Reverse immigration
          * 2006 protests
          * Unaccompanied minors from Central America
          * Central American migrant caravans
          * List of people deported from the United States
        

Geography|

        
                  * Mexico–United States border
          * Canada–United States border
          * United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints
        

Proposed legislation|

        
                  * DREAM Act (2001-2010)
          * H.R. 4437 (2005)
          * McCain-Kennedy (2005)
          * SKIL (2006)
          * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006
          * STRIVE Act (2007)
          * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007
          * Uniting American Families Act (2000–2013)
          * Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013
          * SAFE Act (2015)
          * RAISE Act (2017)
        

Immigration stations  
and points of entry|

        
                  * Angel Island
          * Castle Garden
          * East Boston
          * Ellis Island
          * Sullivan's Island
          * Washington Avenue
        

Operations|

        
                  * "Wetback" (1954)
          * "Peter Pan" (1960-1962)
          * "Babylift" (1975)
          * "Gatekeeper" (1994)
          * "Endgame" (2003-2012)
          * "Front Line" (2004-2005)
          * "Streamline" (2005-present)
          * "Return to Sender" (2006-2007)
          * "Jump Start" (2006-2008)
          * "Phalanx" (2010-2016)
        

State legislation|

        
                  * California DREAM Act (2006-2010)
          * Arizona SB 1070 (2010)
          * Alabama HB 56 (2011)
        

Non-governmental  
organizations

|

        
                  * Arizona Border Recon
          * Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
          * Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform
          * National Immigration Forum
          * Center for Community Change
          * We Are America Alliance
          * CASA of Maryland
          * Mexica Movement
          * Mexicans Without Borders
          * Federation for American Immigration Reform
          * Minuteman Project
          * Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
          * California Coalition for Immigration Reform
          * Save Our State
          * Center for Immigration Studies
          * National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC)
          * NumbersUSA
          * Negative Population Growth
          * Migration Policy Institute
          * Utah Compact
          * Center for Migration Studies of New York
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Voting rights in the United States

* * *

Constitutional  
provisions|

        
                  * Article I
            * Voter Qualifications Clause
            * Elections Clause
          * 1st Amendment
          * 14th Amendment
            * Equal Protection Clause
          * 15th Amendment
          * 17th Amendment
          * 19th Amendment
          * 23rd Amendment
          * 24th Amendment
          * 26th Amendment
        

Federal laws|

        
                  * Voting Rights Act of 1965
            * Amendments
            * List of covered jurisdictions
          * Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped Act
          * Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act
            * Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act
          * National Voter Registration Act of 1993
          * Help America Vote Act of 2002
        

State laws|

| Voter access|

        
                  * Absentee ballot
          * Early voting
          * Postal voting
          * Provisional ballot
          * Voter registration in the U.S.
          * Initiatives and referendums
          * Recall election
        

---|---  
Vote denial|

        
                  * Electoral fraud
          * Grandfather clause
          * Literacy test
          * Poll tax
          * Voter caging
          * Voter ID laws
        

Vote dilution|

        
                  * Gerrymandering
          * Plurality-at-large voting
          * One man, one vote
        

By group|

        
                  * Women
          * Youth
          * Felons
          * Foreigners
          * Transgender people
          * District of Columbia residents
          * Puerto Rico residents
          * Guam residents
        

History|

        
                  * Timeline
          * Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era
          * Selma to Montgomery marches
          * Timeline of women's suffrage
          * Woman Suffrage Parade of 1913
          * Silent Sentinels
          * U.S. suffragists
            * publications
          * History of direct democracy
        

Related|

        
                  * Ballot access
          * Campaign finance
          * Citizenship
            * Native Americans
          * Disfranchisement
          * Election
          * Election law
          * Elections
          * Electoral reform
          * Electoral College
          * Ranked choice voting
          * Redistricting
          * Secret ballot
          * Suffrage
          * Voting
          * Voting system
          * Voter registration
          * National Voting Rights Museum
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

History of the United States

* * *

Timeline|

        
                  * Prehistory
          * Pre-Columbian
          * Colonial
          * 1776–1789
          * 1789–1849
          * 1849–1865
          * 1865–1918
          * 1918–1945
          * 1945–1964
          * 1964–1980
          * 1980–1991
          * 1991–2008
          * 2008–present
        

Topics|

        
                  * American Century
          * Cities
          * Constitution
          * Demographic
          * Diplomatic
          * Economic
          * Education
          * Immigration
          * Medical
          * Merchant Marine
          * Military
          * Musical
          * Religious
          * Slavery
          * Southern
          * Technological and industrial
          * Territorial acquisitions
          * Territorial evolution
          * Voting rights
          * Women
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
          * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
        

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

        
                  * GND: 4243024-0
          * LCCN: n83003571
          * VIAF: 181043601
          * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 181043601
        

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fourteenth_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution&oldid=893398812"

Categories:

        
                  * 1868 in American law
          * 1868 in American politics
          * Aftermath of the American Civil War
          * Amendments to the United States Constitution
          * History of civil rights in the United States
          * Reconstruction Era
          * United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Webarchive template wayback links
          * Subscription required using via
          * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
          * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
          * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
          * Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
          * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
          * Use mdy dates from July 2018
          * Commons category link is on Wikidata
          * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
          * Good articles
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Ænglisc
          * العربية
          * Беларуская
          * Català
          * Deutsch
          * Español
          * فارسی
          * Français
          * 한국어
          * Bahasa Indonesia
          * Italiano
          * עברית
          * Nederlands
          * 日本語
          * Polski
          * Русский
          * Simple English
          * Suomi
          * Українська
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 21 April 2019, at 02:15 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

