

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » Research Reports » Marijuana » What are marijuana
effects?

# Marijuana

Email Facebook Twitter

## What are marijuana effects?

When marijuana is smoked, THC and other chemicals in the plant pass from the
lungs into the bloodstream, which rapidly carries them throughout the body to
the brain. The person begins to experience effects almost immediately (see
"How does marijuana produce its effects?"). Many people experience a pleasant
euphoria and sense of relaxation. Other common effects, which may vary
dramatically among different people, include heightened sensory perception
(e.g., brighter colors), laughter, altered perception of time, and increased
appetite.

If marijuana is consumed in foods or beverages, these effects are somewhat
delayed--usually appearing after 30 minutes to 1 hour--because the drug must
first pass through the digestive system. Eating or drinking marijuana delivers
significantly less THC into the bloodstream than smoking an equivalent amount
of the plant. Because of the delayed effects, people may inadvertently consume
more THC than they intend to.

Pleasant experiences with marijuana are by no means universal. Instead of
relaxation and euphoria, some people experience anxiety, fear, distrust, or
panic. These effects are more common when a person takes too much, the
marijuana has an unexpectedly high potency, or the person is inexperienced.
People who have taken large doses of marijuana may experience an acute
psychosis, which includes hallucinations, delusions, and a loss of the sense
of personal identity. These unpleasant but temporary reactions are distinct
from longer-lasting psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia, that may be
associated with the use of marijuana in vulnerable individuals. (See "Is there
a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?")

Although detectable amounts of THC may remain in the body for days or even
weeks after use, the noticeable effects of smoked marijuana generally last
from 1 to 3 hours, and those of marijuana consumed in food or drink may last
for many hours.

Prev Index Next

This page was last updated June 2018

![What are marijuana

effects?](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/rr-

marijunana-cover-thumb_1.jpg)

## Contents

  * Letter From the Director
  * What is marijuana? 
  * What is the scope of marijuana use in the United States?
  * What are marijuana effects?
  * How does marijuana produce its effects?
  * Does marijuana use affect driving?
  * Is marijuana addictive?
  * What are marijuana's long-term effects on the brain?
  * Is marijuana a gateway drug?
  * How does marijuana use affect school, work, and social life?
  * Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?
  * What are marijuana's effects on lung health?
  * What are marijuana’s effects on other aspects of physical health?
  * Is marijuana safe and effective as medicine?
  * What are the effects of secondhand exposure to marijuana smoke?
  * Can marijuana use during and after pregnancy harm the baby?
  * Available Treatments for Marijuana Use Disorders
  * Where can I get further information about marijuana?
  * References

## Get this Publication

  * English
  * PDF (782KB)
  * ePub (298KB)
  * Kindle (706KB)
  * Online Only

## Ordering Publications

Call **1-877-643-2644** or:  
![NIDA Drug

Pubs](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/feat_drug_pubs%281%29.png)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 25). Marijuana. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana

NIDA. "Marijuana." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 25 Jun. 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana.

NIDA. Marijuana. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana. June 25,
2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Featured Publications

![Cover art for Opioid Facts for

Teens](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/opioidsforteenscover.jpg?itok=j4M3QgvB)

Opioid Facts for Teens

![Science of Addiction

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/soa_cover_2018_0.gif?itok=ZFYtyFxC)

Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction

![](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/pinkandblue_pr_1.jpg?itok=y-uXmu4a)

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...

![Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to

Know](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/parents_mj_facts_cover.png?itok=doAsxOEp)

Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## ​Research Reports

This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the
educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The
series reports on research findings of national interest.

View all ​Research Reports

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

