

![KidsEclipse](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/KidsEclipseLogo_CRMarkDPhillips.png)

Toggle navigation __

        
                  * TEACH
            * How do the Sun, Earth, and Moon move?
            * What is an Eclipse?
              * How an Eclipse Happens
            * What is a Total Solar Eclipse?
              * How can the Sun and the Moon Appear to be the Same Size?
            * What happens during a total solar eclipse?
            * What Are the Safety Facts?
            * Myths, Stories and Historical References
            * What do You Know About Our Sun?
            * What Do You know About Our Moon?
            * What is a Comet?
            * What are asteroids and meteors?
            * Lesson Plan Outline
            * Glossary of Astronomical terms
          * Great American Eclipse
            * Carhenge
            * Salon El-Khouri
            * Site of my Grandfather's Farm: Brasstown, NC
            * In The Shadow of the Eclipse
          * Eclipse Photography
          * Past Eclipses
            * Aruba 1998
            * The Millennial Eclipse
          * Astronomy NEWS
          * Store
        

![](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/KidsEclipseLogo_CRMarkDPhillips.png)

## KidsEclipse

Learn about Total Solar Eclipses

Toggle navigation __

        
                  * TEACH
            * How do the Sun, Earth, and Moon move?
            * What is an Eclipse?
              * How an Eclipse Happens
            * What is a Total Solar Eclipse?
              * How can the Sun and the Moon Appear to be the Same Size?
            * What happens during a total solar eclipse?
            * What Are the Safety Facts?
            * Myths, Stories and Historical References
            * What do You Know About Our Sun?
            * What Do You know About Our Moon?
            * What is a Comet?
            * What are asteroids and meteors?
            * Lesson Plan Outline
            * Glossary of Astronomical terms
          * Great American Eclipse
            * Carhenge
            * Salon El-Khouri
            * Site of my Grandfather's Farm: Brasstown, NC
            * In The Shadow of the Eclipse
          * Eclipse Photography
          * Past Eclipses
            * Aruba 1998
            * The Millennial Eclipse
          * Astronomy NEWS
          * Store
        

__Home / How do the Sun, Earth, and Moon move?

# How do the Sun, Earth, and Moon move?

![A boy spins on the Earth](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/world.gif)

We're always on the move! Even when you're standing still, you're moving! You
are moving because the Earth and everything in our solar system is constantly
moving.

Our solar system includes the Sun, nine planets and their Moons, comets and
asteroids. These objects are sometimes called celestial bodies, and they are
constantly moving, too.

At the center of it all is the Sun. It takes the Sun 25 days to spin, or
rotate, completely around.

The Earth, which is the third planet from the Sun,
![](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/system.jpg)takes 24
hours to rotate. This is what causes day and night. As the Earth rotates, it
also moves, or revolves, around the Sun.

The Earth's path around the Sun is called its orbit. It takes the Earth one
year, or 365 1/4 days, to completely orbit the Sun.

As the Earth orbits the Sun, the Moon orbits the Earth. The Moon's orbit lasts
27 1/2 days, but because the Earth keeps moving, it takes the Moon two extra
days, 29 1/2, to come back to the same place in our sky.

![The greatest picture ever taken of the Moon and the

Earth/NASA](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/297755main_GPN-2001-000009_full.jpg)**The greatest
picture ever taken of the Moon and the Earth:** Apollo 8, the first manned
mission to the moon, entered lunar orbit on Christmas Eve, Dec. 24, 1968. That
evening, the astronauts-Commander Frank Borman, Command Module Pilot Jim
Lovell, and Lunar Module Pilot William Anders-held a live broadcast from lunar
orbit, in which they showed pictures of the Earth and moon as seen from their
spacecraft. Said Lovell, "The vast loneliness is awe-inspiring and it makes
you realize just what you have back there on Earth." They ended the broadcast
with the crew taking turns reading from the book of Genesis. **_Image Credit:
NASA_**

## What is an eclipse?

![](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/13x19_GreatAmericanEclipse_1200px-1-300x205.jpg) Great
American Total Solar Eclipse of August 21, 2017. © **Mark D Phillips** (See
More)

## Next Eclipses in the United States:

## April 8, 2024 - Total Solar Eclipse

We're thinking of Dallas, Texas; 4 minutes 05.4 seconds of totality!

## October 14, 2023 - Annular Solar Eclipse

We're thinking of Dunes City, Oregon; 4 minutes 35.5 seconds of coverage!

_An annular solar eclipse happens when the Moon covers the Sun's center,
leaving the Sun's visible outer edges to form a “ring of fire” or annulus
around the Moon._

## Proud sponsor of kidseclipse.com:

![SouthBrooklyn.com, proud sponsor of

kidseclipse.com](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/SBNbanner_800px.jpg)

![markdphillips.com and southbrooklyn.com are the owners and producers of

kidseclipse.com](http://kidseclipse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/MarkDphillips_com_800banner.jpg)

Copyright (C) 2019. Designed by MageeWP Themes.

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

TOP

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

