

# United States incarceration rate

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

about 22% of the world's prisoners but 4.4% of the world's population

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c4/US_Adult_Incarceration_Rate_by_State.svg/400px-

US_Adult_Incarceration_Rate_by_State.svg.png)

A map of U.S. states by adult incarceration rate per 100,000 adult population.
State prisons and local jails. Excludes federal prisoners.

In September 2013,[update] the incarceration rate of the United States of
America was the highest in the world, at 716 per 100,000 of the national
population. While the United States represents about 4.4 percent of the
world's population, it houses around 22 percent of the world's prisoners.[1]
Corrections (which includes prisons, jails, probation, and parole) cost around
$74 billion in 2007 according to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics.[2][3]

At the end of 2016, the Prison Policy Initiative estimated that in the United
States, about 2,298,300 people were incarcerated out of a population of 324.2
million. This means that 0.7% of the population was behind bars. Of those who
were incarcerated, about 1,316,000 people were in state prison, 615,000 in
local jails, 225,000 in federal prisons, 48,000 in youth correctional
facilities, 34,000 in immigration detention camps, 22,000 in involuntary
commitment, 11,000 in territorial prisons, 2,500 in Indian Country jails, and
1,300 in United States military prisons.[4]

## Contents

  * 1 Prison and jail population
    * 1.1 Growth
  * 2 Comparison with other countries
  * 3 Causes
    * 3.1 Increased sentencing laws
    * 3.2 Economic and age contributions
    * 3.3 Drug sentencing laws
    * 3.4 Racialization
    * 3.4.1 Disproportional incarceration of black people
    * 3.4.2 High prevalence of incarceration among black men who have sex with men
    * 3.5 Prison privatization
    * 3.6 Editorial policies of major media
    * 3.7 Citizenship statistics
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## Prison and jail population[edit]

See also: List of U.S. states by incarceration rate

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/US_incarceration_timeline-

clean.svg/350px-US_incarceration_timeline-clean.svg.png)

Total incarceration in the United States by year

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/43/US_adult_correctional_population_timeline.gif/350px-

US_adult_correctional_population_timeline.gif)

Total US incarceration peaked in 2008. Total correctional population peaked in
2007.[5]

Total U.S. incarceration (prisons and jails) peaked in 2008. Total
correctional population peaked in 2007.[5] If all prisoners are counted
(including those juvenile, territorial, U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) (immigration detention), Indian country, and military), then
in 2008 the United States had around 24.7% of the world's 9.8 million
prisoners.[6][7][8]

The United States has the highest documented incarceration rate in the world,
at 754 per 100,000 (as of 2009[update]).[9][10] As of December 31, 2010, the
International Centre for Prison Studies (ICPS) at King's College London
estimated 2,266,832 prisoners from a total population of 310.64 million as of
this date (730 per 100,000 in 2010).[11]

This number comprises local jails with a nominal capacity of 866,782 inmates
occupied at 86.4% (June 6, 2010), state prisons with a nominal capacity of
approximately 1,140,500 occupied at approximately 115% (December 31, 2010),
and federal prisons with a nominal capacity of 126,863 occupied at 136.0%
(December 31, 2010). Of this number, 21.5% are pretrial detainees (December
31, 2010), 8.7% are female prisoners (December 31, 2010), 0.4% are juveniles
(June 6, 2009), and 5.9% are foreign prisoners (June 30, 2007).[11]

The imprisonment rate varies widely by state; Louisiana surpasses this by
about 100%, but Maine incarcerates at about a fifth this rate. A report
released 28 February 2008, indicates that more than 1 in 100 adults in the
United States are in prison.[12]

According to a U.S. Department of Justice report published in 2006, over 7.2
million people were at that time in prison, on probation, or on parole
(released from prison with restrictions). That means roughly 1 in every 32
adult Americans are under some sort of criminal justice system
control.[13][14]

### Growth[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/U.S._incarceration_rates_1925_onwards.png/350px-U.S._incarceration_rates_1925_onwards.png)

A graph of the incarceration rate under state and federal jurisdiction per
100,000 population 1925–2008. (Omits local jail inmates. Top line = males.
Bottom line = females. Middle line = combined.)

In the last forty years, incarceration has increased with rates upwards of
500% despite crime rates decreasing nationally.[15] Between the years 2001 and
2012, crime rates (both property and violent crimes) have consistently
declined at a rate of 22% after already falling an additional 30% in years
prior between 1991 and 2001.[16] As of 2012, there are 710 people per every
100,000 U.S. residents in the United States that are imprisoned in either
local jails, state prisons, federal prisons, and privately operated
facilities.[16] This correlates to incarcerating a number close to almost a
quarter of the prison population in the entire world.[17] Mass incarceration
is an intervening variable to more incarceration.[18]

The Bureau of Justice Statistics has released a study which finds that,
despite the total number of prisoners incarcerated for drug-related offenses
increasing by 57,000 between 1997 and 2004, the proportion of drug offenders
to total prisoners in State prison populations stayed steady at 21%. The
percentage of Federal prisoners serving time for drug offenses declined from
63% in 1997 to 55% in that same period.[19] In the twenty-five years since the
passage of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, the United States penal population
rose from around 300,000 to more than two million.[20] Between 1986 and 1991,
African-American women's incarceration in state prisons for drug offenses
increased by 828 percent.[21]

In 2009, the U.S. Department of Justice announced that the growth rate of the
state prison population had fallen to its lowest since 2006, but it still had
a 0.2% growth-rate compared to the total U.S. prison population.[22] The
California state prison system population fell in 2009, the first year that
populations had fallen in 38 years.[23]

When looking at specific populations within the criminal justice system the
growth rates are vastly different. In 1977, there were just slightly more than
eleven thousand incarcerated women. By 2004, the number of women under state
or federal prison had increased by 757 percent, to more than 111,000, and the
percentage of women in prison has increased every year, at roughly double the
rate of men, since 2000.[24] The rate of incarcerated women has expanded at
about 4.6% annually between 1995 and 2005 with women now accounting for 7% of
the population in state and federal prisons.

## Comparison with other countries[edit]

Main articles: Comparison of United States incarceration rate with other
countries and List of countries by incarceration rate

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Incarceration_rates_worldwide.gif/350px-

Incarceration_rates_worldwide.gif)

The stats source is the World Prison Population List. 8th edition. Prisoners
per 100,000 population.[7]

Comparing some countries with similar percentages of immigrants, Germany has
an incarceration rate of 76 per 100,000 population (as of 2014),[25] Italy is
85 per 100,000 (as of 2015),[26] and Saudi Arabia is 161 per 100,000 (as of
2013).[27] Comparing other countries with a zero tolerance policy for illegal
drugs, the rate of Russia is 455 per 100,000 (as of 2015),[28] Kazakhstan is
275 per 100,000 (as of 2015),[29] Singapore is 220 per 100,000 (as of
2014),[30] and Sweden is 60 per 100,000 (as of 2014).[31]

## Causes[edit]

Further information: Crime in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf/page1-220px-

Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf.jpg)

_Felony Sentences in State Courts_ , study by the United States Department of
Justice.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/United_States_correctional_population.svg/400px-

United_States_correctional_population.svg.png)

Correctional populations in the United States 1980–2013

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f0/USA_2009._Percent_of_adult_males_incarcerated_by_race_and_ethnicity.svg/400px-

USA_2009._Percent_of_adult_males_incarcerated_by_race_and_ethnicity.svg.png)

2009\. Percent of adult males incarcerated by race and ethnicity.[32]

A 2014 report by the National Research Council identified two main causes of
the increase in the United States' incarceration rate over the previous 40
years: longer prison sentences and increases in the likelihood of
imprisonment. The same report found that longer prison sentences were the main
driver of increasing incarceration rates since 1990.[33]

### Increased sentencing laws[edit]

Further information: Three-strikes law

Even though there are other countries that commit more inmates to prison
annually, the fact that the United States keeps their prisoners longer causes
the total rate to become higher. To give an example, the average burglary
sentence in the United States is 16 months, compared to 5 months in Canada and
7 months in England.[34]

Looking at reasons for imprisonment will further clarify why the incarceration
rate and length of sentences are so high. The practice of imposing longer
prison sentences on repeat offenders is common in many countries but the
three-strikes laws in the U.S. with mandatory 25 year imprisonment —
implemented in many states in the 1990s — are statutes enacted by state
governments in the United States which mandate state courts to impose harsher
sentences on habitual offenders who are previously convicted of two prior
serious criminal offenses and then commit a third.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Economic and age contributions[edit]

Crime rates in low-income areas are much higher than in middle to high class
areas. As a result, Incarceration rates in low-income areas are much higher
than in wealthier areas due to these high crime rates.[35] When the
incarcerated or criminal is a youth, there is a significant impact on the
individual and rippling effects on entire communities. Social capital is lost
when an individual is incarcerated. How much social capital is lost is hard to
accurately estimate, however Aizer and Doyle found a strong positive
correlation between lower income as an adult if an individual is incarcerated
in their youth in comparison to those who are not incarcerated.[36] 63 percent
to 66 percent of those involved in crimes are under the age of thirty.[35]
People incarcerated at a younger age lose the capability to invest in
themselves and in their communities. Their children and families become
susceptible to financial burden preventing them from escaping low-income
communities. This contributes to the recurring cycle of poverty that is
positively correlated with incarceration.[37] Poverty rates have not been
curbed despite steady economic growth. Poverty is not the sole dependent
variable for increasing incarceration rates. Incarceration leads to more
incarceration by putting families and communities at a dynamic social
disadvantage.[38]

### Drug sentencing laws[edit]

The "War on Drugs" is a policy that was initiated by Richard Nixon with the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 and vigorously
pursued by Ronald Reagan.[39] By 2010, drug offenders in federal prison had
increased to 500,000 per year, up from 41,000 in 1985. According to Michelle
Alexander, drug related charges accounted for more than half the rise in state
prisoners between 1985 and 2000. 31 million people have been arrested on drug
related charges, approximately 1 in 10 Americans.[40][41] In contrast, John
Pfaff of Fordham Law School has accused Alexander of exaggerating the
influence of the War on Drugs on the rise in the United States' incarceration
rate: according to him, the percent of state prisoners whose primary offense
was drug-related peaked at 22% in 1990.[42] The Brookings Institution
reconciles the differences between Alexander and Pfaff by explaining two ways
to look at the prison population as it relates to drug crimes, concluding "The
picture is clear: Drug crimes have been the predominant reason for new
admissions into state and federal prisons in recent decades" and "rolling back
the war on drugs would not, as Pfaff and Urban Institute scholars maintain,
totally solve the problem of mass incarceration, but it could help a great
deal, by reducing exposure to prison."[43]

After the passage of Reagan's Anti-Drug Abuse Act in 1986, incarceration for
non-violent offenses dramatically increased. The Act imposed the same five-
year mandatory sentence on those with convictions involving crack as on those
possessing 100 times as much powder cocaine.[39][44] This had a
disproportionate effect on low-level street dealers and users of crack, who
were more commonly poor blacks, Latinos, the young, and women.[45]

Courts were given more discretion in sentencing by the _Kimbrough v. United
States_ (2007) decision, and the disparity was decreased to 18:1 by the Fair
Sentencing Act of 2010.[46] As of 2006[update] , 49.3% of state prisoners, or
656,000 individuals, were incarcerated for non-violent crimes. As of
2008[update], 90.7% of federal prisoners, or 165,457 individuals, were
incarcerated for non-violent offenses.[6]

By 2003, 58% of all women in federal prison were convicted of drug
offenses.[47] Black and Hispanic women in particular have been
disproportionately affected by the War on Drugs. Since 1986, incarceration
rates have risen by 400% for women of all races, while rates for Black women
have risen by 800%.[48] Formerly incarcerated Black women are also most
negatively impacted by the collateral legal consequences of conviction.[49]

According to the American Civil Liberties Union, "Even when women have minimal
or no involvement in the drug trade, they are increasingly caught in the ever-
widening net cast by current drug laws, through provisions of the criminal law
such as those involving conspiracy, accomplice liability, and constructive
possession that expand criminal liability to reach partners, relatives and
bystanders."[50]

These new policies also disproportionately affect African-American women.
According to Dorothy E. Roberts, the explanation is that poor women, who are
disproportionately black, are more likely to be placed under constant
supervision by the State in order to receive social services.[51] They are
then more likely to be caught by officials who are instructed to look
specifically for drug offenses. Roberts argues that the criminal justice
system's creation of new crimes has a direct effect on the number of women,
especially black women, who then become incarcerated.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Racialization[edit]

One of the first laws in the U.S. against drugs was the Opium Exclusion Act of
1909\. It prohibited the smoking of opium, which was ingested but not smoked
by a substantial portion of Caucasian housewives in America. It was smoked
mainly by Asian American immigrants coming to build the railroads. These
immigrants were targeted with anti-Asian sentiment, as many voters believed
they were losing jobs to Asian immigrants.[ _citation needed_ ]

This pattern was repeated in the late twentieth century with higher penalties
for crack cocaine than powder. Crack was consumed primarily by African
Americans, while powder was consumed more by the white middle-class. The
substantial penalties for crack contributed to the five-fold increase in
incarcerations seen in the plot above.[ _citation needed_ ] For instance, the
disproportionate number of African Americans compared to other racial groups
in the United States that are arrested or incarcerated. Figures from 2008
offer a better illustration of the situation with 28% of arrests involving
African Americans and African American men comprising almost half of the
current incarcerated population in the United States.[52]

#### Disproportional incarceration of black people[edit]

Presently, the majority of people sentenced to prison in the United States are
Black, and almost one-third of Black men in their twenties are either on
parole, on probation, or in prison.[53] Currently, the U.S. is at its highest
rate of imprisonment in history.[54] Young Black men are experiencing the
highest levels of incarceration. These disproportionate levels of imprisonment
have made incarceration a normalized occurrence for African-American
communities. This has caused a distrust from Black individuals towards aspects
of the legal system such as police, courts, and heavy sentences[53]. In 2011,
more than 580,000 Black men and women were in state or federal prison.[55]
Black men and women are imprisoned at higher rates compared to all other age
groups, with the highest rate being Black men aged 25 to 39. In 2001, almost
17% of Black men had previously been imprisoned in comparison to 2.6% of White
men. By the end of 2002, of the two million inmates of the U.S. incarceration
system, Black men surpassed the number of White men (586,700 to 436,800
respectively of inmates with sentences more than one year).[53] In the same
year, there were also more Black women behind bars than White women (36,000 to
35,400). African-Americans are about eight times more likely to be imprisoned
than Whites. The Sentencing Project, a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit
organization, released in 1990 that almost one in four Black men in the U.S.
between the ages of 20 and 29 were under some degree of control by the
criminal justice system. In 1995, the organization announced that the rate had
increased to one in three. In the same year, the non-profit stated that more
than half of young Black men were then under criminal supervision in both D.C.
and Baltimore. In addition, African-American women are the largest growing
incarcerated population.[ _citation needed_ ]

The War on Drugs plays a role in the disproportionate amount of incarcerated
African-Americans.[53] Despite a general decline in crime, the massive
increase in new inmates due to drug offenses ensured historically high
incarceration rates during the 1990s and beyond, with New York City serving as
an example. Drug-related arrests continued to increase in the city despite a
near 50% drop in felony crimes. While White individuals have a higher rate of
drug use, 60% of people imprisoned for drug charges in 1998 were Black. Drug
crimes constituted 27% of the increase in the number of Black state prisoners
in the 1990s, while Whites experienced a 14% increase. The rise in African-
American imprisonment as a result of newer drug crimes has been justified for
its alleged societal benefits. Law officials and advocates of these policies
argue that targeting underserved, primarily inner-city neighborhoods is
appropriate because these areas see the more harmful and violent effects of
drug use. These same individuals further point to the negative effects drug
distribution has on these areas to support the inequity in how crimes
involving, for example, powdered cocaine can be treated with less severity
than crack cocaine. This ideology results in a greater number of arrests of
poor, inner-city Black individuals.[ _citation needed_ ]

A significant contributing factor to these figures are the racially and
economically segregated neighborhoods that account for the majority of the
Black prison population. These neighborhoods are normally impoverished and
possess a high minority population. For example, as many as one in eight adult
males who inhabit these urban areas is sent to prison each year, and one in
four of these men is in prison on any given day. A 1992 study revealed that
72% of all New York State’s prisoners came from only 7 of New York City’s 55
community board districts. Many recently-released individuals return to the
area they lived in prior to incarceration. Also in New York City, rates of
incarceration stayed the same or grew in 1996 in neighborhoods that had the
highest rates in 1990. Additionally, in these same neighborhoods, there was a
stronger police presence and parole surveillance despite a period of a general
decline in crime.[ _citation needed_ ]

Finding employment post-release is a significant struggle for African-
Americans.[54] American sociologist Devah Pager performed a study to prove
this. She assembled pairs of fake job seekers to find jobs with résumés that
portrayed the applicant had a criminal record. The findings indicated that the
presence of a criminal record reduced callbacks by approximately 50%. This was
more common for African-Americans than for Whites.[ _citation needed_ ]

#### High prevalence of incarceration among black men who have sex with

men[edit]

There is a 31% incarceration history for Black men who have sex with men
(BMSM).[55] Relating to HIV, Black individuals consisted of almost half (44%)
of all new HIV infections in 2010. They also constituted almost half of all
Americans living with HIV in the same year as well. The HIV Prevention Trials
Network discovered that the odds of incarceration are greater among Black
transgender women compared to other BMSM. Incarceration is also higher among
BMSM aged 35 or older compared to younger populations, and is more prevalent
among BMSM who identify as heterosexual or straight. Lastly, the odds of being
imprisoned are greater among BMSM who were born in the U.S.[ _citation needed_
]

In terms of psychosocial analyses, rates of incarceration are higher for those
from a particular city (the greatest odds are being from Los Angeles). Other
important factors that predict prison enrollment are a history of childhood
violence, early sexual experience, two or more male partners, unprotected
receptive anal intercourse (URAI) six months before enrollment in this
particular HIV Prevention Trials Network study, drug use, alcohol use, low
support, and clinically depressive symptoms.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Prison privatization[edit]

In the 1980s, the rising number of people incarcerated as a result of the War
on Drugs and the wave of privatization that occurred under the Reagan
Administration saw the emergence of the for-profit prison industry. Prior to
the 1980s, private prisons did not exist in the US.[56][57][58]

In a 2011 report by the ACLU, it is claimed that the rise of the for-profit
prison industry is a "major contributor" to "mass incarceration," along with
bloated state budgets.[59] Louisiana, for example, has the highest rate of
incarceration in the world with the majority of its prisoners being housed in
privatized, for-profit facilities. Such institutions could face bankruptcy
without a steady influx of prisoners.[60] A 2013 Bloomberg report states that
in the past decade the number of inmates in for-profit prisons throughout the
U.S. rose 44 percent.[61]

Corporations who operate prisons, such as the Corrections Corporation of
America and The GEO Group, spend significant amounts of money lobbying the
federal government along with state governments.[59] The two aforementioned
companies, the largest in the industry, have been contributors to the American
Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), which seeks to expand the privatization
of corrections and lobbies for policies that would increase incarceration,
such as three-strike laws and "truth-in-sentencing"
legislation.[62][63][64][65][66][67] Prison companies also sign contracts with
states that guarantee at least 90 percent of prison beds be filled. If these
"lockup quotas" aren't met, the state must reimburse the prison company for
the unused beds. Prison companies use the profits to expand and put pressure
on lawmakers to incarcerate a certain number of people.[68][69] This influence
on the government by the private prison industry has been referred to as the
Prison–industrial complex.[64]

The industry is well aware of what reduced crime rates could mean to their
bottom line. This from the CCA's SEC report in 2010:

> Our growth … depends on a number of factors we cannot control, including
crime rates … [R]eductions in crime rates … could lead to reductions in
arrests, convictions and sentences requiring incarceration at correctional
facilities.[59]

### Editorial policies of major media[edit]

Gallup polling since 1989 has found that in most years in which there was a
decline in the U.S. crime rate, a majority of Americans said that violent
crime was getting worse.[70][71][72]

A substantial body of research claims that incarceration rates are primarily a
function of media editorial policies, largely unrelated to the actual crime
rate. _Constructing Crime: Perspectives on Making News and Social Problems_ is
a book collecting together papers on this theme.[73] The researchers say that
the jump in incarceration rate from 0.1% to 0.5% of the United States
population from 1975 to 2000 (documented in the figure above) was driven by
changes in the editorial policies of the mainstream commercial media and is
unrelated to any actual changes in crime. Media consolidation reduced
competition on content. That allowed media company executives to maintain
substantially the same audience while slashing budgets for investigative
journalism and filling the space from the police blotter, which tended to
increase and stabilize advertising revenue. It is safer, easier and cheaper to
write about crimes committed by poor people than the wealthy. Poor people can
be libeled with impunity, but major advertisers can materially impact the
profitability of a commercial media organization by reducing their purchases
of advertising space with that organization. [ _citation needed_ ]

News media thrive on feeding frenzies (such as missing white women) because
they tend to reduce production costs while simultaneously building an audience
interested in the latest development in a particular story. It takes a long
time for a reporter to learn enough to write intelligently about a specific
issue. Once a reporter has achieved that level of knowledge, it is easier to
write subsequent stories. However, major advertisers have been known to spend
their advertising budgets through different channels when they dislike the
editorial policies. Therefore, a media feeding frenzy focusing on an issue of
concern to an advertiser may reduce revenue and profits.[74]

Sacco described how "competing news organizations responded to each other's
coverage [while] the police, in their role as gatekeepers of crime news,
reacted to the increased media interest by making available more stories that
reflected and reinforced" a particular theme. "[T]he dynamics of competitive
journalism created a media feeding frenzy that found news workers 'snatching
at shocking numbers' and 'smothering reports of stable or decreasing use under
more ominous headlines.'"[75]

The reasons cited above for increased incarcerations (US racial demographics,
Increased sentencing laws, and Drug sentencing laws) have been described as
consequences of the shift in editorial policies of the mainstream media.[76]

Additionally, media coverage has been proven to have a profound impact on
criminal sentencing. A study conducted found that the more media attention a
criminal case is given, the greater the incentive for prosecutors and judges
to pursue harsher sentences.[ _citation needed_ ] This is directly linked to
the enormous increase in media coverage of crime over the past two decades.[
_citation needed_ ] While crime decreased by 8% between 1992 and 2002, news
reports on crime increased by 800% and the average prison sentence length
increased by 2,000% for all crimes.[ _citation needed_ ] Less media coverage
means a greater chance of a lighter sentence or that the defendant may avoid
prison time entirely.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Citizenship statistics[edit]

According to the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 80.7% of Federal inmates are U.S.
citizens (as of November 2018). 12.1% are citizens of Mexico, and the next
three countries—Colombia, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic, contribute less
than 1% each. 4.9% have other or unknown citizenship. The Bureau did not state
how many had come to the U.S. legally.[77]

## See also[edit]

  * Comparison of United States incarceration rate with other countries
  * Felony disenfranchisement in the United States
  * Incarceration in the United States
  * List of U.S. states by incarceration rate
  * Mass incarceration
  * Mentally ill people in United States jails and prisons
  * Prison–industrial complex
  * Race and the War on Drugs
  * Youth incarceration in the United States

## Notes[edit]

  1. **^** Roy Walmsley (November 21, 2013). World Prison Population List (tenth edition). _International Centre for Prison Studies._ Retrieved July 11, 2014.
  2. **^** Direct expenditures by justice function, 1982-2007 (billions of dollars). Inflation adjusted to 2007 dollars. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Retrieved 1 Jan 2012 by the Internet Archive. See BJS timeline graph based on the data.
  3. **^** Justice Expenditures and Employment, FY 1982-2007 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 236218). Published December 2011. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By Tracey Kyckelhahn, Ph.D., BJS statistician. See table 2 of the PDF. "Total justice expenditures, by justice function, FY 1982–2007 (real dollars)". A total of around $74 billion for corrections in 2007.
  4. **^** Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2018 
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Correctional Populations in the United States, 2013 (NCJ 248479). Published December 2014 by U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By Lauren E. Glaze and Danielle Kaeble, BJS statisticians. See appendix table 5 on page 13 in the PDF, for "Estimated number of persons supervised by adult correctional systems, by correctional status, 2000–2013."
  6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Prisoners in 2008 Archived 2011-07-16 at the Wayback Machine._ (NCJ 228417). December 2009 report from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. By William J. Sabol, Ph.D. and Heather C. West, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians. Also, Matthew Cooper, BJS Intern. Table 9 on page 8 of the PDF file Archived 2011-07-16 at the Wayback Machine has the number of inmates in state or federal prison facilities, local jails, U.S. territories, military facilities, ICE owned and contracted facilities, jails in Indian country, and juvenile facilities (2006 Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement). Table 8 on page 8 has the incarceration rates for 2000, 2007, and 2008.
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ World Prison Population List. 8th edition. By Roy Walmsley. Published in 2009. From World Prison Population Lists. International Centre for Prison Studies. School of Law, King's College London. "The information is the latest available in early December 2008. ... More than 9.8 million people are held in penal institutions throughout the world, mostly as pre-trial detainees (remand prisoners) or as sentenced prisoners."
  8. **^** Sickmund, M., Sladky, T.J., Kang, W.,  & Puzzanchera, C. Easy Access to the Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement. Click "National Crosstabs" at the top, and then choose the census years. Click "Show table" to get the total number of juvenile inmates for those years. Or go **here** for all the years. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
  9. **^** Entire world – Prison Population Rates per 100,000 of the national population. Highest to Lowest Rates. For more details about the figures of any country, click on the name of that country. World Prison Brief. International Centre for Prison Studies. See this page for breakdowns by region, whole world, prison population total, prison population rate, percentage of pre-trial detainees / remand prisoners, percentage of female prisoners, percentage of foreign prisoners, and occupancy rate.
  10. **^** "Lauren E. Glaze and Errin J. Herberman, Ph.D., Correctional Population in the United States, 2012, Bureau of Justice Statistics (December 2013) Rates".
  11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "World Prison Brief: Country - United States of America". International Centre for Prison Studies. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012.
  12. **^** "One in 100: Behind Bars in America 2008" (PDF). The Pew Center on the States. February 28, 2008.
  13. **^** Probation and Parole in the United States, 2006 Archived December 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. By Lauren E. Glaze and Thomas P. Bonczar. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), US Department of Justice.
  14. **^** BJS. Correctional Population Trends Chart. [ _dead link_ ]
  15. **^** "Incarceration | The Sentencing Project". _The Sentencing Project_. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
  16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ten Economic Facts about Crime and Incarceration in the United States | Brookings Institution". _Brookings_. May 1, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
  17. **^** Hanna, Peter (May 10, 2016). "Themis: Research Journal of Justice Studies and Forensic Science". Retrieved November 15, 2016.
  18. **^** Schrager, Allison. "In America, mass incarceration has caused more crime than it's prevented". _Quartz_. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
  19. **^** Christopher J. Mumola: Drug Use and Dependence, State and Federal Prisoners, 2004, U.S. Department of Justice, October 2006, NCJ 213530
  20. **^** Alexander, Michelle (2010). _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness_. New York: The New Press. p. 6.
  21. **^** Golden, Renny (2005). _War on the Family: Mothers in Prison and the Families They Leave Behind_. New York: Taylor and Friends. p. 46.
  22. **^** "US DOJ Data Brief: Prisoners at Yearend 2009–Advance Counts" (PDF).
  23. **^** Martelle, Scott (2010), _US State Prison Population Falls for First Time in 38 Years_ , AOL, archived from the original on March 22, 2010
  24. **^** Talvi, Silja J.A (2007). _Women Behind Bars: The Crisis of Women in the U.S Prison System_. California: Seal Press. p. 3.
  25. **^** Germany. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  26. **^** Italy. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  27. **^** Saudi Arabia. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  28. **^** Russia. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  29. **^** Kazakhstan. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  30. **^** Singapore. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  31. **^** Sweden. International Centre for Prison Studies.
  32. **^** Prison Inmates at Midyear 2009 - Statistical Tables Archived 2013-03-03 at the Wayback Machine (NCJ 230113). U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. The rates are for adult males, and are from Tables 18 and 19 of the PDF file Archived 2011-10-27 at the Wayback Machine. Rates per 100,000 were converted to percentages.
  33. **^** Travis, Jeremy (2014). _The Growth of Incarceration in the United States: Exploring Causes and Consequences_. National Research Council. p. 40.
  34. **^** Liptak, Adam (April 23, 2008). "Inmate Count in U.S. Dwarfs Other Nations'". _The New York Times_. Retrieved May 26, 2010.
  35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ten Economic Facts about Crime and Incarceration in the United States | The Hamilton Project". _www.hamiltonproject.org_. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
  36. **^** Aizer, Anna; Doyle, Joseph J. (February 2, 2015). "Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges*". _The Quarterly Journal of Economics_. **130** (2): 759–803. doi:10.1093/qje/qjv003. hdl:1721.1/97380. ISSN 0033-5533.
  37. **^** Mosley, Paul; Verschoor, Arjan (March 1, 2005). "Risk Attitudes and the 'Vicious Circle of Poverty'". _The European Journal of Development Research_. **17** (1): 59–88. doi:10.1080/09578810500066548. ISSN 0957-8811.
  38. **^** Clear, Todd R. (March 27, 2009). _Imprisoning Communities: How Mass Incarceration Makes Disadvantaged Neighborhoods Worse_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199728237.
  39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Alexander, Michelle (2010). _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindess_. New York: The New Press. p. 52.
  40. **^** Alexander, Michelle (2010). _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness_. New York: The New Press. p. 60.
  41. **^** SpearIt (July 9, 2015). "Shackles Beyond the Sentence: How Legal Financial Obligations Create a Permanent Underclass". Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2628977.
  42. **^** Neyfakh, Leon (February 6, 2015). "Why Are So Many Americans in Prison?". _Slate_. Retrieved February 14, 2016.
  43. **^** Rothwell, Jonathan (November 25, 2015). "Drug offenders in American prisons: The critical distinction between stock and flow". _Brookings_. Retrieved September 1, 2016.
  44. **^** Lyons, John. "War on the Family: Mothers in Prison and the Children They Leave Behind". _DVD_. Peace Productions. Missing or empty `|url=` (help)
  45. **^** Golden, Renny (2005). _War on the Family: Mothers in Prison and the Families They Leave Behind_. New York: Routledge. p. 45.
  46. **^** "Fair Sentencing Act of 2010" Archived March 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Families Against Mandatory Minimums, famm.org. Retrieved September 30, 2010.
  47. **^** Bureau of Justice Statistics. Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics Online (30th ed.). 2002. _Cited in_ "Words From Prison - Did You Know...?", American Civil Liberties Union, June 12, 2006.
  48. **^** Marc Mauer, Cathy Potler  & Richard Wolf, Gender and Justice: Women, Drugs, and Sentencing Policy, The Sentencing Project. November 1997. _Cited in_ "Words From Prison - Did You Know...?", American Civil Liberties Union, June 12, 2006 and "Caught in the Net: Impact of Drug Policies on Women and Families" (PDF). American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
  49. **^** Ajunwa, Ifeoma (2015). "The Modern Day Scarlet Letter". 83 Fordham L. Rev. 2999 (2015). SSRN 2460898.
  50. **^** "Words From Prison - Did You Know...?", American Civil Liberties Union, June 12, 2006.
  51. **^** Roberts, Dorothy (1997). _Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the Meaning of Liberty_. New York: Vintage Books. p. 172.
  52. **^** Warde, Bryan (December 2013). "Black Male Disproportionality in the Criminal Justice Systems of the USA, Canada, and England: a Comparative Analysis of Incarceration". _Journal of African American Studies_. **17** (4): 461–479. doi:10.1007/s12111-012-9235-0. JSTOR 43525522.
  53. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Roberts, Dorothy (2004). "The Social and Moral Cost of Mass Incarceration in African American Communities". _Stanford Law Review_.
  54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Western, Pettit, Bruce, Becky (2010). "Incarceration  & Social Inequality". _Dædalus_. **139** : 8–19.
  55. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Brewer, Russell (Spring 2014). "The High Prevalence of Incarceration History Among Black Men Who Have Sex With Men in the United States: Associations and Implications". _American Journal of Public Health_. **104** : 448–454.
  56. **^** Khalek, Rania. How private prisons game the system. Salon.com. Dec 1, 2011.
  57. **^** Harcourt, Bernard (2012). _The Illusion of Free Markets: Punishment and the Myth of Natural Order._ Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674066162 p. 235
  58. **^** Selman, Donna and Paul Leighton (2010). _Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge._ Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 1442201738 p. xi
  59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Shapiro, David. "Banking on Bondage: Private Prisons and Mass Incarceration" (PDF). American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved March 31, 2013.
  60. **^** Chang, Cindy (May 29, 2012). "Louisiana is the world's prison capital". The Times-Picayune. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  61. **^** Margaret Newkirk  & William Selway (12 July 2013). "Gangs Ruled Prison as For-Profit Model Put Blood on Floor." Bloomberg. Retrieved 16 July 2013.
  62. **^** Elk, Mike and Sloan, Bob (2011). The Hidden History of ALEC and Prison Labor. _The Nation_.
  63. **^** Prison Privatization and the Use of Incarceration. The Sentencing Project, September 2004. Archived July 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  64. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Whitehead, John (April 10, 2012). "Jailing Americans for Profit: The Rise of the Prison Industrial Complex". The Rutherford Institute. Retrieved April 2, 2013.
  65. **^** Sullivan, Laura (2010). Prison Economics Help Drive Ariz. Immigration Law. _National Public Radio_.
  66. **^** Pat Beall (November 22, 2013). Big business, legislators pushed for stiff sentences. _The Palm Beach Post._ Retrieved November 10, 2014.
  67. **^** Marie Gottschalk. _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press, 2014. p. 61
  68. **^** Katy Hall and Jan Diehm (19 September 2013). One Disturbing Reason For Our Exploding Prison Population (INFOGRAPHIC). _The Huffington Post_ Retrieved 20 September 2013.
  69. **^** CRIMINAL: How Lockup Quotas and "Low-Crime Taxes" Guarantee Profits for Private Prison Corporations Archived 2014-04-24 at the Wayback Machine. _In the Public Interest._ Retrieved 20 September 2013.
  70. **^** Gallup, Inc. "Most Americans Believe Crime in U.S. Is Worsening". _Gallup.com_.
  71. **^** Gallup, Inc. "Most Americans Still See Crime Up Over Last Year". _Gallup.com_.
  72. **^** Gallup, Inc. "U.S. Crime Is Up, but Americans Don't Seem to Have Noticed". _Gallup.com_.
  73. **^** Potter and Kapeller (1998)
  74. **^** McCheney (2004, p. 81) wrote, "A five-year study of investigative journalism on TV news completed in 2002 determined that investigative journalism has all but disappeared from the nation's commercial airwaves."
  75. **^** Sacco, Vincent F. (May 1995), "Media Constructions of Crime", _Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science_ , **539** : 141–154, doi:10.1177/0002716295539001011, reprinted as chapter 2 of Potter and Kapeller (1998, pp. 37-51, esp. p. 42)
  76. **^** See also Sacco, Vincent F (2005). _When Crime Waves_. Sage. ISBN 978-0761927839. and Youngblood, Steven (2017). _Peace Journalism Principles and Practices_. Routledge. pp. 115–131. ISBN 978-1-138-12467-7.
  77. **^** "BOP Statistics: Inmate Citizenship". Federal Bureau of Prisons.

## References[edit]

  * Alexander, Michelle (2012). _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness._ The New Press. ISBN 1595586431
  * Gottschalk, Marie (2014). _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press. Book Hardcover ISBN 9780691164052, eBook ISBN 9781400852147.
  * Harcourt, Bernard (2012). _The Illusion of Free Markets: Punishment and the Myth of Natural Order._ Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674066162
  * McChesney, Robert W. (2004). _The Problem of the Media: U.S. Communications Politics in the 21st Century_. Monthly Review Press. ISBN 978-1-58367-105-4.
  * Potter, Gary W.; Kappeler, Victor E., eds. (1998). _Constructing Crime: Perspectives on Making News and Social Problems_. Waveland press. ISBN 978-0-88133-984-0.
  * Selman, Donna and Paul Leighton (2010). _Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge._ Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 1442201738
  * SpearIt, How Mass Incarceration Underdevelops Latino Communities (April 2, 2015). U.S. Latinos and Criminal Injustice (Michigan State University Press 2015). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2589112

## External links[edit]

  * U. S. Crime and Imprisonment Statistics Total and by State from 1960 - Current

  * v

  * t
  * e

Incarceration of adults in the United States

* * *

This template pertains only to agencies that handle sentenced felons (with
sentences over 1-2 years). In many states, pre-trial detainees, persons
convicted of misdemeanors, and persons sentenced under state law to fewer than
one year are held in county jails instead of state prisons.

Federal Bureau of Prisons|

  * United States federal prisons
  * Federal Prison Industries

Corrections by States|

  * Alabama
  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Hawaii
  * Idaho
  * Illinois
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Mississippi
  * Missouri
  * Montana
  * Nebraska
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * North Dakota
  * Ohio
  * Oklahoma
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * South Carolina
  * South Dakota
  * Tennessee
  * Texas
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Washington
  * West Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming

Corrections by Federal district|

Felons: Federal Bureau of Prisons, Misdemeanants: District of Columbia
(incarcerated long-term felons until year 2001)

Corrections by Insular areas|

  * American Samoa
  * Guam
  * Northern Mariana Islands
  * Puerto Rico
  * U.S. Virgin Islands

Military prisons|

  * United States military prisons
  * Guantanamo Bay

State prisons|

  * United States state prisons

See also|

Immigration detention in the United States

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**
  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) **United States portal**

  * v

  * t
  * e

Incarceration of juveniles in the United States

* * *

Federal Bureau of Prisons|

  * United States federal prisons

Corrections by States|

  * Alabama
  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Hawaii
  * Idaho
  * Illinois
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Mississippi
  * Missouri
  * Montana
  * Nebraska
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * North Dakota
  * Ohio
  * Oklahoma
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * South Carolina
  * South Dakota
  * Tennessee
  * Texas
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Washington
  * West Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming

Corrections by Federal district|

  * District of Columbia

Corrections by Insular areas|

  * Guam
  * Puerto Rico
  * U.S. Virgin Islands

Military facilities|

  * Guantanamo Bay

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) **United States portal**

  * v

  * t
  * e

Incarceration

* * *

Science|

  * Prison healthcare
  * Criminology
  * Penology
  * Punishment
  * Stanford prison experiment

Prisoners|

  * Criminal
  * Detainee
  * Hostage
  * Political prisoner
  * Prisoner of conscience
  * Prisoner of war
  * Slave

Prisons|

| Types|

  * Black site
  * Debtors'
  * Extermination camp
  * Farm
  * Internment
  * Island
  * Labor camp
    * Battalion
    * Chain gang
  * Military
  * Penal colony
  * Corrective labor colony
  * Prisoner-of-war camp
  * Private
  * Ship
  * Youth detention center

\---|---  
Security levels|

  * House arrest
  * Administrative detention
  * Death row
  * Maximum security
  * Open
  * Supermax

Components|

  * Cell
  * Solitary confinement
  * Commissary
  * Cemetery
  * Food
  * Library
  * Nursery
  * Officer
  * Warden
  * Sally port
  * Trusty system

Escape|

  * List of prison escapes
  * Helicopter prison escapes
  * Prisoner-of-war escapes

Culture|

  * Film
  * Gang (United States)
  * Handball
  * Literature
    * Blogs
    * American
  * Prison ring
  * Slang
  * Tattooing

Social issues|

  * Abuse (United States)
  * Contemplative programs
  * Solitary confinement
  * Education
  * Informants
  * LGBT
  * Mentally ill people in the United States
  * Mobile phones
  * Pay-to-stay
  * Overcrowding
  * Private prisons (United States)
  * Violence
  * Rape (United States)
  * Religion (United States)
  * Riots
  * Sexuality
  * Strikes
  * Suicide
  * Protective custody
  * Women in prison (United States)

Organizations|

  * International Network of Prison Ministries
  * African Prisons Project
  * Black and Pink
  * Florida Justice Institute
  * Justice Action
  * POA (trade union)
  * Prison abolition movement
  * Prison Advice and Care Trust
  * Prison Fellowship
  * Prison Fellowship International
  * Prison Legal News
  * Prison Officers' Association (Ireland)
  * Prison Radio
  * Prison Reform Trust
  * Prison University Project
  * The Prison Phoenix Trust
  * WriteAPrisoner.com

Leaving prison|

  * Escape
  * Rehabilitation
  * Work release

Lists|

  * Countries by incarceration rate
  * Prisons

By country|

  * Australia
  * China
  * Chile
  * Estonia
  * Germany
  * India
  * Ireland
  * Jamaica
  * Japan
  * North Korea
  * Russia
  * Soviet Union
    * Gulag
  * Turkey
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Imprisonment and detention

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Commons
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/16px-Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png) Criminal justice portal

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_incarceration_rate&oldid=897646185"

Categories:

  * Incarceration rates in the United States
  * Penal system in the United States

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from November 2010
  * Pages using web citations with no URL
  * Use American English from April 2019
  * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
  * Articles with short description
  * Use mdy dates from April 2019
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2013
  * All articles containing potentially dated statements
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008
  * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017
  * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Italiano
  * தமிழ்
  * ไทย

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 18 May 2019, at 13:19 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

