

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Drug policy of the Netherlands

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![Ambox current

red.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/98/Ambox_current_red.svg/42px-

Ambox_current_red.svg.png)

|

This article needs to be **updated**. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information. _( January 2016)_

\---|---  
Part of a series on  
\---  
Cannabis  
![Cannabis](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Cannabis_leaf.svg/120px-

Cannabis_leaf.svg.png)

  * Arts
  * Culture

  * 420

  * Magu (deity)
  * Names
  * Religion
    * Judaism
    * Latter-day Saints
    * Sikhism
  * Stoner film
  * Stoner rock
  * Terms

Chemistry

  * **Cannabinoid receptors**
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 1
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 2

  * **Cannabinoids**

  * 2-AG

  * 2-AGE, Noladin ether
  * AEA
  * CBC
  * CBL
  * CBD
  * CBDV
  * CBG
  * CBN
  * CBV
  * NADA
  * THC
  * THCV
  * Virodhamine
  * **Synthetic cannabinoids**

  * AM-2201

  * CP-55940
  * Dimethylheptylpyran
  * HU-210
  * HU-331
  * JWH-018
  * JWH-073
  * JWH-133
  * Levonantradol
  * SR144528
  * WIN 55,212-2

Consumption

  * Edibles
  * Smoking
  * Tea

Economics

  * Coffeeshop
  * Cultivation
  * Shop
  * Social Club
  * Grow house
  * Grow shop
  * Head shop
  * Marijuana vending machine

Effects

  * Dependence
  * Drug testing
  * Effects of legalized cannabis
  * Gateway drug theory
  * Long term effects
  * Medicine
  * Memory
  * Pregnancy
  * Psychosis
  * Time perception

Forms

  * Bhang
  * Blunt
  * Charas
  * Flower essential oil
  * Hash oil
  * Hashish
  * Hemp
  * Hemp oil
  * Joint
  * Kief
  * Roach
  * Synthetic cannabis
  * Thai stick
  * Tincture

Law

  * Cannabis rights

  * Legality of cannabis

  * Timeline of cannabis law

  * Legality of cannabis in US

  * Legal history of cannabis in US

  * US (Medical

  * Non-medical
  * Timeline)

  * Cannabis Act of Canada

  * Legal history of cannabis in Canada

  * Drug policy of California

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands

  * Drug policy of Portugal

Regional

  * Adult lifetime cannabis use by country
  * Annual cannabis use by country
  * Afghanistan
  * Alabama
  * American Samoa
  * Arkansas
  * Australia
  * California
  * Canada
  * Chile
  * Colorado
  * Egypt
  * Georgia (USA)
  * Guam
  * Idaho
  * India
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Jamaica
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Massachusetts
  * Montana
  * Morocco
  * Nebraska
  * New Zealand
  * Nigeria
  * North Dakota
  * North Mariana Islands
  * Oregon
  * Palau
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Paraguay
  * Portugal
  * South Dakota
  * Svalbard
  * Switzerland
  * Tennessee
  * U.K.
  * U.S.
  * Uruguay
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming
  * American Indian reservations

Variants

  * Autoflowering cannabis

  * **Cannabis genus**

  * Cannabis indica

  * Cannabis ruderalis
  * Cannabis sativa

  * **Cannabis strains**

  * Acapulco Gold

  * Blue Dream
  * Charlotte's web
  * Kush
  * Malawi Gold
  * Sour Diesel

Related

  * Drug culture
  * Illegal drug trade
  * Psychedelia

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Cannabis_leaf_2.svg/15px-Cannabis_leaf_2.svg.png) Cannabis portal

  * ![Esculaap4.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/66/Esculaap4.svg/15px-Esculaap4.svg.png) Medicine portal
  * ![Veranotrigo.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Veranotrigo.jpg/15px-Veranotrigo.jpg) Agriculture portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/CoffeeShopAmsterdam.jpg/250px-

CoffeeShopAmsterdam.jpg)

Cannabis coffee shop in Amsterdam, Netherlands.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Blowverbod.jpg/250px-

Blowverbod.jpg)

Signs in Amsterdam, indicating smoking cannabis and drinking alcohol are
prohibited in this particular neighbourhood due to disturbances.

While recreational use, possession and trade of non-medicinal drugs described
by the Opium Law are all technically illegal under Dutch law, official policy
since the late 20th century has been to openly tolerate all recreational use
while tolerating the other two under certain circumstances. This pragmatic
approach was motivated by the idea that a drug-free Dutch society is
unrealistic and unattainable, and efforts would be better spent trying to
minimize harm caused by recreational drug use.[1] As a result of this
_**gedoogbeleid**_ (lit. "tolerance policy" or "policy of tolerance"), the
Netherlands is typically seen as much more tolerant of drugs than most other
countries.[2]

Legal distinctions are made in the Opium Law between drugs with a low risk of
harm and/or addiction, called **soft drugs** , and drugs with a high risk of
harm and/or addiction, called **hard drugs**. Soft drugs include hash,
marijuana, sleeping pills and sedatives, while hard drugs include heroin,
cocaine, amphetamine, LSD and ecstasy. Policy has been to largely tolerate the
sale of soft drugs while strongly suppressing the sale, circulation and use of
hard drugs, effectively separating it into two markets. Establishments that
have been permitted to sell soft drugs under certain circumstances are called
_coffee shops_.[3] Laws established in January 2013 required visitors of
coffee shops to be Dutch residents, but these laws were only applied in
Zeeland, North Brabant and Limburg after much local criticism.[4][5]
Possession of a soft drug for personal use in quantities below a certain
threshold (5 grams of cannabis or 5 cannabis plants) is tolerated, but larger
quantities or possession of hard drugs may lead to prosecution. Prosecution
for possession, trade and (in some rare cases) use are typically handled by
the municipal government except where large-scale criminal activity is
suspected.[6][7]

Notably absent from toleration of drugs is its production, particularly the
cultivation of cannabis. This has led to a seemingly paradoxical system where
coffee shops are allowed to buy and sell soft drugs but where production is
nearly always punished.[7] Because coffee shops have to get their goods from
somewhere, criticism has been raised over the years against continued
prosecution of soft drug producers. It was first challenged in court in 2014
when a judge found two people guilty of producing cannabis in large quantities
but refused to punish them.[8][9] A significant change occurred in early 2017,
when a slight majority in the House of Representatives allowed for a law to
pass that would partly legalize production of cannabis.[10] In late 2017, the
newly formed coalition announced that they would seek to implement an
experimental new system in certain cities where coffee shops could legally
acquire cannabis from a state-appointed producer.[11]

While the legalization of cannabis remains controversial, the introduction of
heroin-assisted treatment in 1998 has been lauded for considerably improving
the health and social situation of opiate-dependent patients in the
Netherlands.[12]

## Contents

  * 1 Public health
  * 2 Non-enforcement
  * 3 Drug law enforcement
  * 4 Results of the drug policy
  * 5 Implications of international law
  * 6 Recent developments
    * 6.1 Law banning "magic mushrooms"
    * 6.2 Supply control
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

## Public health

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ab/Smokers-as-a-

percentage-of-adult-pop.jpg/220px-Smokers-as-a-percentage-of-adult-pop.jpg)

Cigarette smokers as a percentage of the population for the Netherlands as
compared with the United States, Norway, Japan, and Finland.

Large-scale dealing, production, import and export are prosecuted to the
fullest extent of the law, even if it does not supply end users or
_coffeeshops_ with more than the allowed amounts. Exactly how coffeeshops get
their supplies is rarely investigated, however. The average concentration of
THC in the cannabis sold in coffeeshops has increased from 9% in 1998 to 18%
in 2005.[13] This means that less plant material has to be consumed to achieve
the same effect. One of the reasons is plant breeding and use of greenhouse
technology for illegal growing of cannabis in Netherlands.[13] The former
minister of Justice Piet Hein Donner announced in June 2007 that cultivation
of cannabis shall continue to be illegal.

## Non-enforcement

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Coffee_shop_license_AMS_mirror.JPG/220px-

Coffee_shop_license_AMS_mirror.JPG)

City license for a cannabis coffee shop in Amsterdam, Netherlands.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2c/2013-04-01_Utrecht_10.JPG/220px-2013-04-01_Utrecht_10.JPG)

A coffeeshop in Utrecht.

The drug policy of the Netherlands is marked by its distinguishing between so
called soft and hard drugs. An often used argument is that alcohol, which is
claimed by some scientists as a hard drug,[14] is legal and a soft drug can't
be more dangerous to society if it's controlled. This may refer to the
Prohibition in the 1920s, when the U.S. government decided to ban all alcohol.
Prohibition created a golden opportunity for organized crime syndicates to
smuggle alcohol, and as a result the syndicates were able to gain considerable
power in some major cities.[15] Cannabis remains a controlled substance in the
Netherlands and both possession and production for personal use are still
misdemeanors, punishable by fines. Coffeeshops are also technically illegal
but are flourishing nonetheless. However, a policy of non-enforcement has led
to a situation where reliance upon non-enforcement has become common, and
because of this the courts have ruled against the government when individual
cases were prosecuted.

This is because the Dutch Ministry of Justice applies a _gedoogbeleid_
(tolerance policy) with regard to the category of soft drugs: an official set
of guidelines telling public prosecutors under which circumstances offenders
should not be prosecuted. This is a more official version of a common practice
in other European countries wherein law enforcement sets priorities regarding
offenses on which it is important enough to spend limited resources.

According to current _gedoogbeleid_ the possession of a maximum amount of five
grams cannabis for personal use is not prosecuted. Cultivation is treated in a
similar way. Cultivation of 5 plants or less is usually not prosecuted when
they are renounced by the cultivator.[16]

Proponents of _gedoogbeleid_ argue that such a policy practices more
consistency in legal protection than without it. Opponents of the Dutch drug
policy either call for full legalization, or argue that laws should penalize
morally wrong or deviant behavior, whether enforceable or not. In the Dutch
courts, however, it has long been determined that the institutionalized non-
enforcement of statutes with well defined limits constitutes _de facto_
decriminalization. The statutes are kept on the books mainly due to
international pressure and in adherence with international treaties.[17] A
November 2008 poll showed that a 60% majority of the Dutch population support
the legalisation of soft drugs. The same poll showed that 85% supported
closing of all cannabis coffeeshops within 250 meters walking distance from
schools.[18]

## Drug law enforcement

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d8/Bolletjes.jpg/170px-

Bolletjes.jpg)

X-ray of a balloon swallower trafficking cocaine, photographed by a Dutch
radiographer.

Importing and exporting of any classified drug is a serious offence. The
penalty can run up to 12 to 16 years if it is hard drug trade, maximum 4 years
for import or export of large quantities of cannabis.[19] It is prohibited to
operate a motor vehicle while under the influence of any drug that affects
driving ability to such an extent that you are unable to drive properly.
(Section 8 of the 1994 Road Traffic Act section 1). The Dutch police have the
right to do a drug test if they suspect influenced driving. For example,
anybody involved in a traffic accident may be tested. Causing an accident that
inflicts bodily harm, while under influence of any drug, is seen as a crime
that may be punished by up to 3 years in prison (9 years in case of a fatal
accident). Suspension of driving license is also normal in such a case
(maximum 5 years).[20] Schiphol, a large international airport near Amsterdam,
has long practiced a zero tolerance policy regarding airline passengers
carrying drugs. In 2006 there were 20,769 drug crimes registered by public
prosecutors and 4,392 persons received an unconditional prison sentence[21]
The rate of imprisonment for drug crimes is about the same as in Sweden, which
has a zero tolerance policy for drug crimes.[22]

Despite the high priority given by the Dutch government to fighting illegal
drug trafficking, the Netherlands continue to be an important transit point
for drugs entering Europe. The Netherlands is a major producer[23] and leading
distributor of cannabis, heroin, cocaine, amphetamines[24][25] and other
synthetic drugs, and a medium consumer of illicit drugs.[26] Despite the
crackdown by Interpol on traffic and illicit manufacture of temazepam,[27] the
country has also become a major exporter of illicit temazepam of the jelly
variety, trafficking it to the United Kingdom and other European nations.[28]
The government has intensified cooperation with neighbouring countries and
stepped up border controls. In recent years, it also introduced so-called 100%
checks and bodyscans at Schiphol Airport on incoming flights from Dutch
overseas territories Aruba and Netherlands Antilles to prevent importing
cocaine by means of swallowing balloons by mules.

Although drug use, as opposed to trafficking, is seen primarily as a public
health issue, responsibility for drug policy is shared by both the Ministry of
Health, Welfare, and Sports, and the Ministry of Justice.

The Netherlands spends more than €130 million annually on facilities for
addicts, of which about fifty percent goes to drug addicts. The Netherlands
has extensive demand reduction programs, reaching about ninety percent of the
country's 25,000 to 28,000 hard drug users. The number of hard drug addicts
has stabilized in the past few years and their average age has risen to 38
years, which is generally seen as a positive trend. Notably, the number of
drug-related deaths in the country remains amongst the lowest in Europe.[29]

On 27 November 2003, the Dutch Justice Minister Piet Hein Donner announced
that his government was considering rules under which coffeeshops would only
be allowed to sell soft drugs to Dutch residents in order to satisfy both
European neighbors' concerns about the influx of drugs from the Netherlands,
as well as those of Netherlands border town residents unhappy with the influx
of "drug tourists" from elsewhere in Europe. The European Court of Justice
ruled in December 2010 that Dutch authorities can ban coffeeshops from selling
cannabis to foreigners. The EU court said the southern Dutch city of
Maastricht was within its rights when it introduced a "weed passport" in 2005
to prevent foreigners from entering cafés that sell cannabis.[30]

In 2010 the owner of Netherlands's largest cannabis selling coffeeshop was
fined 10 million euros for breaking drug laws by keeping more than the
tolerated amount of cannabis in the shop. He was also sentenced to a 16-week
prison term.[31]

## Results of the drug policy

Criminal investigations into more serious forms of organized crime mainly
involve drugs (72%). Most of these are investigations of hard drug crime
(specifically cocaine and synthetic drugs) although the number of soft drug
cases is rising and currently accounts for 69% of criminal investigations.[32]

In a study of the levels of cannabis, cocaine, MDMA, methamphetamine and other
amphetamine in wastewater from 42 major cities in Europe Amsterdam came near
the top of the list in every category but methamphetamine.[33]

In the province of North-Brabant in the south of the Netherlands, the
organized crime organizations form the main producer of MDMA, amphetamine and
cannabis in Europe. Together with the proximity of the ports of Antwerp and
especially Rotterdam where heroin and cocaine enter the European continent,
this causes these substances to be readily available for a relative low price.
Therefore, there is a large quantity drugs of a relative high quality with few
pollution available. This means that users will not have to rely on more
polluted substances with greater health risks. Together with an approach that
focuses on easily accessible health care, harm reduction and prevention, this
causes the medical condition of the Dutch addicts to be less severe than that
of many other countries.[34]

## Implications of international law

The Netherlands is a party to the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances, and the 1988 United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances. The 1961 convention prohibits cultivation and trade of naturally
occurring drugs such as cannabis; the 1971 treaty bans the manufacture and
trafficking of synthetic drugs such as barbiturates and amphetamines; and the
1988 convention requires states to criminalize illicit drug possession:

> Subject to its constitutional principles and the basic concepts of its legal
system, each Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to establish
as a criminal offence under its domestic law, when committed intentionally,
the possession, purchase or cultivation of narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances for personal consumption contrary to the provisions of the 1961
Convention, the 1961 Convention as amended or the 1971 Convention.

The International Narcotics Control Board typically interprets this provision
to mean that states must prosecute drug possession offenses. The conventions
clearly state that controlled substances are to be restricted to scientific
and medical uses. However, Cindy Fazey, former Chief of Demand Reduction for
the United Nations Drug Control Programme, believes that the treaties have
enough ambiguities and loopholes to allow some room to maneuver. In her report
entitled _The Mechanics and Dynamics of the UN System for International Drug
Control_ , she notes:

> Many countries have now decided not to use the full weight of criminal
sanctions against people who are in possession of drugs that are for their
personal consumption. The Conventions say that there must be an offence under
domestic criminal law, it does not say that the law has to be enforced, or
that when it is what sanctions should apply. . . . Despite such grey areas
latitude is by no means unlimited. The centrality of the principle of limiting
narcotic and psychotropic drugs for medical and scientific purposes leaves no
room for the legal possibility of recreational use. . . . Nations may
currently be pushing the boundaries of the international system, but the
pursuit of any action to formally legalize non-medical and non-scientific drug
use would require either treaty revision or a complete or partial withdrawal
from the current regime.

The Dutch policy of keeping anti-drug laws on the books while limiting
enforcement of certain offenses is carefully designed to reduce harm while
still complying with the letter of international drug control treaties. This
is necessary in order to avoid criticism from the International Narcotics
Board, which historically has taken a dim view of any moves to relax official
drug policy. In their annual report, the Board has criticised many
governments, including Canada, for permitting the medicinal use of cannabis,
Australia for providing injecting rooms and the United Kingdom for proposing
to downgrade the classification of cannabis,[35] which it has since done
(although this change was reversed by the Home Secretary on 7 May 2008 against
the advice of its own commissioned report).

## Recent developments

## Part of a series on

Psychedelia

Arts

  * **Psychedelic art**

  * Algorithmic art

  * Cyberdelic
  * Diffraction
  * Fractal art
  * Liquid light show
  * LSD art
  * Paisley
  * Phosphene

  * **Psychedelic music**

  * Acid house

  * Acid jazz
  * Acid rock
  * Acid techno
  * Acid trance
  * Chillwave
  * Hypnagogic pop
  * Neo-psychedelia
  * Peyote song
  * Psychedelic folk
  * Psychedelic pop
  * Psychedelic rock
  * Psychedelic soul
  * Psychedelic trance
  * Space rock
  * Stoner rock
  * Trip hop

**Psychedelic film**

  * Acid Western
  * Stoner film

  * **Psychedelic literature**

Culture

  * Counterculture
  * Entheogen
  * Smart shop
  * Trip sitter
  * Psychedelic microdosing

Drugs

  * 25I-NBOMe
  * 2C-B
  * Ayahuasca
  * Cannabis
  * DMT
  * Ibogaine
  * Ketamine
  * LSD
  * Mescaline
  * Peyote
  * Psilocybin mushrooms
  * Salvinorin A/Salvia
  * San Pedro cactus

  * **List of psychedelic drugs**

  * List of psilocybin mushrooms
  * Psychoactive cactus

Experience

  * Bad trip
  * Ecology
  * Ego death
  * Serotonergic psychedelic
  * Therapy

History

  * Acid Tests
  * Albert Hofmann
  * History of lysergic acid diethylamide
  * Owsley Stanley
  * Psychedelic era
  * Summer of Love
  * Timothy Leary
  * William Leonard Pickard

Law

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands
  * Drug liberalization
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Legal status of psilocybin mushrooms
  * Legal status of Salvia divinorum

Related topics

  * Addiction
  * Cannabis
  * MDMA
  * Philosophy of psychedelics
  * Psychonautics
  * Prohibition of drugs
  * Rave
  * Recreational drug use
  * Surrealism

  * ![Tabletten.JPG](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Tabletten.JPG/16px-Tabletten.JPG) Pharmacy and Pharmacology portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

The liberal drug policy of the authorities in the Netherlands especially led
to problems in "border hot spots" that attracted "drug tourism" as well as
trafficking and related law enforcement problems in towns like Enschede in the
East and Terneuzen, Venlo, Maastricht and Heerlen in the South. In 2006, Gerd
Leers, then mayor of the border city of Maastricht, on the Dutch-Belgian
border, criticised the current policy as inconsistent, by recording a song
with the Dutch punk rock band De Heideroosjes. By allowing possession and
retail sales of cannabis, but not cultivation or wholesale, the government
creates numerous problems of crime and public safety, he alleges, and
therefore he would like to switch to either legalising and regulating
production, or to the full repression that his party (CDA) officially
advocates. The latter suggestion has widely been interpreted as
rhetorical.[36] Leers's comments have garnered support from other local
authorities and put the cultivation issue back on the agenda.

In November 2008, Pieter van Geel, the leader of the CDA (Christian Democrats)
in the Dutch parliament, called for a ban on the cafés where cannabis is sold.
He said the practice of allowing so-called coffeeshops to operate had failed.
The CDA had the support of its smaller coalition partner, the CU
(ChristenUnie), but the third party in government, PvdA (Labour), opposed. The
coalition agreement worked out by the three coalition parties in 2007 stated
that there would be no change in the policy of tolerance. Prominent CDA member
Gerd Leers spoke out against him: cannabis users who now cause no trouble
would be viewed as criminals if an outright ban was to be implemented. Van
Geel later said that he respected the coalition agreement and would not press
for a ban during the current government's tenure .[37]

By 2009, 27 _coffeeshops_ selling cannabis in Rotterdam, all within 200 metres
from schools, must close down. This is nearly half of the _coffeeshops_ that
currently operate within its municipality. This is due to the new policy of
city mayor Ivo Opstelten and the town council.[38] The higher levels of the
active ingredient in cannabis in Netherlands create a growing opposition to
the traditional Dutch view of cannabis as a relatively innocent soft drug.[39]
Supporters of _coffeeshops_ state that such claims are often exaggerated and
ignore the fact that higher content means a user needs to use less of the
plant to get the desired effects, making it in effect safer.[40] Dutch
research has however shown that an increase of THC content also increase the
occurrence of impaired psychomotor skills, particularly among younger or
inexperienced cannabis smokers, who do not adapt their smoking-style to the
higher THC content.[41] Closing of _coffeeshops_ is not unique for Rotterdam.
Many other towns have done the same in the last 10 years.

In 2008, the municipality of Utrecht imposed a Zero Tolerance Policy to all
events like the big dance party Trance Energy held in Jaarbeurs. However, such
zero-tolerance policy at dance parties are now becoming common in the
Netherlands and are even stricter in cities like Arnhem.

The two towns Roosendaal and Bergen op Zoom announced in October 2008 that
they would start closing all _coffeeshops_ , each week visited by up to 25000
French and Belgian drug tourists, with closures beginning in February
2009.[42][43]

In May 2011 the Dutch government announced that tourist are to be banned from
Dutch coffeeshops, starting in the southern provinces and at the end of 2011
in the rest of the country. In a letter to the parliament, the Dutch health
and justice ministers said that, "In order to tackle the nuisance and
criminality associated with coffeeshops and drug trafficking, the open-door
policy of coffeeshops will end".[44]

A government committee delivered in June 2011 a report about Cannabis to the
Dutch government. It includes a proposal that cannabis with more than 15
percent THC should be labeled as hard drugs.[45] Higher concentrations of THC
and drug tourism have challenged the current policy and led to a re-
examination of the current approach; e.g. ban of all sales of cannabis to
tourists in coffeeshops from end of 2011 was proposed but currently only the
border city of Maastricht has adopted the measure in order to test out its
feasibility.[46] According to the initial measure, starting in 2012, each
coffeeshop was to operate like a private club with some 1,000 to 1,500
members. In order to qualify for a membership card, applicants would have to
be adult Dutch citizens, membership was only to be allowed in one
club.[47][48]

In Amsterdam 26 coffeeshops in the De Wallen area will have to close their
doors between 1 September 2012 and 31 August 2015.[49]

A Dutch judge has ruled that tourists can legally be banned from entering
cannabis cafés, as part of new restrictions which come into force in 2012.[50]

A study conducted by the European Monitoring Centre of Drugs and Drug
Addiction report that 25.3% of Irish people smoked cannabis at some stage in
their life. Whereas 25.7% of Dutch people have tried cannabis.[1]

### Law banning "magic mushrooms"

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Paddo_products_Warmoesstraat_Amsterdam_april_2007.JPG/220px-

Paddo_products_Warmoesstraat_Amsterdam_april_2007.JPG)

Different entheogenic mushrooms on display in Amsterdam, Netherlands in 2007.

In October 2007, the prohibition of hallucinogenic or "magic mushrooms" was
announced by the Dutch authorities.[51][52]

On April 25, 2008, the Dutch government, backed by a majority of members of
parliament, decided to ban cultivation and use of all magic mushrooms.
Amsterdam mayor Job Cohen proposed a three-day cooling period in which clients
would be informed three days before actually procuring the mushrooms and if
they would still like to go through with it they could pick up their spores
from the smart shop.[53][54] The ban has been considered a retreat from
liberal drug policies.[55] This followed a few deadly incidents mostly
involving tourists.[56] These deaths were not directly caused by the use of
the drug _per se_ , but by deadly accidents occurring while under the
influence of magic mushrooms.

As of December 1, 2008, all psychedelic mushrooms are banned.[57] However,
schlerotia (what are termed as "truffles"), mushroom spores, and active
mycellium cultures[58] remained legal and are readily available in the
"smartshops", the stores in the Dutch cities that sell legal drugs, herbs and
related gadgets.

### Supply control

The relatively recent increase in the cocaine trafficking business has been
largely focused on the Caribbean area. Since early 2003, a special law court
with prison facilities has been operational at Schiphol airport. Since the
beginning of 2005, there has been 100% control of all flights from key
countries in the Caribbean. In 2004, an average of 290 drug couriers per month
were arrested, decreasing to 80 per month by early 2006.[59]

## See also

  * 2014 Amsterdam drug deaths
  * Arguments for and against drug prohibition
  * Designer drug
  * Drug liberalization
  * Legality of cannabis by country
  * Minors and the legality of cannabis
  * Portugal 2001 decriminalization of drug use

## References

  1. **^** Drugs en Beleid ( _in Dutch_ , "Drugs and Policy"), _Trimbos instituut_
  2. **^** Amsterdam for tourists: What's legal?, _CNN Travel_
  3. **^** Toleration policy regarding soft drugs and coffee shops, _Ministry of Security and Justice_
  4. **^** Weed pass sparks new problems Archived 2012-10-20 at the Wayback Machine. rnw.nl. 2012-05-09.
  5. **^** "Amsterdam ditches controversial 'weed pass' law". _Daily News_. New York. November 21, 2012.
  6. **^** Drugsbezit en drugshandel ( _in Dutch_ , "Possession and trade of drugs", _Wet & Recht_
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Am I committing a criminal offence if I possess, produce or deal in drugs?, _Ministry of Security and Justice_
  8. **^** [https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2014/10/17/rechter-volgt-wietparadox-1431720-a1264875 Rechter volgt wietparadox ( _in Dutch_ , "Judge follows weed paradox"), _NRC_
  9. **^** Wiet - de rechter is er wel klaar mee ( _in Dutch_ , "Weed - judges are quite done with it", _NRC_
  10. **^** Tweede Kamer steunt regulering wietteelt ( _in Dutch_ , "House of Representatives supports regulating weed cultivation", _NOS_
  11. **^** Nieuw kabinet staat proef met legale wietteelt toe ( _in Dutch_ , "New cabinet allows experiment with legal weed cultivation", _RTL News_
  12. **^** "Heroin-assisted Treatment (HAT) a Decade Later: A Brief Update on Science and Politics". _J Urban Health_. **84** (4): 552–62. July 2007. doi:10.1007/s11524-007-9198-y. PMC 2219559. PMID 17562183.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Word Drug report, 2006, Chapter 2.3". Unodc.org. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  14. **^** "Alcohol, tobacco among riskiest drugs". MSNBC. 2007-03-24. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  15. **^** "Call for end to distinction between soft and hard drugs". Nrc.nl. Archived from the original on 2012-09-09. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  16. **^** "Drugs | Rijksoverheid.nl". Justitie.nl. Retrieved 2011-04-20. (in Dutch)
  17. **^** Marc Peeperkorn (22 April 2003). "Kamer voor legaliseren softdrugs". _Volkskrant_ (in Dutch). Retrieved 31 January 2009. "To make the sale, trade and growth of soft drugs not punishable is currently hindered by United Nations treaties."
  18. **^** "Meeste Nederlanders voor legalisering softdrugs". _Het Parool_ (in Dutch). ANP. 21 November 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2009. "Two thirds of all Dutch advocate the legalisation of softdrugs."
  19. **^** "ELDD : Country profiles, Netherlands". Eldd.emcdda.europa.eu. Archived from the original on 2008-07-02. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  20. **^** EMCDDA: Drugs and driving, page 9, June 2003 Archived May 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
  21. **^** EMCDDA. National report 2007: Netherlands
  22. **^** The Swedish Prison and Probation Service in Basic Facts, 2007 page 20-21 Archived 2008-09-11 at the Wayback Machine. Drugs/goods trafficking: 21,6% of a total number of 10,428 imprisoned in 2006.
  23. **^** "UNODC: Seizures laboratories" (PDF). p. 7. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  24. **^** "Report on Dutch drugs market submitted to the Lower House, 2004". English.justitie.nl. 2004-10-25. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  25. **^** "World Drug report 2007, page 131". UNODC. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  26. **^** "Cookies op Trouw.nl".
  27. **^** "Interpol Annual Report - Temazepam" (PDF). _interpol.int_. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-01-09.
  28. **^** Bell, Alex (5 September 1999). "Deaths soar as Dutch drugs flood in". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
  29. **^** "page 84". Emcdda.europa.eu. 2009-09-01. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  30. **^** EURAD: Dutch authorities can ban coffeeshops from selling marijuana to foreigners [ _dead link_ ]
  31. **^** "Dutch coffeeshop fined 10m euros for breaking drug law, BBC,25 March 2010". BBC News. 2010-03-25. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  32. **^** Trimbos Institute: Cannabis use stable, but treatment demand rising; National Drug Monitor Annual Report 2006 (19-06-2007) Archived August 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
  33. **^** Ben Brumfield; CNN (28 May 2014). "Tests on sewage water exposes cities on cocaine, cannabis, other drugs - CNN.com". _CNN_.
  34. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-01-05. Retrieved 2015-01-02.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  35. **^** "aprile 2003". fuoriluogo.it. Archived from the original on 2015-04-23. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  36. **^** "Home - maastrichtportal".
  37. **^** "More pressure on cannabis coffeeshops". Nrc.nl. Archived from the original on 2009-07-20. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  38. **^** View all comments that have been posted about this article. (2007-06-22). "Washington Post Changing Patterns in Social Fabric Test Netherlands". Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  39. **^** Steeds meer tieners zoeken hulp voor wietverslaving 2007 Archived 2012-05-24 at Archive.today
  40. **^** "Erowid Cannabis Vault : Exposing Marijuana Myths".
  41. **^** Tj. T. Mensinga; et al. "A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study on the pharmacokinetics and effects of cannabis" (PDF). RIVM. Retrieved 2007-09-21.
  42. **^** "AFP: Dutch towns close coffeeshops in 'drug tourists' crackdown, Oct 24, 2008". Abc.net.au. 2008-10-24. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  43. **^** "Selling soft drugs is not a right even in the Netherlands". Nrc.nl. Archived from the original on 2008-12-22. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  44. **^** Tourists Face Weed Ban In Dutch Coffee Shops, Sky News, May 28, 2011 
  45. **^** "Garretsen: qualify strong cannabis as hard drugs - Univers". _Univers_.
  46. **^** "Maastricht bans cannabis coffee-shop tourists". _BBC News_. 2011-10-01.
  47. **^** "Amsterdam Will Ban Tourists from Pot Coffee Shops". _Atlantic Wire_. May 27, 2011. Retrieved 2011-06-23.
  48. **^** "Coffee shops turn into private clubs for locals". _IamExpat_.
  49. **^** ‹See Tfd› (in Dutch) Straatgerichte aanpak, Website of the municipality Amsterdam
  50. **^** "Dutch cannabis café owners fight changes". BBC. 2012-04-27.
  51. **^** Sterling, Toby (2007-10-13). "Dutch Declare Hallucinogenic Mushrooms Illegal". Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  52. **^** MacIntyre, James (2007-10-13). "Netherlands imposes total ban on 'magic' mushrooms". London: Independent.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  53. **^** (AFP) - Apr 25, 2008 (2008-04-25). "Afp.google.com, Netherlands to ban 'magic mushrooms'". Afp.google.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-06. Retrieved 2011-04-20.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  54. **^** "news.bbc.co.uk, Dutch bill to ban magic mushrooms". BBC News. 2008-04-26. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  55. **^** "Dutch Cabinet bans sale of hallucinogenic mushrooms in new retreat from liberal policies, Herald Tribune, October 12, 2007". International Herald Tribune. 2009-03-29. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  56. **^** "simplyamsterdam.nl, suicide after using hallucinating mushrooms". Simplyamsterdam.nl. 2007-03-27. Retrieved 2011-04-20.
  57. **^** "Mushplanet".
  58. **^** About Magic Truffles Archived 2012-12-01 at the Wayback Machine Shamantar.com
  59. **^** EMCDDA: Policies and laws Archived October 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine

## Further reading

  * Bewley-Taylor, David R. and Fazey, Cindy S. J.: The Mechanics and Dynamics of the UN System for International Drug Control, 14 March 2003.
  * Duncan, David F.; Nicholson, Thomas (1997), "Dutch drug policy: A model for America?", _Journal of Health and Social Policy_ , **8** (3): 1–15

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Drug
policy**_.  
\---|---

  * EMCDDA, ELDD. European Legal Map on Possession of cannabis for personal use
  * Explanation of the Dutch drugs policy for tourist
  * 2000-2001 Progress Report on the Drug Policy of the Netherlands (PDF)
  * Article on Amsterdam drug scene
  * NL Planet - Dutch Soft Drugs Policy
  * "Gedogen" - active Dutch tolerance.
  * "The National Institute of the Netherlands in the field of mental health and dependency care" ‹See Tfd›(in Dutch)

  * v

  * t
  * e

National cannabis legalization

* * *

Enacted|

  * Law 19.172 (Uruguay)
  * Cannabis Act (Canada)

Proposed|

  * Entwurf eines Cannabiskontrollgesetzes ‎(Germany)
  * Ending Federal Marijuana Prohibition Act (United States)

De facto|

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands (Netherlands)
  * Cannabis in Spain (Spain)

Legality of cannabis by country

  * v
  * t
  * e

Drug policy by country

* * *

Asia|

  * India

Europe|

  * Germany
  * Netherlands
  * Portugal
  * Slovakia
  * Soviet Union
  * Sweden
  * United Kingdom

North America|

  * Canada
  * United States
  * Legality of cannabis by U.S. jurisdiction

International|

  * Legality of cannabis by country

  * v

  * t
  * e

Netherlands articles

* * *

Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands

History|

  * Germanic tribes
  * Roman Era
  * Frisii, Chamavi, Batavi, Cananefates
  * Migration Period
  * Saxons, Frisians, Franks
  * Dorestad, Utrecht
  * Development urban centers
  * Frisian Kingdom
  * Frankish Kingdom
  * Middle Francia
  * Lower Lorraine
  * Flanders, Holland, Frisian Freedom
  * Brabant, Guelders
  * Holy Roman Empire
  * Burgundian Netherlands
  * Habsburg Netherlands
  * Renaissance
  * Seventeen Provinces
  * Spanish Netherlands
  * Eighty Years' War
  * Dutch Republic
  * Golden Age
  * Batavian Revolution
  * Batavian Republic
  * Kingdom of Holland
  * First French Empire
  * Principality
  * United Kingdom
  * Netherlands since 1900
    * World War II
    * Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands

|

![Netherlands](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Royal_Arms_of_the_Netherlands.svg/80px-

Royal_Arms_of_the_Netherlands.svg.png)

Geography|

|

  * Birds
  * Cities
  * Delta Works
  * Earthquakes
  * Extreme points
  * Flood control
  * Gas field
  * Islands
  * Lakes
  * Mammals
  * Mountains and hills
  * Regions
  * Rivers
  * Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta
  * Volcanoes
  * World Heritage Sites
  * Zuiderzee Works

* * *

Politics|

|

  * Cabinet
  * Constitution
  * Corruption
  * Demographics
  * Drug policy
  * Immigration
  * Education
  * Elections
  * Health care
  * Foreign relations
  * Human rights
    * LGBT
  * Law
    * enforcement
  * Monarch
  * Municipalities
  * Provinces
  * Republicanism
  * Parliament
  * Political parties
  * Prime Minister
  * Military
  * Water boards

* * *

Economy|

|

  * AEX index
  * Central bank
  * Energy
  * Euronext
  * Polder model
  * Taxation
  * Telecommunications
  * Tourism
  * Trade unions
  * Transport

* * *

Culture|

|

  * Architecture
  * Art
  * Cinema
  * Cuisine
  * Cultural icons
  * Customs and etiquette
  * Decorations and medals
  * Languages
  * Literature
  * Media
  * Music
  * Orders of knighthood
  * People
  * Netherlands names
  * Public holidays
  * Religion
  * Sport
  * Symbols
    * Anthem
    * Coat of arms
    * Flag
    * Lion

* * *

  * Outline

  * Category

  * Portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

Regulation of therapeutic goods

* * *

Americas|

  * Brazil
  * Canada
  * United States (drug schedules: I - II - III - IV - V)

Eurasia|

  * European Union
  * Germany
  * India
  * Japan
  * Netherlands
  * Norway
  * Portugal
  * Singapore
  * Soviet Union
  * Switzerland
  * Thailand
  * United Kingdom

Oceania|

  * Australia

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drug_policy_of_the_Netherlands&oldid=901344731"

Categories:

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands
  * Dutch law

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from June 2016
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * Webarchive template archiveis links
  * Articles with Dutch-language external links
  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2016
  * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
  * Commons category link is locally defined
  * Commons category link is on Wikidata using P373

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * Հայերեն
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Polski
  * Русский
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Svenska

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 11 June 2019, at 08:54 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

