

  1. Skip to navigation
  2. Skip to content

![

    
    
                                                    Calgary Herald                          Homepage](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/ch_300x300_rgb.png?resize=120,120)
    

  * News

    * All News
    * Local News
    * Politics
    * Crime
    * National
    * World
    * Traffic
  * Opinion

    * All Opinion
    * Editorials
    * Columnists
    * Letters
  * Sports

    * All Sports
    * Hockey

    * All Hockey

    * Calgary Flames
    * NHL

    * Football

    * All Football

    * Calgary Stampeders
    * CFL
    * NFL

    * Spruce Meadows

    * Baseball
    * Basketball

    * All Basketball

    * NBA
    * NCAA

    * Golf

    * Golf Videos

    * Rodeo-Chucks

    * Soccer

    * All Soccer

    * International Soccer
    * MLS

    * Curling

    * Tennis
    * Auto Racing
  * Business

    * All Business
    * Energy
    * Local Business
    * Real Estate
    * Commercial Real Estate
    * FP Markets
    * FP Headlines
    * FP Money
    * Technology

    * All Technology

    * Gaming
    * Internet
    * Personal Tech
    * Science
    * Space
    * Tech-Biz

    * Small Business

  * Arts

    * All Arts
    * Local Arts
    * Movies

    * All Movies

    * Movie Listings

    * Television

    * All TV

    * TV Listings

    * Theatre

    * Music

    * All Music

    * NP Music

    * Celebrity

    * Books
    * Swerve Listings
  * Life

    * All Life
    * Swerve
    * Homes

    * All Homes

    * New Homes
    * Condos
    * Rec Properties

    * Food

    * All Food

    * Taste Alberta
    * Recipes

    * Health

    * All Health

    * Women
    * Men
    * Seniors
    * Sexual Health
    * Diet & Fitness
    * Family & Child

    * Life By Design

    * Fashion & Beauty
    * Parenting
    * Relationships
    * Puzzles & Comics
    * Royals
    * Travel

    * All Travel

    * Ski & Snowboard

    * Gift Guide

  * Careers

  * Obits
  * Classifieds

    * All Classifieds
    * FlyerCity
    * Announcements
    * Browse Listings
    * Place a Classifieds Ad
    * Local Directory
    * Special Sections
  * Driving

  * Life

  * Health
  * Men

  * |Featured:

  * Energy News

  * Don Braid
  * Cannabis
  * Inside Alberta Podcast
  * Chris Varcoe
  * Licia Corbella
  * Driving
  * Video Centre
  * Bronco Unbroken
  * |

More

  * Open Search Close Search Search

Videos Sign In Sign Out Subscribe

# Keenan: A man's guide to marijuana and its potential side-effects

Tom Keenan

Updated: August 2, 2018

![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/cannabis-420-201804201.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=840&h=630&crop=1)

A man smokes three joints at once while attending a marijuana celebration, in
Vancouver, B.C., on April 20, 2018. DARRYL DYCK / THE CANADIAN PRESS

Share Adjust Comment Print

The upcoming Canada-wide legalization of recreational marijuana will have all
sorts of consequences, both intended and unintended. But what, specifically,
will it do to the male body? Quite a lot, it appears.

For starters, pot affects males and females differently. A team of researchers
from Washington State University, a state where cannabis has been legal since
2012, has given us some answers. Researcher Rebecca Craft found that, in
female rats, the effects of THC were closely linked to hormone levels, with a
spike in sensitivity right around ovulation.

Craft also notes that "the majority of research in humans suggests that women
are more likely to be affected by cannabinoids than men, with reports of
enhanced and decreased performance on various tasks." She has also studied
cannabis withdrawal symptoms, and says that women often have a harder time
discontinuing pot after heavy use, with symptoms like irritability and sleep
disruption. In rats, THC withdrawal has even caused changes in the menstrual
cycle timing.

Smoking pot also can also affect the male hormone balance. A famous, if rather
dated (1981) University of Texas study garnered wide attention by claiming
that pot caused testosterone to jump up to six times the normal level right
after administering THC. Then, after 20 minutes, it fell to below normal. It's
important to note that this work was done in mice who were fed liquid THC, so
it may not be applicable to humans toking up at home.

More recent evidence comes from 1,221 young Danish men who were studied when
they reported for their military induction physical between 2008 and 2012.

First of all, 45 per cent reported smoking marijuana in the last three months,
even though marijuana is still illegal in Denmark. This study "found a
significant increase in testosterone (levels in the blood) correlated to the
use of marijuana." The researchers explain the apparent contradiction with
previous studies which showed lower testosterone levels by saying that those
studies ignored the confounding effect of cigarette smoking. So, the jury is
still out on what pot does to your T level. You might convince your doctor to
order a blood test and do your own experiment if you really want to know how
your body deals with weed.

What about fertility? The Danish men "delivered a semen sample" which was
dutifully analyzed by the researchers. The news was not good. "Regular
marijuana smoking more than once per week was associated with a … 29% lower
total sperm count after adjustment for confounders." Combining marijuana with
other recreational drugs had an even more severe impact, with a 55 per cent
lower sperm count.

Other fertility-related parameters like sperm concentration and motility were
also negatively affected by drug use. The Danish researchers estimated that
approximately 15 per cent of the men in their study might need fertility
treatment in the future if they wanted to father a child.

Another gender difference noted by the University of Washington researchers
was more increased post-cannabis appetite surge in males compared to females.
So, expanding waistlines may become a significant problem for the Canadian
male if marijuana use catches fire. This is especially true if the predictions
in a recent Deloitte LLP study are accurate. That report notes that marijuana
use "tapers off with age" but that the middle-aged "conservative experiment"
might be a growth market. Of course, that 35 to 54-year-old guy is often
struggling to keep off extra pounds.

Experts suggest planning fun distractions, so you don't eat all the food in
the fridge. It also seems that various strains of marijuana have different
munchie-inducing properties.

While everything else in this article is based on serious scientific research,
it was inevitable that I would stumble across some more informal studies,
especially on sites like herb.co. This source suggests that certain foods may
prolong the euphoric effect of marijuana. Put "mangoes and marijuana" into
your search engine if you dare.

The more entertaining men and cannabis research question is, of course, is pot
an aphrodisiac?

It certainly can be, though the long-term outlook for stoners is not so rosy.
In 2017, psychiatrist Richard Balon of Wayne State University concluded that
"low and acute doses of cannabis may enhance human sexual functioning, e.g.,
sexual desire and enjoyment/satisfaction." On the other hand, "chronic use of
higher doses of cannabis may lead to negative effect on sexual functioning
such as lack of interest, erectile dysfunction, and inhibited orgasm."

Balon concludes his article by suggesting that there is a need for rigorous
double-blind studies of human sexuality in cannabis users and healthy
volunteers. Somehow, I think he will find no shortage of research volunteers.
Indeed, the October legalization will undoubtedly spawn whole new research
initiatives at Canadian universities, which are now at a competitive advantage
over U.S. scientists, at least in the wacky world of weed.

_Dr. Tom Keenan is an award-winning journalist, public speaker, professor in
the Faculty of Environmental Design at the University of Calgary, and author
of the bestselling book, Technocreep: The Surrender of Privacy and the
Capitalization of Intimacy_

![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/cal-0901-remington-14.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=150)
Brooks: Remington Golf Classic huge win for Prostate Cancer Centre
![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/cal-0721-us-

consul-6.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=150) Brooks: And that 's a wrap — one last
look at Stampede...

## This Week's Flyers

## Comments

**Postmedia is pleased to bring you a new commenting experience**. We are
committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion and encourage
all readers to share their views on our articles. Comments may take up to an
hour for moderation before appearing on the site. We ask you to keep your
comments relevant and respectful. Visit our Community Guidelines for more
information.

Sign in to Comment

## Connect With Us

  *     *       * 

![a research based pharmaceutical

company](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/patient-

diaries-logo.jpg)

## Patient Diaries

Sponsored by **a research based pharmaceutical company**

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Working with her doctor, this Alberta woman overcame her Crohn’s to reach

her new life ...

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Funding needed to improve diabetes care

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### For people monitoring their glucose not all pumps are created equal

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Know Your Rights: Diabetes 360° and you

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Understanding the link between weight loss and diabetes management

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Facing the challenge of type 2 diabetes

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### For people living with diabetes, monitoring cardiovascular health can

save a life.

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Canadians living with psoriasis fight for awareness

Read More

![INDOCHINO](https://postmediavancouversun2.files.wordpress.com/2017/02/indochino_logo_gray_120x60.gif)

## Suit Yourself

Sponsored by **INDOCHINO**

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### The spring trifecta: Three ways to diversify your suit collection

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Groom finds perfectly fitting wedding suit at a great price

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### Whether online or brick and mortar, Indochino CEO Drew Green sees

customization and personality as ...

  * ![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

#### 5 Simple Steps To Take Care of Your Suit

Share this story

## Keenan: A man's guide to marijuana and its potential side-effects

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Reddit
  * Email
  * Tumblr
  * Pinterest
  * Google+
  * LinkedIn

  * ## News

    * All News
    * Local News
    * Politics
    * Crime
    * National
    * World
    * Traffic
    * ## Opinion

    * All Opinion

    * Editorials
    * Columnists
    * Letters
    * ## Sports

    * All Sports

    * Hockey
    * Football
    * Spruce Meadows
    * Baseball
    * Basketball
    * Golf
    * Rodeo-Chucks
    * Soccer
    * Curling
    * Tennis
    * Auto Racing
    * ## Business

    * All Business

    * Energy
    * Local Business
    * Real Estate
    * Commercial Real Estate
    * FP Markets
    * FP Headlines
    * FP Money
    * Technology
    * Small Business
    * ## Arts

    * All Arts

    * Local Arts
    * Movies
    * Television
    * Theatre
    * Music
    * Celebrity
    * Books
    * Swerve Listings
    * ## Life

    * All Life

    * Swerve
    * Homes
    * Food
    * Health
    * Life By Design
    * Fashion & Beauty
    * Parenting
    * Relationships
    * Puzzles & Comics
    * Royals
    * Travel
    * Gift Guide

![Postmedia Logo](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/postmedia-theme-

broadsheet/images/common/logo-postmedia.png)

365 Bloor St East, Toronto, ON, M4W3L4, www.postmedia.com

(C) 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.

Powered by WordPress.com VIP

  * ## Classifieds

    * Driving
    * Obits
    * Announcements
    * FlyerCity
    * Careers
    * Browse Listings
    * Place a Classified Ad
    * Local Directory
    * ## Legal

    * Privacy - Updated

    * Terms
    * Copyright
    * Digital Ad Registry
    * ## Services

    * Advertise With Us

    * Subscribe
    * My Subscription
    * Edit Profile
    * Contact Us
    * ePaper
    * Digital Access
    * Contests
    * NIE
    * ## Properties

    * Canada.com

    * Edmonton Journal
    * London Free Press
    * Montreal Gazette
    * National Post
    * Leader-Post (Regina)
    * Ottawa Citizen
    * The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon)
    * The Province (Vancouver)
    * Vancouver Sun
    * Windsor Star

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

