

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » Research Reports » Marijuana » Is there a link between
marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?

# Marijuana

Email Facebook Twitter

## Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?

Several studies have linked marijuana use to increased risk for psychiatric
disorders, including psychosis (schizophrenia), depression, anxiety, and
substance use disorders, but whether and to what extent it actually causes
these conditions is not always easy to determine.32 The amount of drug used,
the age at first use, and genetic vulnerability have all been shown to
influence this relationship. The strongest evidence to date concerns links
between marijuana use and substance use disorders and between marijuana use
and psychiatric disorders in those with a preexisting genetic or other
vulnerability.62

Research using longitudinal data from the National Epidemiological Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions examined associations between marijuana use,
mood and anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders. After adjusting for
various confounding factors, no association between marijuana use and mood and
anxiety disorders was found. The only significant associations were increased
risk of alcohol use disorders, nicotine dependence, marijuana use disorder,
and other drug use disorders.63

Recent research (see "AKT1 Gene Variations and Psychosis") has found that
people who use marijuana and carry a specific variant of the _AKT1_ gene,
which codes for an enzyme that affects dopamine signaling in the _striatum_ ,
are at increased risk of developing psychosis. The striatum is an area of the
brain that becomes activated and flooded with dopamine when certain stimuli
are present. One study found that the risk of psychosis among those with this
variant was seven times higher for those who used marijuana daily compared
with those who used it infrequently or used none at all.64

![Bar graph comparing AKT1 gene variants and their carriers' risk for

psychosis](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/mj_akt1_gene-

varaitions-small.gif) Whether adolescent marijuana use can contribute to
developing psychosis later in adulthood appears to depend on whether a person
already has a genetically based vulnerability to the disorder. The AKT1 gene
governs an enzyme that affects brain signaling involving the neurotransmitter
dopamine. Altered dopamine signaling is known to be involved in schizophrenia.
AKT1 can take one of three forms in a specific region of the gene implicated
in susceptibility to schizophrenia: T/T, C/T, and C/C. Those who use marijuana
daily (green bars) with the C/C variant have a seven times higher risk of
developing psychosis than those who use it infrequently or use none at all.
The risk for psychosis among those with the T/T variant was unaffected by
whether they used marijuana.

Source: Di Forti et al. _Biol Psychiatry_. 2012.

Another study found an increased risk of psychosis among adults who had used
marijuana in adolescence and also carried a specific variant of the gene for
_catechol-O-methyltransferase_ (COMT), an enzyme that degrades
neurotransmitters such as dopamine and norepinephrine 65 (see "Genetic
Variations in COMT Influences the Harmful Effects of Abused Drugs"). Marijuana
use has also been shown to worsen the course of illness in patients who
already have schizophrenia. As mentioned previously, marijuana can produce an
acute psychotic reaction in non-schizophrenic people who use marijuana,
especially at high doses, although this fades as the drug wears off.

![Bar graph showing how the influence of adolescent marijuana use on adult

psychosis is affected by COMT genetic

variation](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/mj_genetic_variation_in_comt.gif)
The influence of adolescent marijuana use on adult psychosis is affected by
genetic variables. This figure shows that variations in a gene can affect the
likelihood of developing psychosis in adulthood following exposure to cannabis
in adolescence. The COMT gene governs an enzyme that breaks down dopamine, a
brain chemical involved in schizophrenia. It comes in two forms: "Met" and
"Val." Individuals with one or two copies of the Val variant have a higher
risk of developing schizophrenic-type disorders if they used cannabis during
adolescence (dark bars). Those with only the Met variant were unaffected by
cannabis use.

Source: Caspi et al. _Biol Psychiatry_. 2005.

Inconsistent and modest associations have been reported between marijuana use
and suicidal thoughts and attempted suicide among teens. 66,67 Marijuana has
also been associated with an _amotivational syndrome_ , defined as a
diminished or absent drive to engage in typically rewarding activities.
Because of the role of the endocannabinoid system in regulating mood and
reward, it has been hypothesized that brain changes resulting from early use
of marijuana may underlie these associations, but more research is needed to
verify that such links exist and better understand them.

## Adverse Consequences of Marijuana Use

![Student with hands on his

head](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/content_image_portrait/public/marijrr201406.jpg?itok=9kZw8R9E)
Photo by (C)getttyimages.com/Fuse

### Acute (present during intoxication)

  * Impaired short-term memory 
  * Impaired attention, judgment, and other cognitive functions 
  * Impaired coordination and balance 
  * Increased heart rate 
  * Anxiety, paranoia 
  * Psychosis (uncommon) 

### Persistent (lasting longer than intoxication, but may not be permanent)

  * Impaired learning and coordination 
  * Sleep problems 

### Long-term (cumulative effects of repeated use)

  * Potential for marijuana addiction 
  * Impairments in learning and memory with potential loss of IQ* 
  * Increased risk of chronic cough, bronchitis 
  * Increased risk of other drug and alcohol use disorders 
  * Increased risk of schizophrenia in people with genetic vulnerability** 

* * *

_*Loss of IQ among individuals with persistent marijuana use disorder who
began using heavily during adolescence_

_**These are often reported co-occurring symptoms/disorders with chronic
marijuana use. However, research has not yet determined whether marijuana is
causal or just associated with these mental problems._

Prev Index Next

This page was last updated June 2018

![Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric

disorders?](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/rr-

marijunana-cover-thumb_1.jpg)

## Contents

  * Letter From the Director
  * What is marijuana? 
  * What is the scope of marijuana use in the United States?
  * What are marijuana effects?
  * How does marijuana produce its effects?
  * Does marijuana use affect driving?
  * Is marijuana addictive?
  * What are marijuana's long-term effects on the brain?
  * Is marijuana a gateway drug?
  * How does marijuana use affect school, work, and social life?
  * Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?
  * What are marijuana's effects on lung health?
  * What are marijuana’s effects on other aspects of physical health?
  * Is marijuana safe and effective as medicine?
  * What are the effects of secondhand exposure to marijuana smoke?
  * Can marijuana use during and after pregnancy harm the baby?
  * Available Treatments for Marijuana Use Disorders
  * Where can I get further information about marijuana?
  * References

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (782KB)
  * ePub (298KB)
  * Kindle (706KB)
  * Online Only

## Ordering Publications

Call **1-877-643-2644** or:  
![NIDA Drug

Pubs](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/feat_drug_pubs%281%29.png)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 25). Marijuana. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana

NIDA. "Marijuana." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 25 Jun. 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana.

NIDA. Marijuana. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana. June 25,
2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Featured Publications

![Cover art for Opioid Facts for

Teens](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/opioidsforteenscover.jpg?itok=j4M3QgvB)

Opioid Facts for Teens

![Science of Addiction

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/soa_cover_2018_0.gif?itok=ZFYtyFxC)

Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction

![](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/pinkandblue_pr_1.jpg?itok=y-uXmu4a)

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...

![Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to

Know](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/parents_mj_facts_cover.png?itok=doAsxOEp)

Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## ​Research Reports

This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the
educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The
series reports on research findings of national interest.

View all ​Research Reports

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

