

  * Patient Referral Forms
  * Signup for eNewsletter
  * Contact Us
  * Login

![Canabo Medical Clinic Logo](https://www.canabomedicalclinic.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/canabo-clinic-vert.png) ![Canabo Medical Clinic

Logo](https://www.canabomedicalclinic.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/canabo-

clinic-horiz.png)

  * ABOUT
  * PATIENTS
    * Clinic Locations
    * Patient FAQs
    * Patient Referral Forms
    * Sleep Aid Program
    * Privacy Policy
  * PHYSICIANS
    * Physician FAQs
  * SPECIALTY PROGRAMS
    * Long-term Care Facility and Home Visit Program
    * VIP Service
    * Sleep Aid Program
    * Self Referral - Sleep Aid Form
  * INVEST
  * BLOG
  *   * ABOUT

  * PATIENTS
    * Clinic Locations
    * Patient FAQs
    * Patient Referral Forms
    * Sleep Aid Program
    * Privacy Policy
  * PHYSICIANS
    * Physician FAQs
  * SPECIALTY PROGRAMS
    * Long-term Care Facility and Home Visit Program
    * VIP Service
    * Sleep Aid Program
    * Self Referral - Sleep Aid Form
  * INVEST
  * BLOG
  * 

# 6 Reasons You Shouldn't Self-Medicate with Medical Cannabis

## 6 Reasons You Shouldn't Self-Medicate with Medical Cannabis

Doctors still routinely deny patients medical cannabis, although it's
sometimes for good reason. Some patients then decide to obtain and use
cannabis on their own. Others decide not to talk to their doctor at all,
instead choosing to self-medicate.

What is self-medication?

Self-medication is the process of the patient deciding and administering a
"treatment" without the advice of a doctor or another qualified healthcare
professional. Most people do self-medicate at some point. When you take over-
the-counter painkillers, for example, you're often self-medicating.

It's not a good idea to self-medicate with medical cannabis. If you've been
thinking about foregoing a doctor's advice, here are a few reasons to
reconsider.

## 1\. Medical Cannabis Comes in Many Different Forms

One reason not to self-medicate is that it can be difficult to determine the
right dosage of medical marijuana for an individual patient. Even medical
professionals often have to use a trial-and-error method to ensure you're
getting the right dose.

There are a few reasons for this. One is that there are many different strains
of medical marijuana. Another is that there are different forms. Taking a CBD
oil is very different from using dried cannabis, and the conversion can be
tricky.

Those who self-medicate are often using an incorrect dosage. This may not seem
like a problem, but a high dose can impair you or trigger unpleasant side
effects.

## 2\. There Are Still Side Effects

One thing people like about medical marijuana is that it has fewer side
effects than many other treatments. That said, it does still have side
effects.

Most side effects of medical cannabis tend to be non-severe, such as red eyes
or drowsiness. Nonetheless, there are a few more dangerous side effects, such
as paranoia. However, some people have a higher risk for adverse events, such
as psychosis, and THC could potentially be contraindicated. A doctor can help
tell you if you are at a higher risk of experiencing adverse events with
cannabis.

As already mentioned, using the wrong dose can also cause problems, since it
may make side effects such as drowsiness worse. This can lead to impairment,
which has an effect on your daily routines and activities.

## 3\. You Might Not Be Using the Right Strain

Another reason not to self-medicate with medical marijuana is that you may not
be using the right strain for you. Most people who self-medicate often use
whatever they can obtain. This means you may not be getting the optimal
treatment for the symptoms you have.

Many people who self-medicate use high THC products and may have withdrawals
because they are not using the proper methods of consumption (such as oils or
products high in CBD). In addition, they may mistake withdrawals from THC for
anxiety and use more cannabis to fight the withdrawal, causing a downward
spiral.

symptoms. Rather than guessing, you should work with these professionals to
make sure you're getting the strain that will most likely help you.

## 4\. Your Doctor May Have a Good Reason to Say No

Perhaps the best reason not to self-medicate with medical marijuana is that
your doctor may actually have a good reason not to authorize cannabis for you.
Perhaps research doesn't support its use for your medical condition. Maybe you
have a condition that interacts with cannabis in a negative way.

Your doctor is the medical expert, and you may be placing yourself at risk by
self-medicating with medical cannabis.

If you're concerned your doctor will say no or has said no, try asking for a
referral to a medical cannabis clinic. This could help you get a second
opinion about medical marijuana as a treatment for you.

## 5\. There May Be a Drug Interaction to Consider

If you're taking other medications, medical cannabis may cause drug
interactions, such as blood sugar, blood thinner, pain, and anti-epileptic
drug interactions.

## 6\. Your Medications Should Be on Your Medical Record

Although it is possible to self-medicate properly, if you're treating a
medical condition, it's best to seek out medical advice to ensure this is
documented in your medical records, that coverage can be given if appropriate
and present, and so physicians have an accurate understanding of all medicines
you're taking.

By Dr. Michael Verbora| 2019-04-23T18:44:50+00:00 October 29th, 2018|Blog|0
Comments

#### Share This Story, Choose Your Platform!

FacebookTwitterLinkedinRedditTumblrGoogle+PinterestVkEmail

Copyright 2017 Canabo Medical Corp

Our Privacy Policy

FacebookTwitterInstagramLinkedin

Toggle Sliding Bar Area

Newsletter Signup

×

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

