

Brought to you by our treatment providers

Get 24/7 help now: All calls free and confidential. (855) 826-4464

  * Find Rehab Go
  * Alcohol
    * Addiction and Abuse 
    * Addiction and Abuse
    * Is Your Drinking Out of Control?
    * Binge Drinking
    * How Long Does Alcohol Stay in Your System?
    * Is Alcohol a Depressant?
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs 
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs
    * Alcoholism Causes and Risk Factors
    * Genetics of Alcoholism
    * Withdrawal and Detox 
    * Alcohol Withdrawal and Detox
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Treatment and Rehab 
    * Treatment and Rehab
    * Intervention for Alcoholism
    * Alcoholism Cures
    * Government Alcohol Abuse Treatment
    * Aftercare Programs
    * Alcoholism Medications 
      * Acamprosate
      * Disulfiram
      * Naltrexone for Alcoholism Treatment
      * Benzodiazepines for Alcohol Withdrawal
    * Effects of Alcohol Abuse 
    * Alcohol-related Medical Conditions 
      * Alcohol and the Liver
      * Alcohol Poisoning
      * Alcohol and Depression
      * Alcohol and Dual Diagnosis
    * Mixing Alcohol With Other Drugs
    * Drunk Driving
    * Alcohol-Related Crime
    * Who Alcoholism Impacts 
    * High-Functioning Alcoholics
    * End Stage Alcoholism
    * How to Help an Alcoholic Parent
    * Stage an Intervention
    * The Impact of Alcoholism on Families
    * The 5 Types of Alcoholics
    * Alcohol Community
  * Drugs
    * Substances
    * Drug Classifications
    * Benzodiazepines 
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Ativan
    * Librium
    * Halcion
    * Klonopin
    * Rohypnol
    * Valium
    * Xanax
    * Illicit Drugs 
    * What are Illicit Drugs?
    * Ayahuasca
    * Cocaine
    * Crack Cocaine
    * DMT
    * Ecstasy
    * Inhalants
    * GHB
    * Hallucinogens
    * Heroin
    * Ketamine
    * LSD
    * Marijuana
    * Mescaline
    * Meth
    * PCP
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Salvia
    * Synthetic Marijuana
    * Opiates 
    * What are Opiates?
    * The Opioid Epidemic
    * How Long Do Opioids Stay in Your System?
    * Codeine
    * Darvocet and Darvon
    * Demerol
    * Dilaudid
    * Fentanyl
    * Hydrocodone
    * Methadone
    * Morphine
    * Over the Counter (OTC) Drugs
    * Oxycodone
    * Prescription Opioids
    * Synthetic Opioids
    * Tramadol
    * Sleeping Pills 
    * What are Sleeping Pills?
    * Ambien
    * Amytal
    * Lunesta
    * Sonata
    * Stimulants 
    * What are Stimulants?
    * Adderall
    * Antidepressants
    * Caffeine
    * Concerta
    * Dexedrine
    * Diet Pills
    * Nicotine
    * Ritalin
    * Steroids
    * Overdose
    * Drug Street Names
    * Behavioral Addictions 
    * Gambling Addiction
    * Plastic Surgery Addiction
    * Porn Addiction
    * Sex Addiction
    * Sugar Addiction
  * Treatment
    * Treatment
    * Treatment Journey 
    * Treatment Choices 
      * Inpatient Drug Rehab
      * Outpatient Drug Rehab
      * Inpatient vs. Outpatient Rehab
    * Intervention 
      * Intervention
      * An Interventionist's Perspective
      * When Do I Need to Hold an Intervention?
      * How Do I Hold an Intervention?
      * What Is an Enabler?
      * How Is Rehab Helpful After an Intervention?
      * 10 Steps to Take if an Alcoholic or Addict Refuses Treatment
      * City-Based Interventions 
      * New York City Drug and Alcohol Interventions
      * Miami Drug and Alcohol Interventions
    * Treatment Process 
      * Overview
      * Drug and Alcohol Detox
      * Treatment Medications 
      * Addiction Treatment Medications
      * Clonidine
      * Naloxone (Narcan)
      * Naltrexone for Opioid Addiction
      * Suboxone
      * 12-Step Programs
    * Treatment Therapies 
      * Biofeedback Therapy
      * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
      * Dialectical Behavior Therapy
      * EMDR Therapy
      * Equine Therapy
      * Experiential Therapy
      * Faith-Based Drug and Alcohol Rehab
      * Healthy Relationships
      * Holistic Therapy
      * Motivational Enhancement Therapy
      * NAD Therapy
      * TMS Therapy
    * Support Groups 
      * 12-Step Programs
      * Alcoholics Anonymous
      * Narcotics Anonymous
      * Al-Anon
      * Alcoholics Anonymous: The Big Book
      * SMART Recovery
    * Questions About Rehab 
    * Paying for Rehab 
      * Cost of Drug and Alcohol Rehab
      * How Do I Pay for Addiction Treatment?
    * Rehab & Insurance 
      * Aetna
      * BlueCross BlueShield
      * Cigna
      * Affordable Care Act
      * Medicaid and Medicare
      * United Healthcare
      * Humana
      * Beacon Health Options
      * Magellan Health
    * Before Rehab 
      * Questions About Rehab
      * How Do I Prepare for Rehab?
      * How to Know if You Need Help
      * Should I Travel For Rehab?
      * Why Does Rehab Have a Stigma?
      * What Makes a Top-Rated Treatment Center?
      * How Do I Choose the Right Rehab?
      * How Long Does Detox Take?
    * During Rehab 
      * Can I Do It On My Own?
      * Caring for Loved Ones
      * What Medications Are Used?
      * What if I have a co­-occurring disorder?
      * How Long Does Treatment Take?
      * What Is a Typical Day in Drug Rehab Like?
      * What to Bring to Rehab
    * After Rehab 
      * Life After Rehab
      * Can I Get My Job Back After Rehab?
      * How Do I Regain My Loved Ones' Trust?
      * How Do I Stay Sober After Rehab?
      * Should I Go Back to Rehab?
      * What Happens if I Relapse?
      * Will My Social Life Change After Rehab?
      * How Do I Help a Recovering Addict or Alcoholic?
  * Community
    * Blog
    * Browse Categories 
    * Alcohol
    * Celebrity
    * Drug News
    * Education
    * Expert Insight
    * Heroin
    * Legislation
    * Lifestyle
    * Marijuana
    * Mental Health
    * News
    * Prescription Drugs
    * Prevention
    * Recovery
    * Treatment Centers
    * Addiction Info 
    * Addiction
    * 10 Most Common Addictions
    * Addiction vs. Dependence
    * Addiction and the Brain
    * Addiction Statistics
    * Treatment Center Myths
    * Your Loved Ones and Addiction
    * The Role of Family in Addiction Recovery
    * Who Addiction Affects 
    * Co-Disorders 
      * Dual Diagnosis
      * ADHD
      * Bipolar Disorder
      * Borderline Personality Disorder
      * Depression
      * Eating Disorders
      * Generalized Anxiety Disorder
      * Insomnia
      * Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
      * Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
      * Postpartum Depression
      * Schizophrenia
    * Who Addiction Affects 
      * Community Resources
      * Cancer Patients
      * Differences Between Men and Women
      * Domestic Violence
      * The Disabled Community
      * Elderly
      * Emergency Responders
      * Homelessness
      * LGBTQ
      * Medical Professionals
      * Pregnant Women
      * Rural Areas
      * Teens
      * Veterans
      * Workplace
    * College Students 
      * College Drug Abuse
      * Addiction Treatment for College Students
      * College Drug Abuse vs Addiction
      * Drinking and Drug Abuse in Greek Life
      * Eating Disorders in College
      * Facts and Statistics of College Drug Abuse
      * Prescription Study Aid Abuse
      * Preventing Substance Abuse in College
    * Teenagers 
      * Teen Drug Abuse
      * Health Effects of Teen Substance Abuse
      * Teen Addiction Treatment
      * Teen Co-Occurring Disorders
      * Teenage Substance Abuse Prevention
      * Underage Drinking
    * International 
      * UK 
      * Addiction in the UK
      * Finding Treatment Outside the UK
      * Canada 
      * Addiction in Canada
      * Finding Treatment Outside Of Canada
      * Australia 
      * Addiction in Australia
      * Finding Treatment Outside of Australia
    * Health & Safety 
      * Addiction and HIV/AIDS
      * Addiction and Hepatitis
      * Addiction and the Brain
      * Addiction and Suicide
      * Driving Under the Influence (DUI)
  * Search 

# Xanax Addiction and Abuse

Xanax is a benzodiazepine used to treat anxiety and insomnia. The drug is
extremely addictive and should only be used under a doctor’s supervision.

Xanax Info

  * Addiction and Abuse
  * Symptoms and Warning Signs
  * Withdrawal and Detox
  * Treatment and Rehab
  * Bars

Start the road to recovery

(877) 746-0480

Get a Call

Call Now

Treatment Center Locator

##### Xanax Info

  * Addiction and Abuse 
  * Symptoms and Warning Signs
  * Withdrawal and Detox
  * Treatment and Rehab
  * Bars

##### Types of Benzodiazepines

  * Ativan
  * Halcion
  * Klonopin
  * Librium
  * Valium
  * Xanax

##### Get started on the road to recovery.

![steve-halama-266139](/app/uploads/2017/12/steve-

halama-266139-e1514821344127.jpg)

Find Out How

##### Questions about treatment?

Get confidential help 24/7. Call now for:

  * Access to top treatment centers
  * Caring, supportive guidance
  * Financial assistance options

(855) 826-4464

##### See how Jerry

overcame his  
addiction.

![Jerry Lawson sitting in a

chair](/app/uploads/2017/08/jerry_small_bg-e1504123506687.jpg)

Watch Jerry's Story

##### Frequently Asked Questions

  * Can I Use Medicaid And Medicare?
  * How Much Does Treatment Cost?
  * Can I Use Insurance For Rehab?
  * What Is Inpatient Drug Rehab?
  * What Is Outpatient Drug Rehab?
  * USA Top 10 Drug Rehab Centers
  * How Can I Stage An Intervention?

##### Is your loved one

in need of help?

![Meeting Of Support Group](/app/uploads/2018/03/familylp_ad_bg.jpg)

Learn What You Can Do

## Addiction to Xanax (Alprazolam)

![Xanax_SR](/app/uploads/2014/03/Xanax_SR-238x179.jpg)

Xanax is a powerful benzodiazepine that is often prescribed to treat
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), panic disorders and insomnia. It is
extremely addictive when used long-term. Xanax is the number one prescribed
psychiatric medication in the United States. Seventy percent of teens with a
Xanax addiction get the drug from their family’s medicine cabinet.

Tolerance to Xanax develops quickly, requiring the user to take more of the
drug to achieve the desired effects. Someone with a Xanax addiction may take
up to 20 to 30 pills per day. If the user decides to stop taking Xanax, they
may experience withdrawal effects, such as anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,
and tremors. The onset of withdrawal symptoms is a sign that a physical
dependence has developed. The development of tolerance and withdrawal are
indications of addiction.

Once a Xanax addiction has taken hold, daily responsibilities, such as school,
work or family, are ignored as energy is redirected towards drug seeking
behavior.

##### Questions about treatment?

Get confidential help 24/7. Call now for:

  * Access to top treatment centers
  * Caring, supportive guidance
  * Financial assistance options

(855) 826-4464

Other behavioral signs of Xanax addiction include:

  * Continued use of Xanax even though it is contributing to personal difficulties
  * Inability to stop using Xanax despite the desire to
  * Loss of interest in activities once enjoyed
  * Obsessing about obtaining and using Xanax
  * Loss of control over the amount of Xanax being consumed
  * Legal problems that are the result of using Xanax
  * Risk-taking behaviors, such as driving while under the influence of Xanax

If a user wishes to stop taking Xanax after dependence on the drug has formed,
it is not recommended to quit “cold turkey” or without medical supervision.
The symptoms of Xanax withdrawal are similar to those of alcohol or
barbiturate withdrawal, and the severity of the symptoms can vary. If
convulsions occur, withdrawal from Xanax can be deadly.

Normally, the withdrawal process involves slowly reducing the dosage of Xanax
and eventually switching the user to a long-acting form of the drug for a
period of time. The gradual taper of this drug helps to reduce withdrawal
symptoms.

### Understanding Xanax

Xanax is the brand name for alprazolam, a prescription sedative in the
benzodiazepines family. Benzodiazepines were originally developed as a
replacement for barbiturates. Xanax affects the brain and central nervous
system (CNS). It boosts a brain chemical called gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), which slows down the nerve cell activity in the brain. The result is a
calm and relaxed feeling.

Because Xanax is a CNS depressant, common effects of the drug include slurred
speech, loss of coordination, and anxiety.

Xanax is dispensed in 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg and 2 mg strengths. The pills come
in different shapes and colors depending on strength. The 2 mg tablets are
white, green, or yellow in color and rectangular in shape. The rest are oval
shaped and colored white (0.25 mg), orange (0.5 mg) or blue (1 mg). Xanax is a
regulated schedule IV controlled substance.

After taking Xanax, the peak effects of the drug are typically felt within one
to two hours. As an intermediate-duration drug, Xanax stays in a person’s
system for 12 to 15 hours.

## How Long Do Benzos Stay in the Body?

Brands| Halcion| Xanax| Librium  
Length of Action| Short-acting| Intermediate| Long-acting  
Time| 2-4 hours| 6-12 hours| 5-30 hours

Common street names for Xanax include:

  * Xannies or zannies
  * Handlebars
  * Bars
  * Blue footballs
  * Benzos
  * French fries
  * Ladders
  * Sticks

![Background image](/app/uploads/2017/03/pranam-

gurung-116984-e1503343463687.jpg)

### Ready to get help?

Our phone number is available 24/7 to help you or your loved one find a
treatment center that suits your needs. It only takes one call to start your
new life in recovery.

Don’t waste another second. Call now to speak with a compassionate treatment
expert.

Speak with an expert (855) 826-4464

\- OR -

Let us call you (877) 746-0480

Get a Call

### Xanax Effects and Abuse

Taking more than the prescribed dosage or using Xanax without a prescription
is considered abuse of the drug. However, those who follow a prescription can
still become addicted to Xanax.

Xanax may be abused in several ways, including:

  * Taking multiple pills
  * Injecting it
  * Snorting it
  * Taking it via blotter paper
  * Taking it with other drugs or alcohol

Xanax is typically abused because of the sense of calm and relaxation it
causes in the user. Some people abuse Xanax by taking it in higher doses and
combining it with other drugs or alcohol in order to achieve the desired high.

> They say drugs fill a void, or at least that’s what my therapist thinks. The
first time I popped a Xanax was the first time I felt relief from my anxiety
disorder…There was something oddly comforting about Xanax—the way it came in
many shapes and colors, like peach and blue. I enjoyed looking at the pills.
They were a pretty little assortment of happiness I could feel just by holding
in my hands. Although Xanax put a temporary stop to my agony, it soon
introduced a new kind.

>

> \- Former benzo addict Ashley Zlatopolsky, Salon.com, 2015

##### See how Jerry

overcame his  
addiction.

![Jerry Lawson sitting in a

chair](/app/uploads/2017/08/jerry_small_bg-e1504123506687.jpg)

Watch Jerry's Story

An overdose on Xanax can be fatal, especially if the drug is taken with
alcohol or other drugs. Overdose can also occur if the pills are crushed or
chewed, as the drug is designed to be time-released into the system. Xanax
overdose symptoms include:

  * Confusion
  * Slowed heart rate
  * Extreme drowsiness
  * Difficulty breathing
  * Fainting
  * Loss of balance
  * Muscle weakness
  * Coma

Treatment for a Xanax overdose will depend on how much of the drug was taken
and whether other drugs or alcohol were also taken. In the event of an
overdose, medical providers may pump the stomach to remove as much of the
unabsorbed Xanax as possible. Medications, such as flumazenil, may also be
administered as an antidote. Doctors may insert an IV to provide necessary
fluids. It is important for anyone suffering from an overdose to be honest
with the emergency medical personnel about exactly what substances were taken
and how much.

### Common Xanax Drug Combinations

Xanax is commonly used in combination with alcohol or other pills—particularly
opiates—to get a better high. Heroin users regularly consume Xanax, as do
methadone users. In addition, approximately 40 percent of alcoholics regularly
abuse Xanax. Alcohol is particularly dangerous when mixed with Xanax because
they are both depressants, which can lead to an overdose and respiratory
failure.

##### Get started on the road to recovery.

![steve-halama-266139](/app/uploads/2017/12/steve-

halama-266139-e1514821344127.jpg)

Find Out How

### Xanax Statistics

124.9

thousand

Emergency room visits due to the recreational abuse of Xanax more than doubled
from 57,419 in 2005 to 124,902 in 2010.

50

million

In 2013, 50 million prescriptions were written for alprazolam (the generic
name for Xanax), up from 38 million written in 2006.

9

percent

Prescription rates for Xanax have been climbing at a 9 percent rate since
2008.

### Xanax Addiction Treatment

Overcoming an addiction to Xanax isn’t easy, but people do it everyday.
Medical detox and a treatment program can give someone addicted to Xanax their
best chance at achieving sobriety. Talk with a recovery professional today for
help finding a Xanax addiction treatment program.

Last Edited: May 14, 2019

![Photo of Addiction

Center](/app/uploads/2017/06/0ec5eea65f678c9d354096a42b7db6af-150x150.jpg)

##### Author

Addiction Center

  * About
  * Sources

Previous PageValium Treatment and Rehab Next Page Xanax Symptoms and Warning
Signs

Since 2014, Addiction Center has been an informational web guide for those who
are struggling with substance use disorders and co-occurring behavioral and
mental health disorders. All content included on Addiction Center is created
by our team of researchers and journalists. of our articles are fact-based and
sourced from relevant publications, government agencies and medical journals.

  * Drugs.com. (2014). Xanax for Anxiety Disorders: Usage & Safety Guidelines. Retrieved on March 9, 2014, from: http://www.drugs.com/xanax.html
  * Examiner.com. (2011). Xanax, The Most Dangerous Benzodiazepine. Retrieved on March 9, 2014, from: http://www.examiner.com/article/xanax-the-most-dangerous-benzo
  * Foundation for a Drug Free World. (2006). Prescription Drug Abuse Statistics. Retrieved on March 9, 2014, from: http://www.drugfreeworld.org/drugfacts/prescription/abuse-international-statistics.html

Medically Reviewed: January 2, 2019

![Photo of Theresa Soltesz](/app/uploads/2018/12/Pic-of-Theresa-150x150.jpg)

##### Medical Reviewer

Theresa Soltesz

  * About

All of the information on this page has been reviewed and verified by a
CERTIFIED ADDICTION PROFESSIONAL.

Theresa Soltesz graduated with her Bachelor’s Degree in Addiction Science and
Addiction Counseling from Minnesota State University in 2010. Upon completion
of her degree and clinical internship, Theresa began her career as an
Addiction Counselor in 2010. Theresa is currently certified as a Certified
Addiction Professional (CAP) by The Florida Certification Board, a Certified
International Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ICADC) by The International
Certification and Reciprocity Consortium (IC&RC) since 2013. Theresa is also a
Certified Professional Life Coach and is currently awaiting an additional
certification as a Certified Behavioral Health Case Manager (CBHCM) by The
Florida Certification Board.

### Get help today

Don't go through the process of recovery alone. Get in touch with someone who
can help.

(877) 746-0480

Get a Call

### Browse drug rehab centers

No matter where you live, there is a drug rehab center that can help you
overcome your addiction. We'll help you find it.

Select a state

  * Alabama
  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Hawaii
  * Idaho
  * Illinois
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Mississippi
  * Missouri
  * Montana
  * Nebraska
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * North Dakota
  * Ohio
  * Oklahoma
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * South Carolina
  * South Dakota
  * Tennessee
  * Texas
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Washington
  * West Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming
  * Guam
  * Puerto Rico
  * US Pacific Islands
  * US Virgin Islands
  * Washington D.C.

  * Find a Center

    * All listings
    * Add your center
  * Alcohol
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs
    * Withdrawal and Detox
    * Treatment and Rehab
    * Alcohol Community
  * Drugs
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Illicit Drugs
    * Opiates
    * Sleeping Pills
    * Stimulants
  * Treatment
    * Drug and Alcohol Detox
    * Inpatient Rehab
    * Outpatient Rehab
    * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
    * Questions About Rehab
    * Support Groups
  * Addiction
    * How to Stage an Intervention
    * 10 Most Common Addictions
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Community Resources
  * Community
    * Education
    * Lifestyle
    * Recovery

![HONConduct267448_s1](/app/uploads/2017/03/HONConduct267448_s1.png)

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information:  
verify here.

Addiction Center supports:

![SAMHSA Logo](/app/uploads/2017/05/samhsa_logo.png)

Copyright © 2019 AddictionCenter.com |  
For immediate treatment help call:  
(855) 826-4464

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Disclaimer

  * Where do calls go? 

  * Brought to You by Providers 

    * Ambrosia Treatment Center
    * Delphi Behavioral Health Group
    * Sunlight Recovery Center

AddictionCenter.com is a referral service that provides information about
addiction treatment practitioners and facilities. AddictionCenter.com is not a
medical provider or treatment facility and does not provide medical advice.
AddictionCenter.com does not endorse any treatment facility or guarantee the
quality of care provided, or the results to be achieved, by any treatment
facility. The information provided by AddictionCenter.com is not a substitute
for professional treatment advice.

Get 24/7 help now. All calls free and confidential.

(855) 826-4464

### Take the first step into recovery today.

![flyout_test_bg](/app/uploads/2018/04/flyout_test_bg.jpg)

Find a Treatment Center

### Take control of your life

Our treatment specialists offer 24/7 assistance.

  * Access to top treatment centers
  * Caring, supportive guidance
  * Financial assistance options

Call now:

(855) 826-4464

OR

Have us call you:

(877) 746-0480

Get a Call

### Where do calls go?

Calls to numbers on a specific treatment center will be routed to that
treatment center. Other calls will be primarily routed to our partners at
Addiction Campuses, Delphi Behavioral Health Group, and Sunlight Recovery
Center.

![Delphi Behavioral Health Group](/app/uploads/2019/05/delphi.png)  
![Sunlight Recovery Center](/app/uploads/2019/05/sunlightrecovery.png)

Additional calls will also be forwarded and returned by one of our treatment
partners below

  * Ambrosia Treatment Center
  * Ardu Recovery Center
  * Capo by the Sea
  * Deer Hollow Recovery and Wellness
  * Medical Concierge Recovery
  * Oceanside Malibu Addiction Treatment Center
  * Palm Partners
  * Shoreline Recovery Center
  * Southern California Sunrise Recovery Center

All calls are private and confidential. Find out more about Addiction Center.

A treatment facility paid to have their center promoted here. Learn more about
how to be featured in a paid listing.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

