

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Grants women the right to vote; prohibiting denial of voting rights on the
basis of sex

## This article is part of a series on the

Constitution of the  
United States of America  
![Greater coat of arms of the United

States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg/160px-

Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg.png)  
Preamble and Articles  
of the Constitution  
* Preamble
        
                  * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
        

Amendments to the Constitution  
* **Bill of Rights**
        
                  * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
          * VIII
          * IX
          * X
        

* * *
        
                  * XI
          * XII
          * XIII
          * XIV
          * XV
          * XVI
          * XVII
          * XVIII
          * XIX
          * XX
          * XXI
          * XXII
          * XXIII
          * XXIV
          * XXV
          * XXVI
          * XXVII
        

Unratified Amendments

        
                  * Congressional Apportionment
          * Titles of Nobility
          * Corwin
          * Child Labor
          * Equal Rights
          * D.C. Voting Rights
        

History

        
                  * Drafting and ratification timeline
          * Convention
          * Signing
          * Federalism
          * Republicanism
        

Full text of the Constitution and Amendments  
* Preamble and Articles I–VII * Amendments I–X * Amendments XI–XXVII * Unratified Amendments  
* ![Flag of the United States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States portal * U.S. Government portal * Law portal * Wikipedia book 
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

The **Nineteenth Amendment** ( **Amendment XIX** ) to the United States
Constitution prohibits the states and the federal government from denying the
right to vote to citizens of the United States on the basis of sex. Initially
introduced to Congress in 1878, several attempts to pass a women's suffrage
amendment failed until 1919, when suffragists pressed President Woodrow Wilson
to call a special congressional session. On May 21, 1919, the proposed
amendment passed the House of Representatives, followed by the Senate on June
4, 1919; it was then submitted to the states for ratification. Once again,
suffragists mobilized to lobby state legislatures to approve the amendment. On
August 18, 1920, the Tennessee legislature approved the amendment, becoming
the last of the necessary 36 states to secure ratification. U.S. Secretary of
State Bainbridge Colby made the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment official
on August 26, 1920, the culmination of a decades-long movement for women's
suffrage at both state and national levels.

While women had the right to vote in several of the colonies in what would
become the United States, by 1807 women had been denied even limited suffrage.
By the mid-nineteenth century, organizations supporting women's rights became
more active. In 1848, the Seneca Falls convention adopted the Declaration of
Sentiments, which called for equality between the sexes and included a
resolution urging women to secure the vote. Organizations began to advocate
for the vote using a variety of tactics, including legal arguments that relied
on existing amendments. After those arguments were struck down by the U.S.
Supreme Court, suffrage organizations, along with activists like Susan B.
Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, called for a new constitutional amendment
that would guarantee women the right to vote.

By the late nineteenth century, new states and territories, particularly in
the West, began to grant women the right to vote. In 1878, Senator Aaron A.
Sargent introduced to Congress a suffrage proposal that would eventually
become the Nineteenth Amendment, but it was rejected in 1887. By the 1890s,
suffrage organizations focused on a national amendment while still working at
the state and local levels. Lucy Burns, and Alice Paul emerged as important
leaders whose work helped move the Nineteenth Amendment forward, although they
pursued very different strategies.

Entry of the United States into World War I helped to shift public perception
of women's suffrage. The National American Woman Suffrage Association, led by
Carrie Chapman Catt, supported the war effort, making the case that women
should be rewarded with enfranchisement for their patriotic wartime service.
The National Woman's Party staged marches, demonstrations, and hunger strikes
while pointing out the contradictions of fighting abroad for democracy while
limiting it at home by denying women the right to vote. The work of both
organizations swayed public opinion, prompting President Wilson to announce
his support of the suffrage amendment in 1918. The Nineteenth Amendment
enfranchised 26 million American women in time for the 1920 U.S. presidential
election, but the powerful women's voting bloc that many politicians feared
failed to fully materialize. As well, the Nineteenth Amendment failed to fully
enfranchise African American, Asian American, Latin American, and Native
American women.

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Text
          * 2 Background
            * 2.1 Early woman suffrage efforts
            * 2.2 Reconstruction Amendments and woman suffrage
            * 2.3 Suffrage in western states
            * 2.4 Post-Reconstruction
            * 2.5 African-American woman suffrage efforts
            * 2.6 Nineteenth Amendment suffrage in literature of early 20th century
          * 3 Proposal and ratification
            * 3.1 A new focus on a federal amendment
            * 3.2 Woman suffrage and World War I patriotism
            * 3.3 Final congressional challenges
            * 3.4 Ratification
            * 3.5 Ratification timeline
          * 4 Legal challenges
            * 4.1 _Leser v Garnett_
            * 4.2 _Fairchild v Hughes_
          * 5 Effects
            * 5.1 Women's voting behavior
            * 5.2 Limitations
              * 5.2.1 African-American women
              * 5.2.2 Other minority groups
              * 5.2.3 Other limitations
          * 6 Legacy
            * 6.1 League of Women Voters
            * 6.2 Equal Rights Amendment
            * 6.3 Commemorations
            * 6.4 Popular culture
          * 7 See also
          * 8 Notes
          * 9 References
            * 9.1 Citations
            * 9.2 Bibliography
          * 10 External links
        

## Text

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/19th_Amendment_Pg1of1_AC.jpg/190px-19th_Amendment_Pg1of1_AC.jpg)

Nineteenth Amendment in the National Archives

> The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.  
>

>

> Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate
legislation.[1]

## Background

### Early woman suffrage efforts

Main article: Women's suffrage in the United States

The United States Constitution, adopted in 1789, left the boundaries of
suffrage undefined. The only directly elected body created under the original
Constitution was the U.S. House of Representatives, for which voter
qualifications were explicitly delegated to the individual states.[note 1]
While women had the right to vote in several of the early colonies in what
would become the United States, after 1776, with the exception of New Jersey,
all states adopted constitutions that denied voting rights to women. New
Jersey's constitution initially granted suffrage to property-holding
residents, including single and married women, but the state rescinded women's
voting rights in 1807 and did not restore them until New Jersey ratified the
Nineteenth Amendment in 1920.[2]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Women%27s_Rights_Convention_-

WomensMarch_-WomensMarch2018_-SenecaFalls_-NY_%2828029155839%29.jpg/220px-

Women%27s_Rights_Convention_-WomensMarch_-WomensMarch2018_-SenecaFalls_-

NY_%2828029155839%29.jpg)

Text of the small ad that attracted a wide and diverse meeting of women and
men at the first Women's Rights Convention, held in Seneca Falls, NY during
July 1848.

While scattered movements and organizations dedicated to women's rights
existed previously, the 1848 Seneca Falls Convention in New York is
traditionally held as the start of the American women's rights movement.
Attended by nearly 300 women and men, the convention was designed to "discuss
the social, civil, and religious rights of women", and culminated in the
adoption of the Declaration of Sentiments.[3] Signed by 68 women and 32 men,
the Declaration called for equality of the sexes and addressed sixteen areas
in which U.S. women experienced oppression. The ninth of the document's twelve
resolved clauses reads, "Resolved, That it is the duty of the women of this
country to secure to themselves their sacred right to the elective
franchise."[4] This was the only clause that did not receive unanimous support
by the convention's attendees, and passed by only a small majority.[5] While
some attendees said that failure to enfranchise women was central to women's
full equality, others felt this was too radical and could undermine efforts to
successfully address the other issues raised in the Declaration. Some
therefore chose not to sign the document or later removed their support of the
Declaration of Sentiments.[6] Conveners Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady
Stanton became key early leaders in the U.S. women's suffrage movement, often
referred to at the time as the "woman suffrage movement". The Seneca Falls
Convention can be viewed as a foundational event in the movement for women's
suffrage at the federal level in the United States.[7][8] Lucretia Mott spent
the summer of 1948 with the Seneca Nation, one of the six tribes in the
Iroquois Confederacy, which gave women significant political power, including
the right to choose and remove chiefs, and veto acts of war, among other
powers. Mott witnessed the impact of women voting on the Seneca Nation's
political life, and brought those insights with her to the Seneca Falls
convention later that year. [9]

Activism addressing federal women's suffrage was minimal during the Civil War.
In 1865, at the conclusion of the war, a "Petition for Universal Suffrage",
signed by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, among others, called
for a national constitutional amendment to "prohibit the several states from
disenfranchising any of their citizens on the ground of sex".[10] The campaign
was the first national petition drive to feature woman suffrage among its
demands.[11] While suffrage bills were introduced into many state legislatures
during this period, they were generally disregarded and few came to a
vote.[12]

### Reconstruction Amendments and woman suffrage

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fd/Elizabeth_Cady_Stanton_and_Susan_B._Anthony.jpg/220px-

Elizabeth_Cady_Stanton_and_Susan_B._Anthony.jpg)

Elizabeth Cady Stanton (seated) with Susan B. Anthony (standing)

The women's suffrage movement, delayed by the American Civil War, resumed
activities during the Reconstruction era (1865–1877). They included the
formation of two rival suffrage organizations in 1869: the National Woman
Suffrage Association (NWSA), led by suffrage leaders Elizabeth Cady Stanton
and Susan B. Anthony, and the American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA), led
by Lucy Stone.[13] Each organization had its own agenda and employed different
strategies.[14] The NWSA's main effort was lobbying Congress for a women's
suffrage amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The AWSA generally focused on a
long-term effort of state campaigns to achieve women's suffrage on a state-by-
state basis.[15]

During the Reconstruction era, women's rights leaders advocated for inclusion
of universal suffrage as a civil right in the Reconstruction Amendments (the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments). Despite their efforts,
these amendments did not enfranchise women.[13][16] Section 2 of the
Fourteenth Amendment explicitly discriminated between men and women by
penalizing states which deprived adult male citizens of the vote, but not for
denying the vote to adult female citizens.[note 2]

The NWSA attempted several unsuccessful court challenges in the mid-1870s.[17]
Their legal argument, known as the "New Departure" strategy, contended that
the Fourteenth Amendment (granting universal citizenship) and Fifteenth
Amendment (granting the vote irrespective of race) together guaranteed voting
rights to women.[18] The U.S. Supreme Court rejected this argument. In
_Bradwell v. Illinois_ , 83 U.S. 130 (1873), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
the Supreme Court of Illinois's refusal to grant Myra Bradwell a license to
practice law was not a violation of the U.S. Constitution and refused to
extend federal authority in support of women's citizenship rights.[note 3] In
_Minor v. Happersett_ , 88 U.S. 162 (1874), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment did not
provide voting rights to U.S. citizens; it only guaranteed additional
protection of privileges to citizens who already had them. If a state
constitution limited suffrage to male citizens of the United States, then
women in that state did not have voting rights.[19] After U.S. Supreme Court
decisions between 1873 and 1875 denied voting rights to women in connection
with the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments, suffrage groups shifted their
efforts to advocating for a new constitutional amendment.[18]

### Suffrage in western states

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Woman_suffrage_in_Wyoming_Territory._-_Scene_at_the_polls_in_Cheyenne_-

_from_a_photo._by_Kirkland._LCCN92516129.jpg/220px-

Woman_suffrage_in_Wyoming_Territory._-_Scene_at_the_polls_in_Cheyenne_-

_from_a_photo._by_Kirkland._LCCN92516129.jpg)

Woman suffrage in Wyoming Territory; scene at the polls in Cheyenne, from a
photo.

Continued settlement of the western frontier, along with the establishment of
territorial constitutions, allowed the women's suffrage issue to be raised as
the western territories progressed toward statehood. Through the activism of
suffrage organizations and independent political parties, women's suffrage was
included in the constitutions of Wyoming Territory (1869), Utah Territory
(1870), and Washington Territory (1883).[16][20] In the late 1800s, women's
suffrage in the American West was viewed as a way to attract new settlers and
it was hoped that the presence of more women in the territories would provide
a civilizing influence on the region. Women's suffrage also satisfied other
political goals in the western states. In the Utah Territory, for example,
women were granted voting rights in order to maintain a Mormon voting
majority. Women's suffrage was however revoked in the territory in 1887, when
Congress passed the Edmunds-Tucker Act that also prohibited polygamy. Women's
suffrage was not restored in Utah until it achieved statehood in 1896.[14][20]

Existing state legislatures in the West, as well as those east of the
Mississippi River, began to consider suffrage bills in the 1870s and 1880s.
Several held voter referendums, but they were unsuccessful[17] until the
suffrage movement was revived in the 1890s. Full women's suffrage continued in
Wyoming after it became a state in 1890. Colorado granted partial voting
rights that allowed women to vote in school board elections in 1893 and Idaho
granted women suffrage in 1896. Beginning with Washington in 1910, seven more
western states passed women's suffrage legislation, including California in
1911, Oregon, Arizona, and Kansas in 1912, Alaska in 1913, and Montana and
Nevada in 1914. Not all women in the western states were in favor of women's
suffrage and not all western states granted full suffrage to women before
final ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920. However, all of the
states that were successful in securing full voting rights for women before
1920 were located in the west.[14][21]

### Post-Reconstruction

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/Elizabeth_Cady_Stanton_before_the_Senate_Committee_on_Privileges_and_Elections_cph.3b08655.jpg/220px-

Elizabeth_Cady_Stanton_before_the_Senate_Committee_on_Privileges_and_Elections_cph.3b08655.jpg)

Elizabeth Cady Stanton before the Senate Committee on Privileges and
Elections. _New York Daily Graphic_ , January 16, 1878, p. 501.

A federal amendment intended to grant women the right to vote was introduced
in the U.S. Senate for the first time in 1878 by A.A. Sargent, the senator
from California. Sargent, who had met and befriended Anthony on a train ride
in 1872, was a dedicated women's suffrage advocate.[22] Stanton and other
women testified before the Senate in support of the amendment.[23] The
proposal sat in a committee until it was considered by the full Senate and
rejected in a 16-to-34 vote in 1887.[24] An amendment proposed in 1888 in the
U.S. House of Representatives called for limited suffrage for women who were
spinsters or widows who owned property.[25]

By the 1890s, suffrage leaders began to recognize the need to broaden their
base of support to achieve success in passing suffrage legislation at the
national, state, and local levels. While western women, state suffrage
organizations, and the AWSA concentrated on securing women's voting rights for
specific states, efforts at the national level persisted through a strategy of
congressional testimony, petitioning, and lobbying.[26][27] After the AWSA and
NAWSA merged in 1890 to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association,
the group directed its efforts to win state-level support for suffrage.[28]
Suffragists had to campaign publicly for the vote, in order to convince male
voters, state legislators, and members of Congress that American women wanted
to be enfranchised and that women voters would benefit American society.
Suffrage supporters also had to convince American women, many of whom were
indifferent to the issue, that suffrage was something they wanted. Apathy
among women was an ongoing obstacle that the suffragists had to overcome
through organized grassroots efforts.[29] Despite the suffragists' efforts, no
state granted women suffrage between 1896 and 1910, and the NAWSA shifted its
focus toward passage of a national constitutional amendment.[28] Suffragists
also continued to press for the right to vote in individual states and
territories while retaining the goal of federal recognition.[24]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Mary_church_terrell.jpg/220px-

Mary_church_terrell.jpg)

Suffragist and civil rights activist Mary Church Terrell

### African-American woman suffrage efforts

Main article: African-American women's suffrage movement

Thousands of African-American women were active in the suffrage movement,
addressing issues of race, gender, and class, as well as enfranchisement. [30]
often through the Black church but eventually through organizations devoted to
specific causes.[31] While white women sought the vote to gain an equal voice
in the political process, African-American women often sought the vote as a
means of racial uplift and as a way to effect change in the post-
reconstruction era.[32][33] Notable African-American suffragists such as Mary
Church Terrell, Sojourner Truth, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Fannie Barrier
Williams, and Ida B. Wells-Barnett advocated for suffrage in tandem with civil
rights for African-Americans.[30]

As early as 1866, in Philadelphia, Margaretta Forten and Harriet Forten Purvis
helped to found the Philadelphia Suffrage Association; Purvis would go on to
serve on the executive committee of the American Equal Rights Association
(AERA), an organization that supported suffrage for women and for African-
American men.[34] A national movement in support of suffrage for African-
American women began in earnest with the rise of the black women’s club
movement.[32] In 1896, club women belonging to various organizations promoting
women’s suffrage met in Washington, D.C. to form the National Association of
Colored Women, of which Francis E.W. Harper, Josephine St. Pierre, Harriet
Tubman and Ida B. Wells Barnett were founding members.[35] Led by Mary Church
Terrell, it was the largest federation of African-American women’s clubs in
the nation.[32] After 1914 it became the National Association of Colored
Women's Clubs.[36] Their motto, "Lifting As We Climb", referred to their
temperance and woman's suffrage efforts which they shared with their white
sister organizations, but the Association also fought for dismantlement of
"Jim Crow" laws and improved childcare, education and housing.[35] The Equal
Suffrage League, founded in the late 1880s by Sarah J. Garnet in Brooklyn, New
York,[37] counted among its members Mary McLoed Bethune, later a presidential
advisor to Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt.[38] The League's affiliation with
the National Association of Colored Women came about when Garnet served as
Superintendent of the Association's Suffrage Department; the League dissolved
with Garnet's death in 1911.[37]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Banner_with_the_National_Association_of_Colored_Women%E2%80%99s_Clubs%27_motto.jpg/220px-

Banner_with_the_National_Association_of_Colored_Women%E2%80%99s_Clubs%27_motto.jpg)

Banner with the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs' motto

When the Fifthteenth Amendment enfranchised African-American men, Elizabeth
Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony abandoned the AERA, which supported
universal suffrage, to found the National Woman Suffrage Association in 1869,
stating that Black men should not receive the vote before white women.[34] In
response, African-American suffragist Frances Ellen Watkins Harper and others
joined the American Woman Suffrage Association, which was formed in the same
year and supported suffrage for women and for Black men. Mary Ann Shadd Cary,
the second African-American woman to receive a degree from Howard University
Law School, joined the National Woman Suffrage Association in 1878 when she
delivered their convention's keynote address.[38] Tensions between African-
American and white suffragists persisted, even after the NWSA and AWSA merged
to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association in 1890.[34] By the
early 1900s, white suffragists often adopted strategies designed to appease
the Southern states, at the expense of African-American women.[39][40] At
conventions in 1901 and 1903, in Atlanta and New Orleans, NAWSA prevented
African Americans from attending. At the 1911 national NAWSA conference,
Martha Gruening asked the organization to formally denounce white supremacy.
NAWSA president Anna Howard Shaw refused, saying that she was “in favor of
colored people voting,” but did not want to alienate others in the suffrage
movement.[41] Even NAWSA’s more radical Congressional Committee, led by Alice
Paul, which would later split to become the National Woman's Party, failed
African-American women, most visibly by refusing to allow them to march in the
nation’s first suffrage parade in Washington, D.C. While the NAWSA directed
Paul not exclude African-American participants, 72 hours before the parade
African-American women were directed to the back of the parade; Ida B. Wells
joined the Illinois unit, prompting telegrams of support.[41]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/Nannie_Burroughs%2C_Woman%27s_National_Baptist_Convention.jpg/220px-

Nannie_Burroughs%2C_Woman%27s_National_Baptist_Convention.jpg)

Nannie Helen Burroughs holding a Woman's National Baptist Convention banner.

Mary B. Talbert, a leader in both the NACW and NAACP, and Nannie Helen
Burroughs, an educator and activist, contributed to an issue of the _Crisis_ ,
published by W.E.B. Du Bois in August, 1915.[41] They wrote passionately about
African-American women’s need for the vote. Burroughs, asked what women could
do with the ballot, responded pointedly: “What can she do without it?” [41]

### Nineteenth Amendment suffrage in literature of early 20th century

A body of popular literature written during the first decades of the 20th
century developed around the idea of an amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Plays include George Middleton’s one act farce _Back of the Ballot_ (1915),
Elizabeth Robins’s _Votes for Women!_ (1907), Marion Craig Wentworth's _War
Brides: a play in one_ act (1915), and Gilson Willets, _Your Girl and Mine: a
play in one act_ (1914). Novels include Gertrude Atherton’s _Julia France and
Her Times_ (1912), Margaret Deland’s _The Rising Tide_ (1916), Marietta
Holley’s _Samantha on the Woman Question_ (1913), Inez Haynes Irwin's _Angel-
Island (1913),_ Elizabeth Robins’ _The Convert_ (1907), Caroline Abbot
Stanley's _A Modern Madonna_ (1906) (described as the “American Suffrage
Novel”), Helen L. Winslow's _A Woman for Mayor: A Novel of Today_ , 1909.[42]
_The Sturdy Oak_ (1916) was a collaborative novel with 25 authors including
Dorothy Canfield, Elizabeth Jordan, Samuel Merwin, Kathleen Norris and Henry
Leon Wilson. Based on a parlor game where a story is started by one to be
continued by another, _The Sturdy Oak_ was dedicated to Anna Howard Shaw,
former vice-president and president of the National American Woman Suffrage
Association and appeared in serial form in _Collier’s Weekly_ in 1917.[42] In
non-fiction, the six volumes of _The History of Woman Suffrage_ (1871–1922)
was edited in three parts: the first three volumes were edited by Susan B.
Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Matilda Jocelyn Gage in 1871 and 1872; the
fourth volume was edited by Anthony with Ida Husted Harper as her assistant
and published in 1902; and volumes five and six were edited by Harper 20 years
later and include the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment.[43]

## Proposal and ratification

### A new focus on a federal amendment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Carrie_Chapman_Catt_-

_National_Woman%27s_Party_Records.jpg/220px-Carrie_Chapman_Catt_-

_National_Woman%27s_Party_Records.jpg)

Carrie Chapman Catt, President of the National American Woman Suffrage
Association, organized the "Winning Plan" that helped secure passage of the
Nineteenth Amendment.

In 1900, Carrie Chapman Catt succeeded Susan B. Anthony as the president of
the National American Woman Suffrage Association. Catt revitalized NAWSA,
turning the focus of the organization to the passage of the federal amendment
while simultaneously supporting women who wanted to pressure their states to
pass suffrage legislation. The strategy, which she later called "The Winning
Plan", had several goals: women in states that had already granted
presidential suffrage (the right to vote for the President) would focus on
passing a federal suffrage amendment; women who believed they could influence
their state legislatures would focus on amending their state constitutions and
Southern states would focus on gaining primary suffrage (the right to vote in
state primaries).[44] Simultaneously, the NAWSA worked to elect congressmen
who supported suffrage for women.[39] By 1915, NAWSA was a large, powerful
organization, with 44 state chapters and over 2 million members.[44]

In a break with NAWSA, Alice Paul and Lucy Burns founded the Congressional
Union for Women Suffrage in 1913 to pressure the federal government to take
legislative action. One of their first acts was to organize a women's suffrage
parade in Washington, D.C. on March 3, 1913, the day before Woodrow Wilson's
inauguration. The procession of more than 5,000 participants, the first of its
kind, attracted a crowd of an estimated 500,000, as well as national media
attention, but Wilson took no immediate action. In March 1917, the
Congressional Union joined with Women's Party of Western Voters to form the
National Woman's Party (NWP), whose aggressive tactics included staging more
radical acts of civil disobedience and controversial demonstrations to draw
more attention to the women's suffrage issue.[45]

### Woman suffrage and World War I patriotism

When World War I started in 1914, women in eight states had already won the
right to vote, but support for a federal amendment was still tepid. The war
provided a new urgency to the fight for the vote. When the U.S. entered World
War I, Catt made the controversial decision to support the war effort, despite
the widespread pacifist sentiment of many of her colleagues and
supporters.[46] As women joined the labor force to replace men serving in the
military and took visible positions as nurses, relief workers, and ambulance
drivers[47] to support the war effort, NAWSA organizers argued that women's
sacrifices made them deserving of the vote. By contrast, the NWP used the war
to point out the contradictions of fighting for democracy abroad while
restricting it at home.[39] In 1917, the NWP began picketing the White House
to bring attention to the cause of women's suffrage.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Women_suffragists_picketing_in_front_of_the_White_house.jpg/220px-

Women_suffragists_picketing_in_front_of_the_White_house.jpg)

"Silent sentinels" begin 2 1/2 year campaign in front of the White House
(1917).

In 1914 the constitutional amendment proposed by Sargent, which was nicknamed
the "Susan B. Anthony Amendment", was once again considered by the Senate,
where it was again rejected.[24] In April 1917 the "Anthony Amendment," which
eventually became the Nineteenth Amendment, was reintroduced in the U.S. House
and Senate. Picketing NWP members, nicknamed the "Silent Sentinels", continued
their protests on the sidewalks outside the White House. On July 4, 1917,
police arrested 168 of the protesters, who were sent to prison in Lorton,
Virginia. Some of these women, including Lucy Burns and Alice Paul, went on
hunger strikes; some were force fed while others were otherwise harshly
treated by prison guards. The release of the women a few months later was
largely due to increasing public pressure.[45]

### Final congressional challenges

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b7/Allender_President_Wilson_says_1917_%28cropped%29.jpg/220px-

Allender_President_Wilson_says_1917_%28cropped%29.jpg)

Nina Allender political cartoon aimed at President Wilson published in _The
Suffragist_ on October 3, 1917.

In 1918, President Wilson faced a difficult midterm election and would have to
confront the issue of women's suffrage directly.[39] Fifteen states had
extended equal voting rights to women and, by this time, the President fully
supported the federal amendment.[48][49] A proposal brought before the House
in January 1918 passed by only one vote. The vote was then carried into the
Senate where Wilson made an appeal on the Senate floor, an unprecedented
action at the time.[50] In a short speech, the President tied women's right to
vote directly to the war, asking, "Shall we admit them only to a partnership
of suffering and sacrifice and toil and not to a partnership of privilege and
right?"[39] On September 30, 1918, the proposal fell two votes short of
passage, prompting the NWP to direct campaigning to senators who had voted
against the amendment.[49]

Between January 1918 and June 1919, the House and Senate voted on the federal
amendment five times.[39][50][51] Each vote was extremely close and Southern
Democrats continued to oppose giving women the vote.[50] Suffragists pressured
President Wilson to call a special session of Congress and he agreed to
schedule one for May 19, 1919. On May 21, 1919, the amendment passed the House
304 to 89, with 42 votes more than was necessary.[52] On June 4, 1919, it was
brought before the Senate and, after Southern Democrats abandoned a
filibuster,[39] 37 Republican senators joined 19 Democrats to pass the
amendment with 56 ayes and 25 nays.[53]

### Ratification

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Map_of_US_Suffrage%2C_1920.svg/350px-

Map_of_US_Suffrage%2C_1920.svg.png)

Highest level of women's suffrage laws just before adoption of the Nineteenth
Amendment:[54][55]

Full suffrage

Presidential suffrage

Primary suffrage

Municipal suffrage

School, bond, or tax suffrage

Municipal suffrage in some cities

Primary suffrage in some cities

No suffrage

Carrie Chapman Catt and Alice Paul immediately mobilized members of the NAWSA
and NWP to pressure states to ratify the amendment. Within a few days,
Illinois, Wisconsin, and Michigan did so, their legislatures being in session.
By July, Montana, Arkansas, and Nebraska had approved ratification.[52] In
other states support proved more difficult to secure. Much of the opposition
to the amendment came from Southern Democrats; only one southern state (Texas)
and four border states had voted for ratification.[39] Alabama and Georgia
were the first states to defeat ratification. The governor of Louisiana worked
to organize 13 states to resist ratifying the amendment. The Maryland
legislature refused to ratify the amendment and attempted to prevent other
states from doing so. Carrie Catt began appealing to Western governors,
encouraging them to act swiftly. By the end of 1919, a total of 22 states had
ratified the amendment.[52]

Resistance to ratification took many forms: anti-suffragists continued to
state that the amendment would never be approved by the November, 1920
elections and that special sessions were a waste of time and effort. Other
opponents to ratification filed lawsuits requiring the federal amendment to be
approved by state referendums. By June, 1920, after intense lobbying by both
the NAWSA and the NWP, the amendment was ratified by 35 of the necessary 36
state legislatures.[52] Ratification would be determined by Tennessee. In the
middle of July, 1919, both opponents and supporters of the Anthony Amendment
arrived in Nashville to lobby the General Assembly. Carrie Catt, representing
the NAWSA, worked with state suffragist leaders, including Anne Dallas Dudley
and Abby Crawford Milton. Sue Shelton White, a Tennessee native who had
participated in protests at the White House and toured with the Prison
Special, represented the NWP.[56] Opposing them were the "Antis", in
particular, Josephine Pearson, state president of the Southern Women's
Rejection League of the Susan. B. Anthony Amendment, who had served as dean
and chair of philosophy at Christian College in Columbia.[40] Pearson was
assisted by Anne Pleasant, president of the Louisiana Women's Rejection League
and the wife of a former Louisiana governor. Especially in the South, the
question of women's suffrage was closely tied to issues of race.[57] While
both white and African-American women worked toward women's suffrage, some
white suffragists tried to appease southern states by arguing that votes for
women could counter the black vote, strengthening white supremacy.[39] For the
anti-suffragists in the south (the "Antis"), the federal amendment was viewed
as a "Force Bill", one that Congress could use to enforce voting provisions
not only for women, but for African-American men who were still effectively
disenfranchised even after passage of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.
Carrie Catt warned suffrage leaders in Tennessee that the "Anti-Suffs" would
rely on "lies, innuendoes, and near truths", raising the issue of race as a
powerful factor in their arguments.[40]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/af/National_Anti-

Suffrage_Association_LCCN97500067.tif/lossy-page1-220px-National_Anti-

Suffrage_Association_LCCN97500067.tif.jpg)

An office of the Anti-Suffragist movement.

Prior to the start of the General Assembly session on August 9, both
supporters and opponents had lobbied members of the Tennessee Senate and House
of Representatives. Though the Democratic governor of Tennessee, Albert H.
Roberts, supported ratification, most lawmakers were still undecided. Anti-
suffragists targeted members, meeting their trains as they arrived in
Nashville to make their case. When the General Assembly convened on August 9,
both supporters and opponents set up stations outside of chambers, handing out
yellow roses to suffrage supporters and red roses to the "Antis". On August
12, the legislature held hearings on the suffrage proposal; the next day the
Senate voted 24-5 in favor of ratification. As the House prepared to take up
the issue of ratification on August 18, lobbying intensified.[56] House
Speaker Seth M. Walker attempted to table the ratification resolution, but was
defeated twice, with a vote of 48-48. The vote on the resolution would be
close. Representative Harry Burn, a Republican, had voted to table the
resolution both times. When the vote was held again, Burn voted yes. The
24-year-old said he supported women's suffrage as a "moral right", but had
voted against it because he believed his constituents opposed it. In the final
minutes before the vote, he received a note from his mother, urging him to
vote yes. Rumors immediately circulated that Burns and other lawmakers had
been bribed, but newspaper reporters found no evidence of this.[56]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Anti-

suffrage_postcard-_Suffragists_on_the_warpath.jpg/220px-Anti-

suffrage_postcard-_Suffragists_on_the_warpath.jpg)

Anti-suffrage postcard: Suffragists on the warpath

The same day that ratification passed in the General Assembly, Speaker Walker
filed a motion to reconsider. When it became clear that he did not have enough
votes to carry the motion, representatives opposing suffrage boarded a train,
fleeing Nashville for Decatur, Alabama to block the House from taking action
on the reconsideration motion by preventing a quorum. Thirty-seven legislators
fled to Decatur, issuing a statement that ratifying the amendment would
violate their oath to defend the state constitution.[56] The ploy failed and
when the House reconvened to take the final procedural steps that would
reaffirm ratification, Tennessee suffragists sat at the desks of the missing
Anti delegates.[40]

On August 18, 1920, Tennessee narrowly approved the Nineteenth Amendment, with
50 of 99 members of the Tennessee House of Representatives voting yes.[48][58]
Upon signing the ratification certificate, the Governor of Tennessee sent it
by registered mail to the U.S. Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby, whose
office received it at 4:00 a.m. on August 26, 1920. Once certified as correct,
Bainbridge signed the Proclamation of the Women's Suffrage Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution in the presence of his secretary only, making the Nineteenth
Amendment officially law as of that date.[59] This provided the final
ratification necessary to add the amendment to the Constitution,[60] making
the United States the twenty-seventh country in the world to give women the
right to vote.[14]

### Ratification timeline

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c2/Sewing_stars_on_suffrage_flag_LCCN2016827559.jpg/220px-

Sewing_stars_on_suffrage_flag_LCCN2016827559.jpg)

Alice Paul and other suffragists sewing stars on suffrage flag for each state
as Nineteenth Amendment is ratified.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/19th_Amendment_Voting_Badge-

Harding_Coolidge_Ticket_1920.png/220px-19th_Amendment_Voting_Badge-

Harding_Coolidge_Ticket_1920.png)

"I Cast My First Vote" 19th Amendment Women's Suffrage Badge, Nov. 2, 1920

Congress proposed the Nineteenth Amendment on June 4, 1919, and the following
states ratified the amendment.[61][62]

        
                  1. Illinois (June 10, 1919)[63][64][note 4]
          2. Wisconsin (June 10, 1919)[63][64]
          3. Michigan (June 10, 1919)[65]
          4. Kansas (June 16, 1919)[66]
          5. Ohio (June 16, 1919)[67][68][69]
          6. New York (June 16, 1919)[70]
          7. Pennsylvania (June 24, 1919)[69]
          8. Massachusetts (June 25, 1919)[69]
          9. Texas (June 28, 1919)[69]
          10. Iowa (July 2, 1919)[note 5]
          11. Missouri (July 3, 1919)
          12. Arkansas (July 28, 1919)[71]
          13. Montana (July 30, 1919)[71] (August 2, 1919);[note 5][note 6]
          14. Nebraska (August 2, 1919)[71]
          15. Minnesota (September 8, 1919)
          16. New Hampshire (September 10, 1919)[note 5]
          17. Utah (September 30, 1919)[72]
          18. California (November 1, 1919)[71]
          19. Maine (November 5, 1919)[73]
          20. North Dakota (December 1, 1919)[71]
          21. South Dakota (December 4, 1919)[73]
          22. Colorado (December 12, 1919)[71] (December 15, 1919)[note 5]
          23. Kentucky (January 6, 1920)[71]
          24. Rhode Island (January 6, 1920)[71]
          25. Oregon (January 12, 1920)[74]
          26. Indiana (January 16, 1920)[75][76]
          27. Wyoming (January 26, 1920)[77][note 7]
          28. Nevada (February 7, 1920)[71]
          29. New Jersey (February 9, 1920)[77][note 8]
          30. Idaho (February 11, 1920)[77]
          31. Arizona (February 12, 1920)[77]
          32. New Mexico (February 16, 1920)[77][note 9]
          33. Oklahoma (February 23, 1920)[78][note 10]
          34. West Virginia (March 10, 1920, confirmed on September 21, 1920)[note 11]
          35. Washington (March 22, 1920)[note 12]
          36. Tennessee (August 18, 1920)[79][note 13][80]
        

States that subsequently ratified the amendment:[61]

        
                  1. Connecticut (September 14, 1920, reaffirmed on September 21, 1920)
          2. Vermont (February 8, 1921)
          3. Delaware (March 6, 1923, after being rejected on June 2, 1920)
          4. Maryland (March 29, 1941, after being rejected on February 24, 1920; not certified until February 25, 1958)
          5. Virginia (February 21, 1952, after being rejected on February 12, 1920)
          6. Alabama (September 8, 1953, after being rejected on September 22, 1919)
          7. Florida (May 13, 1969)[81]
          8. South Carolina (July 1, 1969, after being rejected on January 28, 1920; not certified until August 22, 1973)
          9. Georgia (February 20, 1970, after being rejected on July 24, 1919)
          10. Louisiana (June 11, 1970, after being rejected on July 1, 1920)
          11. North Carolina (May 6, 1971)
          12. Mississippi (March 22, 1984, after being rejected on March 29, 1920)
        

## Legal challenges

### _Leser v Garnett_

The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously upheld the amendment's validity in _Leser
v. Garnett_ , 258 U.S. 130 (1922).[82] Maryland citizens Mary D. Randolph, "'a
colored female citizen' of 331 West Biddle Street,"[83] and Cecilia Street
Waters, "a white woman, of 824 North Eutaw Street",[83] applied for and were
granted registration as qualified Baltimore voters on October 12, 1920. To
have their names removed from the list of qualified voters, Oscar Leser and
others brought suit against the two women on the sole grounds that they were
women, arguing that they were not eligible to vote because the Constitution of
Maryland limited suffrage to men[84] and the Maryland legislature had refused
to vote to ratify the Nineteenth Amendment. Two months before, on August 26,
1920, the federal government had proclaimed the amendment incorporated into
the Constitution.[82]

Leser stated that the national amendment "destroyed State autonomy" because it
increased Maryland's electorate without the state's consent. The U.S. Supreme
Court answered that the Nineteenth Amendment had similar wording to the
Fifteenth Amendment, which had expanded state electorates without regard to
race for more than 50 years by that time despite being rejected by six states,
including Maryland.[82][85] Leser further argued that the state constitutions
in some ratifying states did not allow their legislatures to ratify. The Court
replied that state ratification was a federal function granted under Article V
of the U.S. Constitution and not subject to a state constitution's
limitations. Finally, those bringing suit asserted the Nineteenth Amendment
was not adopted because Tennessee and West Virginia violated their own rules
of procedure. The Court ruled that the point was moot because Connecticut and
Vermont had subsequently ratified the amendment, providing a sufficient number
of state ratifications to adopt the Nineteenth Amendment even without
Tennessee and West Virginia. The Court also ruled that Tennessee's and West
Virginia's certifications of their state ratifications was binding and had
been duly authenticated by the U.S. Secretary of State. As a result of the
Court's ruling, Randolph and Waters were permitted to become registered voters
in Baltimore.[82]

### _Fairchild v Hughes_

_Fairchild v. Hughes_ , 258 U.S. 126 (1922),[86] was a case in which the
Supreme Court of the United States held that a general citizen, in a state
that already had women's suffrage, lacked standing to challenge the validity
of the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment. On July 7, 1920, Charles S.
Fairchild challenged the validity of the ratification process for the
Nineteenth Amendment in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia. The
district court dismissed the case on July 20, and Fairchild appealed. On
August 26, Hughes acknowledged Tennessee's ratification, and the Nineteenth
Amendment became law. The Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court decision.
The case was appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard arguments in November,
1922.[87][88] In February, the Court announced a unanimous decision authored
by Associate Justice Louis Brandeis, concluding that Fairchild, as a private
citizen, lacked standing to challenge the amendment's ratification under the
limitations of the Case or Controversy Clause of Article III.[89]

## Effects

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/VOTE_poster_-

_Citation_Acc_22002_-_Archives_and_Manuscripts_-

_Library_of_Virginia.jpg/220px-VOTE_poster_-

_Citation_Acc_22002_-_Archives_and_Manuscripts_-_Library_of_Virginia.jpg)

VOTE poster, League of Women Voters. c.1920

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a2/Ad_targeting_female_votes_for_1920_presidential_election.jpg/220px-

Ad_targeting_female_votes_for_1920_presidential_election.jpg)

Ladies Home Journal ad targeting female votes for 1920 presidential election

### Women's voting behavior

Ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment enfranchised 26 million American
women in time for the 1920 U.S. presidential election.[90] Many legislators
feared that a powerful women's bloc would emerge in American politics. This
fear led to the passage of such laws as the Sheppard–Towner Maternity and
Infancy Protection Act of 1921, which expanded maternity care during the
1920s.[91] Newly enfranchised women and women's groups prioritized a reform
agenda rather than party loyalty and their first goal was the Sheppard-Towner
Act. It was the first federal social security law and made a dramatic
difference before it was allowed to lapse in 1929.[92] Other efforts at the
federal level in the early 1920s that related to women labor and women's
citizenship rights included the establishment of a Women's Bureau in the U.S.
Department of Labor in 1920 and passage of the Cable Act in 1922.[93] After
the U.S. presidential election in 1924, politicians realized that the women's
bloc they had feared did not actually exist and they did not need to cater to
what they considered as "women's issues" after all.[94] The eventual
appearance of an American women's voting bloc has been tracked to various
dates, depending on the source, from the 1950s[95] to 1970.[96] Around 1980, a
nationwide gender gap in voting had emerged, with women usually favoring the
Democratic candidate in presidential elections.[97]

According to political scientists J. Kevin Corder and Christina Wolbrecht, few
women turned out to vote in the first national elections after the Nineteenth
Amendment gave them the right to do so. In 1920, 36 percent of eligible women
turned out to vote (compared with 68 percent of men). The low turnout among
women was partly due to other barriers to voting, such as literacy tests, long
residency requirements and poll taxes. Inexperience with voting and persistent
beliefs that voting was inappropriate for women may also have kept turnout
low. The participation gap was lowest between men and women in swing states at
the time, in states that had closer races such as Missouri and Kentucky, and
where barriers to voting were lower.[98][99] By 1960, women were turning out
to vote in presidential elections in greater numbers than men and a trend of
higher female voting engagement has continued into 2018.[100]

### Limitations

#### African-American women

African-Americans had gained the right to vote, but for 75 percent of them it
was granted in name only, as state constitutional loopholes kept them from
exercising that right.[32] Prior to the passage of the amendment, southern
politicians held firm in their convictions to not allow African-American women
to vote.[101] They had to fight to not only secure their own right to vote,
but the right of African-American men as well.[102]

Three million women south of the Mason-Dixon line remained disfranchised after
the passage of the amendment, as voter suppression had already been well
established in the area.[101][103][104] Election officials regularly
obstructed access to the ballot box, and as newly enfranchised African-
American women attempted to register, officials increased methods of fraud,
intimidation, poll taxes, and state violence.[103] In 1926, a group of women
attempting to register in Birmingham, Alabama were beaten by officials.[105]
Incidents such as this, threats of violence and job losses, and legalized
prejudicial practices blocked women of color from voting.[106] Not until the
24th Amendment to the Constitution was ratified in 1962, were Congress and the
states prohibited from making voting conditional on poll or other taxes,
paving the way to more reforms with the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

African-Americans continued to face barriers preventing them from exercising
their vote until a new movement arose in the 1950s and 1960s, which posited
voting rights as civil rights.[101][105] Nearly a thousand civil rights
workers converged on the South to support voting rights as part of Freedom
Summer. However, state officials continued to refuse registration until the
passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which prohibited racial
discrimination in voting.[103][106] For the first time, states were forbidden
from imposing discriminatory restrictions on voting eligibility, and
mechanisms were placed allowing the federal government to enforce its
provisions.[105]

#### Other minority groups

Native Americans were granted citizenship by an Act of Congress in 1924,[107]
but state policies prohibited them from voting. In 1948, a suit brought by
World War II veteran Miguel Trujillo resulted in Native Americans gaining the
right to vote in New Mexico and Arizona,[108] but some states continued to bar
them from voting until 1957.[105]

Poll taxes and literacy tests kept Latin American women from voting. Literate
women in Puerto Rico, for example, could not vote until 1932, and universal
voting rights did not become law there until 1935. Further, the 1975
extensions of the Voting Rights Act included requiring bilingual ballots and
voting materials in certain regions, making it easier for Latin American women
to vote.[106][105]

National immigration laws prevented Asians from gaining citizenship until
1952.[105][106][45]

#### Other limitations

After passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, women still faced political
limitations. Women had to lobby their state legislators, bring lawsuits, and
engage in letter-writing campaigns to earn the right to sit on juries. In
California, women won the right to serve on juries four years after passage of
the Nineteenth Amendment. In Colorado, it took 33 years. Women continue to
face obstacles when running for elective offices, and the Equal Rights
Amendment, which would grant women equal rights under the law, has yet to be
realized.[109][110][111][112]

## Legacy

### League of Women Voters

In 1920, about six months before the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified, Emma
Smith DeVoe and Carrie Chapman Catt agreed to merge the National American
Woman Suffrage Association and the National Council of Women Voters to help
newly enfranchised women exercise their responsibilities as voters.
Originally, only women could join the league; but in 1973 the charter was
modified to include men. Today, the League of Women Voters operates at the
local, state, and national level, with over 1,000 local and 50 state leagues,
and one territory league in the U.S. Virgin Islands. Some critics and
historians question whether creating an organization dedicated to political
education rather than political action made sense in the first few years after
ratification, suggesting that the League of Women Voters diverted the energy
of activists.[40]

### Equal Rights Amendment

After the 1920 election, the NWP’s Alice Paul, Crystal Eastman, and Sue White
worked to draft the Equal Rights Amendment, a new constitutional amendment
that would guarantee equal rights under the law and prohibit discrimination
based on sex. The amendment did not have the full support of suffragists, and
was opposed by Carrie Catt and the League of Women Voters. The ERA was first
introduced into Congress in 1923, but without unified support, it floundered.
Congress eventually passed the amendment in 1972, but it failed during
ratification.[40] The amendment needs approval by legislatures in three-
fourths of the 50 states; by 2019, the ERA has been ratified by 37 of the 38
states needed for approval. The states not yet ratified are Alabama, Arkansas,
Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina,
Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah, and Virginia.[113]

### Commemorations

        
                  * ![File:Portrait Monument Video 01.webmhd.webm](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Portrait_Monument_Video_01.webmhd.webm/220px--Portrait_Monument_Video_01.webmhd.webm.jpg)Play media
        

"The Portrait Monument" (originally "Woman's Movement") by sculptress Adelaide
Johnson in the U.S. Capitol Rotunda.

A 7-and-one-half ton marble slab from a Carrara, Italy, quarry carved into
statue called the "Portrait Monument"[114] (originally known as the "Woman's
Movement"[115]) by sculptress Adelaide Johnson was unveiled at the U.S.
Capitol Rotunda on February 15, 1921, six months after the ratification of the
Nineteenth Amendment, on the 101st anniversary of Susan B. Anthony's birth,
and during the National Woman's Party's first post-ratification national
convention in Washington, D.C.[114] The Party presented it as a gift "from the
women of the U.S." The monument is installed in the Capitol Rotunda and
features busts of Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott.
Over 50 woman's groups with delegates from every state were represented at the
dedication ceremony in 1921 that was presided over by Jane Addams. After the
ceremony, the statue was moved temporarily to the Capitol Crypt, where it
stood for less than a month until Johnson discovered that an inscription
stenciled in gold lettering on the back of the monument had been removed. The
inscription read, in part: "Woman, first denied a soul, then called mindless,
now arisen declares herself an entity to be reckoned. Spiritually, the woman
movement...represents the emancipation of womanhood. The release of the
feminine principal in humanity, the moral integration of human evolution come
to rescue torn and struggling humanity from its savage self."[114] Congress
denied passage of several bills to move the statue, whose place in the Crypt
also held brooms and mops. In 1963, the Crypt was cleaned for an exhibition of
several statues including this one, which had been dubbed "The Women in the
Bathtub." In 1995 on the 75th anniversary of the Nineteenth Amendment, women's
groups renewed congressional interest in the monument and on May 14, 1997, the
statue was finally returned to the Rotunda.[116]

        
                  * On August 26, 2016, a monument commemorating Tennessee's role in providing the required 36th state ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment was unveiled in Centennial Park (Nashville) in Nashville, Tennessee.[117] The memorial, erected by the Tennessee Suffrage Monument, Inc.[118] and created by Alan LeQuire, features likenesses of suffragists who were particularly involved in securing Tennessee's ratification: Carrie Chapman Catt; Anne Dallas Dudley; Abby Crawford Milton; Juno Frankie Pierce; and Sue Shelton White.[119][40] In June 2018, the city of Knoxville, Tennessee, unveiled another sculpture by LeQuire, this one depicting 24-year-old freshman state representative Harry T. Burn and his mother. Representative Burn, at the urging of his mother, cast the deciding vote on August 18, 1920, making Tennessee the final state needed for the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment.[120]
          * In 2018, Utah launched a campaign called Better Days 2020 to "popularize Utah women's history." One of its first projects was the unveiling on the Salt Lake City capitol steps of the design for a license plate in recognition of women's suffrage. The commemorative license plate would be available for new or existing car registrations in the state. The year 2020 marks the centennial of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, as well as the 150th anniversary of the first women voting in Utah, which was the first state in the nation where women cast a ballot.[121]
          * An annual celebration of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, known as Women's Equality Day, began on August 26, 1973.[122] There usually is heightened attention and news media coverage during momentous anniversaries such as the 75th (1995) and 100th (2020), as well as in 2016 because of the presidential election.[123]
        

### Popular culture

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/56/BURNS%2C_MISS_LUCY%2C_OF_C.U.W.S._IN_JAIL_LCCN2016868634.jpg/200px-

BURNS%2C_MISS_LUCY%2C_OF_C.U.W.S._IN_JAIL_LCCN2016868634.jpg)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5e/Alice_Paul_%281915%29_by_Harris_%26_Ewing.jpg/200px-

Alice_Paul_%281915%29_by_Harris_%26_Ewing.jpg)

Lucy Burns (left, pictured while in jail) and Alice Paul (right) of the
Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage were subjects of the film _Iron Jawed
Angels_.

        
                  * The 1976 song "Sufferin' Till Suffrage" from Schoolhouse Rock!, performed by Essra Mohawk and written by Bob Dorough and Tom Yohe, states, in part, "Not a woman here could vote, no matter what age, Then the Nineteenth Amendment struck down that restrictive rule ... Yes the Nineteenth Amendment Struck down that restrictive rule."[124][125]
          * _One Woman, One Vote_ is a 1995 PBS documentary narrated by Susan Sarandon chronicling the Seneca Falls Convention through the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment.[126][127]
          * A 1999 documentary by filmmaker Ken Burns, _Not For Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth Cady Stanton & Susan B. Anthony_, used archival footage and commentary by actors Ann Dowd, Julie Harris, Sally Kellerman and Amy Madigan.[128][129]
          * _Iron Jawed Angels_ is a 2004 film depicting suffragists Alice Paul (Hilary Swank) and Lucy Burns (Frances O’Connor) as they help secure the Nineteenth Amendment.[130][131]
          * In 2013, John Green, the best-selling author of _The Fault in Our Stars_ , produced a video entitled _Women in the 19th Century: Crash Course US History #31_ , providing an overview of the women's movement leading to the Nineteenth Amendment.[132][133]
          * In 2018, various recording artists released an album called _27: The Most Perfect Album_ , featuring songs inspired by the 27 amendments to the U.S. Constitution; Dolly Parton's song inspired by the Nineteenth Amendment is called "A Woman's Right".[134][135]
          * In August 2018, former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Academy Award-winning director/producer Steven Spielberg announced plans to make a television series based on Elaine Weiss's best-selling book, _The Woman's Hour: The Great Fight to Win the Vote_.[136][137]
        

## See also

        
                  * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/32px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png)United States portal
        
          * Equal Rights Amendment
          * History of feminism
          * League of Women Voters
          * List of suffragists and suffragettes
          * List of women's rights activists
          * Timeline of women's suffrage
          * Women's rights
          * Women's suffrage in film
          * Women's suffrage in the United States
          * Women's suffrage organizations
          * Woodrow Wilson
        

## Notes

        
                  1. **^** U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section 2, states, in part: "the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature" See: "1st Amendment". Legal Information Institute, Cornell University School of Law. Retrieved May 31, 2019.
          2. **^** U.S. Constitution, Fourteenth Amendment, Section 2, states, in part: "But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the **male** inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State." (emphasis added) See: "14th Amendment". Legal Information Institute, Cornell University School of Law. Retrieved  May 31, 2019.
          3. **^** Illinois courts denied Myra Bradwell's application to practice law in that state because she was a married women and due to her marital status she could not be bound by legal contracts she made with her clients. See Baker 2009, p. 3.
          4. **^** Because of a mistake in wording in the introduction of the bill, but not the amendment itself, Illinois reaffirmed passage of the amendment on June 17 and submitted a brief to confirm that the second vote was merely a legal formality. Illinois was acknowledged by the U.S. Secretary of State as the first state to ratify the amendment. See: Harper, Ida Husted, ed. (1922). _History of Woman Suffrage_. 6: 1900-1920. Rochester, New York: J. J. Little & Ives Company for the National Woman Suffrage Association. p. 164. OCLC 963795738.
          5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Date on which approved by governor
          6. **^** Montana was not only the first Western state to ratify, it was also the first state to elect a woman to Congress. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 232.
          7. **^** Wyoming as a territory was the first globally to grant women full voting rights in 1869. In 1892, Wyoming's Theresa Jenkins was the first woman to serve as a national party convention delegate; now in 1919 she thanked Wyoming legislators for their unanimous decision to support the Nineteenth Amendment. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 233.
          8. **^** New Jersey ratified following a rally producing a petition of over 140,000 signatures supporting the state's ratification of the amendment. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 233.
          9. **^** New Mexico's ratification came a day after the hundredth anniversary of Susan B. Anthony's birth; suffragists used this centennial to lament that ratification had not yet been achieved. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 233.
          10. **^** Oklahoma's ratification followed a Presidential intervention urging legislators to ratify. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 237.
          11. **^** West Virginia's ratification followed the dramatic turnaround of a voting block instigated by state Senator Jesse A. Bloch demonstrated against by suffragists from around the nation who had descended upon the state capitol. See: Weatherford (1998), pp. 237-38.
          12. **^** Washington was holding out to have the honor of being the last state to ratify but, in the end, a female legislator brought the matter to the floor and ratification was unanimously approved in both houses. See: Weatherford (1998), p. 238.
          13. **^** Breaking a 48-48 vote tie, Tennessee's ratification passed when 24-year old Representative Harry T. Burn remembered his mother writing him to "help Mrs. [Carrie Chapman] Catt put the rat in ratification" by supporting suffrage. See: Weatherford (1998), pp. 232-43.
        

## References

### Citations

        
                  1. **^** "19th Amendment". _LII / Legal Information Institute_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          2. **^** Nenadic, Susan L. (May 2019). "Votes for Women: Suffrage in Michigan". _Michigan History_. Lansing, Michigan: Historical Society of Michigan. **103** (3): 18.
          3. **^** Keyssar, Alexander (2000). _The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States_. New York: Basic Books. p. 173.
          4. **^** "Image 8 of Report of the Woman's Rights Convention, held at Seneca Falls, New York, July 19th and 20th, 1848. Proceedings and Declaration of Sentiments". _Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA_. Retrieved  May 20, 2019.
          5. **^** _The Concise History of Woman Suffrage: Selections from History of Woman Suffrage edited by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Matilda Joslyn Gage, and the National American Woman Suffrage Association_. Buhle, Paul, 1944-, Buhle, Mari Jo, 1943-. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 2005. ISBN 978-0252072765. OCLC 60835888.CS1 maint: others (link)
          6. **^** "Seneca Falls Convention | United States history". _Encyclopedia Britannica_. Retrieved  May 20, 2019.
          7. **^** DuBois, Ellen Carol, 1947- (1998). _Woman Suffrage and Women's Rights_. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 978-0585434711. OCLC 51232208.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
          8. **^** Weber, Liz (June 3, 2019). "Women of color were cut out of the suffragist story. Historians say it's time for a reckoning". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  June 4, 2019.
          9. **^** Nordell, Jessica (November 24, 2016). "Millions of women voted this election. They have the Iroquois to thank". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  June 5, 2019.
          10. **^** United States Senate (1865). _Petition for Universal Suffrage which Asks for an Amendment to the Constitution that Shall Prohibit the Several States from Disenfranchising Any of Their Citizens on the Ground of Sex_. _National Archives Catalog_. File Unit: Petitions and Memorials, Resolutions of State Legislatures which were Presented, Read, or Tabled during the 39th Congress, 1865 - 1867. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved  July 29, 2016.
          11. **^** "Universal Suffrage". _National Archives_. August 15, 2016. Retrieved  May 21, 2019.
          12. **^** Banaszak 1996, pp. 5–6.
          13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Banaszak 1996, pp. 6–7.
          14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Mintz, Steven (July 2007). "The Passage of the Nineteenth Amendment". _OAH Magazine of History_. Organization of American Historians. **21** (3): 47. doi:10.1093/maghis/21.3.47.
          15. **^** Woloch 1984, p. 307.
          16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mead 2004, p. 2.
          17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Banaszak 1996, p. 8.
          18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mead 2004, pp. 35–38.
          19. **^** Baker 2009, p. 3.
          20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Woloch 1984, p. 333.
          21. **^** Myres, Sandra L. (1982). _Westering Women and the Frontier Experience_. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. pp. 227–30. ISBN 9780826306258.
          22. **^** Mead 2004, p. 38.
          23. **^** Amar 2005, pp. 421.
          24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Kobach, Kris (May 1994). "Woman suffrage and the Nineteenth Amendment". University of Missouri–Kansas City School of Law. See also: Excerpt from Kobach, Kris (May 1994). "Rethinking Article V: term limits and the Seventeenth and Nineteenth Amendments". _Yale Law Journal_. Yale Law School. **103** (7): 1971–2007. doi:10.2307/797019. JSTOR 797019.
          25. **^** United States House of Representatives (April 30, 1888). _House Joint Resolution (H.J. Res.) 159, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution to Extend the Right to Vote to Widows and Spinsters who are Property Holders_. _National Archives Catalog_. File Unit: Bills and Resolutions Originating in the House of Representatives during the 50th Congress, 1885 - 1887. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved  July 25, 2016.
          26. **^** Woloch 1984, pp. 325-326.
          27. **^** Banaszak 1996, pp. 133–134.
          28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Woloch 1984, p. 334.
          29. **^** Woloch 1984, p. 327.
          30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Perspective | It's time to return black women to the center of the history of women's suffrage". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          31. **^** "The Black Church". _The Black Suffragist_.
          32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Terborg-Penn, Rosalyn (1998). _African American Women in the Struggle for the Vote, 1850-1920_. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253211767.
          33. **^** Goodier, S., & Pastorello, K. (2017). A Fundamental Component: Suffrage for African American Women. In _Women Will Vote: Winning Suffrage in New York State_ (pp. 71-91). ITHACA; LONDON: Cornell University Press. 
          34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "African American Women and the Nineteenth Amendment (U.S. National Park Service)". _www.nps.gov_. Retrieved  June 5, 2019.
          35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "A National Association for Colored Women". _The Black Suffragist_.
          36. **^** "National Association of Colored Women's Clubs". _Britannica.com_.
          37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mjagkij, Nina (2001). _Organizing Black America: An Encyclopedia of African American Associations_. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc. p. 224.
          38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "SISTERHOOD: The Black Suffragist: Trailblazers of Social Justice -- A Documentary Film". _The Black Suffragist_.
          39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ Lichtman, Allan J. (2018). _The Embattled Vote in America: From the Founding to the Present_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 120. ISBN 9780674972360.
          40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Weiss, Elaine (2018). _The Woman's Hour: The Great Fight to Win the Vote_. Penguin Books. ISBN 9780143128991.
          41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Votes for Women means Votes for Black Women". _National Women's History Museum_. Retrieved  June 5, 2019.
          42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Delahaye, Claire (June 2, 2016). ""A Tract in Fiction": Woman Suffrage Literature and the Struggle for the Vote". _European Journal of American Studies [Online]_. 11-1 | 2016, document 3: 1–20  - via Open Edition Journals.
          43. **^** Baldwin, Sarah (2001). "Earnest Lives and Fearless Words: The Literature and Ideals of the Women's Rights Movement". _The Antiquarian Booksellers' Association of America_.
          44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Carrie Chapman Catt (1859-1947) | Turning Point Suffragist Memorial". Retrieved  May 21, 2019.
          45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Ault, Alicia (April 9, 2019). "How Women Got the Vote Is a Far More Complex Story Than the History Textbooks Reveal". Smithsonian.com. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
          46. **^** Evans, Sara M. (1989). _Born for Liberty: A History of Women in America_. New York: The Free Press. pp. 164–72.
          47. **^** "How World War I helped give US women the right to vote". _www.army.mil_. Retrieved  May 22, 2019.
          48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Christine Stansell. _The Feminist Promise_. New York: The Modern Library, 2011, pp. 171–174.
          49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Nineteenth Amendment | History & Facts". _Encyclopedia Britannica_. Retrieved  May 23, 2019.
          50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lunardini, C., & Knock, T. (1980). Woodrow Wilson and Woman Suffrage: A New Look. _Political Science Quarterly,_ _95_ (4), 655-671. doi:10.2307/2150609
          51. **^** "The House's 1918 Passage of a Constitutional Amendment Granting Women the Right to Vote | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". _history.house.gov_. Retrieved  May 28, 2019.
          52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Cooney, Jr., Robert P. J. (2005). _Winning the Vote: the Triumph of the American Woman Suffrage Movement_. Santa Cruz, CA: American Graphic Press. pp. 408–427. ISBN 978-0977009503.
          53. **^** "U.S. Senate: The Senate Passes the Woman Suffrage Amendment". _www.senate.gov_. Retrieved  May 23, 2019.
          54. **^** Shuler, Marjorie (September 4, 1920). "Out of Subjection Into Freedom". _The Woman Citizen_ : 360.
          55. **^** Keyssar, Alexander (August 15, 2001). _The Right to Vote_. ISBN 978-0-465-02969-3.
          56. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jones, Robert B., and Mark E. Byrnes (Fall 2009). "The "Bitterest Fight": The Tennessee General Assembly and the Nineteenth Amendment". _Tennessee Historical Quarterly_. **68** (3): 270–295. JSTOR 42628623.
          57. **^** Goodstein, A. (1998). "A Rare Alliance: African American and White Women in the Tennessee Elections of 1919 and 1920". _The Journal of Southern History_. **64** (2): 219–46. doi:10.2307/2587945.. 
          58. **^** Van West 1998.
          59. **^** Monroe, Judy (1998). _The Nineteenth Amendment: Women's Right to Vote_. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Ensloe Publishers, Inc. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-89490-922-1.
          60. **^** Hakim 1995, pp. 29–33.
          61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mount, Steve (January 2007). "Ratification of Constitutional Amendments". Retrieved February 24, 2007.
          62. **^** "Claim Wisconsin First to O.K. Suffrage". _Milwaukee Journal_. November 2, 1919. Retrieved  November 16, 2010.
          63. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Two States Ratify Votes for Women". _The Ottawa Herald_. Ottawa, Kansas. June 10, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          64. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Wisconsin O.K.'s Suffrage; Illinois First". _The Capital Times_. Madison, Wisconsin. June 10, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          65. **^** "Michigan Third to Put O.K. on Suffrage Act". _The Detroit Free Press_. Detroit, Michigan. June 10, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          66. **^** "Suffrage is Ratified". _The Independence Daily Reporter_. Independence, Kansas. June 16, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          67. **^** "Assembly to O. K. Suffrage with Dispatch". _The Dayton Daily News_. Dayton, Ohio. June 16, 1919. p. 9. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          68. **^** "Ohio Legislature Favors Suffrage". _The Fremont Daily Messenger_. Fremont, Ohio. June 17, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          69. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Weatherford 1998, p. 231.
          70. **^** "Women Suffrage Amendment Wins in Legislature (pt. 1)". _The New York Times_. New York, New York. June 17, 1919. p. 1. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png) and "Women Suffrage Amendment Wins in Legislature (pt. 2)". _The New York Times_. New York, New York. June 17, 1919. p. 9. Retrieved December 17, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          71. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ Weatherford 1998, p. 232.
          72. **^** "Utah Ratifies the Suffrage Amendment". _The Ogden Standard_. Ogden, Utah. September 30, 1919. p. 6. Retrieved December 18, 2018 - via Newspapers.com. ![open access](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg/9px-Open_Access_logo_PLoS_transparent.svg.png)
          73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Weatherford 1998, pp. 231-33.
          74. **^** Weatherford 1998, pp. 231-233.
          75. **^** Morgan, Anita (2019). "'An Act of Tardy Justice': The Story of Women's Suffrage in Indiana". Indiana Women's Suffrage Centennial. Retrieved May 14, 2019.
          76. **^** Weatherford 1998, pp. 232-233.
          77. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Weatherford 1998, p. 233.
          78. **^** Weatherford 1998, p. 237.
          79. **^** Weatherford 1998, pp. 242-243.
          80. **^** Monroe, Judy. _The Nineteenth Amendment: Women's Right to Vote_. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Ensloe Publishers, Inc. p. 75.
          81. **^** "Ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment by the Florida Legislature, 1969". Institute of Museum and Library Services. Retrieved  February 2, 2011.
          82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Anzalone 2002, p. 17.
          83. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bronson, Minnie (November 6, 1920). "Maryland League for State Defense Starts Great Suit". _The Woman Patriot, Issues 3-4_. **4** (43): 2  - via EBOOK.
          84. **^** "Leser v. Garnett page 217" (PDF). _1921 Supreme Court document_. October 1921.
          85. **^** "258 U.S. 130 - Leser v. Garnett". _OpenJurist_. Retrieved  February 7, 2011.
          86. **^** _Fairchild v. Hughes_ , 258 U.S. 126 (1922)
          87. **^** Bradeis, Louis D. (June 30, 1978). _Letters of Louis D. Brandeis: 1921-1941, Elder statesman: 1921-1941_. SUNY Press. pp. 47–. ISBN 9780873953306. Retrieved December 13, 2012.
          88. **^** Wroth, Lawrence Counselman (1921). _The Johns Hopkins Alumni Magazine: Published in the Interest of the University and the Alumni_. The Johns Hopkins Alumni Association. p. 20. Retrieved  December 13, 2012.
          89. **^** _Fairchild v. Hughes_ , 258 U.S. 126 (1922).
          90. **^** Woloch 1984, p. 354.
          91. **^** Dumenil 1995, pp. 23–30.
          92. **^** Lemons, J. Stanley (1969). "The Sheppard-Towner Act: Progressivism in the 1920s". _The Journal of American History_. **55** (4): 776–786. doi:10.2307/1900152. ISSN 0021-8723. JSTOR 1900152.
          93. **^** Baker 2009, p. 43.
          94. **^** Harvey, Anna L. (July 13, 1998). _Votes Without Leverage: Women in American Electoral Politics, 1920-1970_. Cambridge University Press. p. 157. ISBN 9780521597432.
          95. **^** Moses & Hartmann 1995, pp. xx-xxi.
          96. **^** Harvey, Anna L. (July 13, 1998). _Votes Without Leverage: Women in American Electoral Politics, 1920-1970_. Cambridge University Press. pp. 10, 210. ISBN 9780521597432.
          97. **^** "THE GENDER GAP, Voting Choices In Presidential Elections; Fact Sheet" (PDF). _Center for American Women and Politics (CAWP), Eagleton Institute of Politics, Rutgers University_. 2017.
          98. **^** "Was women's suffrage a failure? What new evidence tells us about the first women voters". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  August 26, 2016.
          99. **^** "Counting Women's Ballots". _Cambridge University Press_. Retrieved  August 26, 2016.
          100. **^** "19th Amendment: How far have women in politics come since 1920?". _Christian Science Monitor_. August 18, 2010. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Nelson, Marjory (1979). "women suffrage and race". _Off Our Backs_. **9** (10): 6–22. ISSN 0030-0071. JSTOR 25793145.
          102. **^** "African American Women and the Nineteenth Amendment (U.S. National Park Service)". _www.nps.gov_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          103. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Staples, Brent (July 28, 2018). "Opinion | How the Suffrage Movement Betrayed Black Women". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          104. **^** Fiza Pirani, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. "19 things you never knew about the 19th Amendment and women's suffrage". _ajc_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          105. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Contreras, Russell (November 1, 2018). "How the Native American Vote Evolved". _Great Falls Tribune_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Williams, Sherri. "Women's Equality Day celebrates the 19th Amendment. For nonwhite women, the fight to vote continued for decades. - The Lily". _The Lily - The Washington Post_. Retrieved  May 24, 2019.
          107. **^** "On this day, all Indians made United States citizens - National Constitution Center". _National Constitution Center – constitutioncenter.org_. Retrieved  June 6, 2019.
          108. **^** Oxford, Andrew (August 2, 2018). "It's been 70 years since court ruled Native Americans could vote in New Mexico". _Santa Fe New Mexican_. Retrieved  June 5, 2019.
          109. **^** McCammon, H., Chaudhuri, S., Hewitt, L., Muse, C., Newman, H., Smith, C., & Terrell, T. (2008). Becoming Full Citizens: The U.S. Women’s Jury Rights Campaigns, the Pace of Reform, and Strategic Adaptation. _American Journal of Sociology,_ _113_ (4), 1104-1147. doi:10.1086/522805
          110. **^** Brown, J. (1993). The Nineteenth Amendment and Women's Equality. _The Yale Law Journal,_ _102_ (8), 2175-2204. doi:10.2307/796863
          111. **^** "Current Numbers". _CAWP_. June 12, 2015. Retrieved  May 29, 2019.
          112. **^** Rohlinger, Deana. "In 2019, women's rights are still not explicitly recognized in US Constitution". _The Conversation_. Retrieved  May 29, 2019.
          113. **^** Alice Paul Institute (2018). "ERA: Ratification Info State by State". _Equal Rights Amendment_.
          114. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Goolsby, Denise (September 19, 2016). "No room for fourth bust on suffragist statue?". _Desert Sun_.
          115. **^** "The Portrait Monument". _Atlas Obscura_.
          116. **^** Boissoneault, Lorraine (May 13, 2017). "The Suffragist Statue Trapped in a Broom Closet for 75 Years: The Portrait Monument was a testament to women's struggle for the vote that remained hidden till 1997". _Smithsonian.com_.
          117. **^** Bliss, Jessica (August 26, 2016). "Alan LeQuire's Women Suffrage Monument unveiled in Nashville's Centennial Park". Nashville _Tennessean_. Retrieved  August 27, 2016.
          118. **^** "Too Few Statues of Women". _Tennessee Suffrage Monument, Inc_.
          119. **^** Randal Rust. "Woman Suffrage Movement". _Tennessee Encyclopedia_. Retrieved  May 29, 2019.
          120. **^** "Listen to your Mother: a Mom-ument". _RoadsideAmerica.com_.
          121. **^** Burt, Spencer (October 3, 2018). "New Utah license plates celebrating Utah women's suffrage now available". _Deseretnews.com_.
          122. **^** "Women's Equality Day". _National Women's History Museum_. Retrieved  May 29, 2019.
          123. **^** "Women's Equality Day | American holiday". _Encyclopedia Britannica_. Retrieved  May 29, 2019.
          124. **^** Litman, Kevin (April 25, 2018). "Bob Dorough: 9 Best 'Schoolhouse Rock!' Songs from the Composer". Inverse. Retrieved November 12, 2018.
          125. **^** "Schoolhouse Rock - Sufferin' 'til Suffrage". Schoolhouserock.tv. Retrieved  November 12, 2018.
          126. **^** "SECONDARY SOURCE - One Woman, One Vote: A PBS Documentary". _Women's Sufferage and the Media_.
          127. **^** Leab, Amber (November 4, 2008). "'One Woman, One Vote': A Documentary Review". _Bitch Flicks_.
          128. **^** Burns, Ken. "Not For Ourselves Alone". _PBS_.
          129. **^** "Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth Cady Stanton & Susan B. Anthony". _IMBd_.
          130. **^** McNeil-Walsh, Gemma (February 6, 2018). "Suffrage On Screen: Five Vital Films About How Women Won the Vote". _Rights Info: Human Rights News, Views & Info_.
          131. **^** "Iron Jawed Angels". _Rotten Tomatoes_.
          132. **^** Green, John. "Women's Suffrage: Crash Course US History #31". _CrashCourse on YouTube_.
          133. **^** "Women in the 19th Century". _IMBd_.
          134. **^** "27: The Most Perfect Album | Radiolab". WNYC Studios. September 19, 2018. Retrieved  November 12, 2018.
          135. **^** 10:01 AM (September 18, 2018). "Dolly Parton Hopes to "Uplift Women" in New Song That Highlights 19th Amendment: Women's Right to Vote [Listen]". Nash Country Daily. Retrieved November 12, 2018.
          136. **^** Nevins, Jake (August 1, 2018). "Hillary Clinton and Steven Spielberg to make TV series on women's suffrage". _The Guardian_.
          137. **^** Shoot, Brittany (August 1, 2018). "Hillary Clinton Is Producing a Television Series on Women's Fight to Win Voting Rights". _Fortune_.
        

### Bibliography

        
                  * Amar, Akhil Reed (2005). _America's Constitution: A Biography_. Random House trade pbk. ed. ISBN 978-0-8129-7272-6.
          * Anzalone, Christopher A (2002). _Supreme Court Cases on Gender and Sexual Equality, 1787–2001_. United States Supreme Court (Sharpe). ISBN 978-0-7656-0683-9.
          * Baker, Jean H. (2009). _Women and the U.S. Constitution, 1776–1920_. New Essays in American Constitutional History. Washington, D.C.: American Historical Assocation. ISBN 9780872291638.
          * Banaszak, Lee A. (1996). _Why Movements Succeed or Fail: Opportunity, Culture, and the Struggle for Woman Suffrage_. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-2207-2.
          * Dumenil, Lynn (1995). _The Modern Temper: American Culture and Society in the 1920s_. Hill and Wang. ISBN 978-0-8090-6978-1.
          * Hakim, Joy (1995). "Book 9: War, Peace, and All That Jazz". _A History of US_. New York, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509514-2.
          * Mead, Rebecca J. (2004). _How the Vote Was Won: Woman Suffrage in the Western United States, 1868–1914_. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-5676-8.
          * Moses, Claire Goldberg; Hartmann, Heidi I. (1995). _U.S. Women in Struggle: A Feminist Studies Anthology_. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02166-4.
          * Van West, Carroll (ed.) (1998). "Woman Suffrage Movement". _Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture_. Thomas Nelson. ISBN 1558535993.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
          * Weatherford, Doris (1998). _A History of the American Suffragist Movement_. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781576070659.
          * Woloch, Nancy (1984). _Women and the American Experience_. New York: Knopf. ISBN 9780394535159.
        

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Nineteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution**_.  
---|---  
* 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution from the Library of Congress * Our Documents: Nineteenth Amendment * CRS Annotated Constitution: Nineteenth Amendment * Woman Suffrage and the 19th Amendment from the National Archives
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Constitution of the United States

* * *

Articles|

        
                  * Preamble
          * I
          * II
          * III
          * IV
          * V
          * VI
          * VII
        

Amendments|

| Ratified|

| Bill of Rights|

        
                  * 1
          * 2
          * 3
          * 4
          * 5
          * 6
          * 7
          * 8
          * 9
          * 10
        

---|---  
1795 - 1804|

        
                  * 11
          * 12
        

Reconstruction|

        
                  * 13
          * 14
          * 15
        

Twentieth century|

        
                  * 16
          * 17
          * 18
          * 19
          * 20
          * 21
          * 22
          * 23
          * 24
          * 25
          * 26
          * 27
        

Pending|

        
                  * Congressional Apportionment
          * Titles of Nobility
          * Corwin Amendment
          * Child Labor
        

Unsuccessful|

        
                  * Equal Rights
          * District of Columbia Voting Rights
        
          * Amendment proposals in Congress
          * Convention to propose amendments
          * State ratifying conventions
        

Formation|

        
                  * History
          * Articles of Confederation
          * Mount Vernon Conference
          * Annapolis Convention
          * Philadelphia Convention
            * Virginia Plan
            * New Jersey Plan
            * Connecticut Compromise
            * Three-Fifths Compromise
            * Committee of Detail
            * Signing
            * Independence Hall
            * Syng inkstand
          * _The Federalist Papers_
          * Anti-Federalist Papers
          * Massachusetts Compromise
          * Virginia Ratifying Convention
          * Hillsborough Convention
          * Rhode Island ratification
          * Drafting and ratification timeline
        

Clauses|

        
                  * Appointments
          * Appropriations
          * Assistance of Counsel
          * Case or Controversy
          * Citizenship
          * Commerce
          * Compact
          * Compulsory Process
          * Confrontation
          * Congressional enforcement
          * Contract
          * Copyright and Patent
          * Double Jeopardy
          * Due Process
          * Elections
          * Equal Protection
          * Establishment
          * Exceptions
          * Excessive Bail
          * _Ex post facto_
          * Extradition
          * Free Exercise
          * Free Speech
          * Fugitive Slave
          * Full Faith and Credit
          * General Welfare
          * Guarantee
          * Impeachment
          * Import-Export
          * Ineligibility
          * Militia
          * Natural-born citizen
          * Necessary and Proper
          * New States
          * No Religious Test
          * Oath or Affirmation
          * Origination
          * Pardon
          * Petition
          * Postal
          * Presentment
          * Presidential succession
          * Privileges and Immunities
          * Privileges or Immunities
          * Recess appointment
          * Recommendation
          * Self-Incrimination
          * Speech or Debate
          * Speedy Trial
          * State of the Union
          * Supremacy
          * Suspension
          * Take Care
          * Takings
          * Taxing and Spending
          * Territorial
          * Title of Nobility
          * Treaty
          * Trial by Jury
          * Vesting
          * Vicinage
          * War Powers
          * List of clauses
        

Interpretation|

        
                  * Concurrent powers
          * Constitutional law
          * Criminal procedure
          * Criminal sentencing
          * Dormant Commerce Clause
          * Enumerated powers
          * Equal footing
          * Executive privilege
          * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
          * Judicial review
          * Nondelegation doctrine
          * Preemption
          * Saxbe fix
          * Separation of church and state
          * Separation of powers
          * Taxation power
          * Unitary executive theory
        

Display  
and legacy|

        
                  * National Archives
            * Charters of Freedom Rotunda
          * Independence Mall
          * Constitution Day
          * Constitution Gardens
          * National Constitution Center
          * _Scene at the Signing of the Constitution_ (painting)
          * _A More Perfect Union_ (film)
          * USS _Constitution_
          * Worldwide influence
        

**US Government Portal** • **Law Portal** • **Wikipedia book**

        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Voting rights in the United States

* * *

Constitutional  
provisions|

        
                  * Article I
            * Voter Qualifications Clause
            * Elections Clause
          * 1st Amendment
          * 14th Amendment
            * Equal Protection Clause
          * 15th Amendment
          * 17th Amendment
          * 19th Amendment
          * 23rd Amendment
          * 24th Amendment
          * 26th Amendment
        

Federal laws|

        
                  * Voting Rights Act of 1965
            * Amendments
            * List of covered jurisdictions
          * Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped Act
          * Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act
            * Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act
          * National Voter Registration Act of 1993
          * Help America Vote Act of 2002
        

State laws|

| Voter access|

        
                  * Absentee ballot
          * Early voting
          * Postal voting
          * Provisional ballot
          * Voter registration in the U.S.
          * Initiatives and referendums
          * Recall election
        

---|---  
Vote denial|

        
                  * Electoral fraud
          * Grandfather clause
          * Literacy test
          * Poll tax
          * Voter caging
          * Voter ID laws
        

Vote dilution|

        
                  * Gerrymandering
          * Plurality-at-large voting
          * One man, one vote
        

By group|

        
                  * Women
          * Youth
          * Felons
          * Foreigners
          * Transgender people
          * District of Columbia residents
          * Puerto Rico residents
          * Guam residents
        

History|

        
                  * Timeline
          * Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era
          * Selma to Montgomery marches
          * Timeline of women's suffrage
          * Woman Suffrage Parade of 1913
          * Silent Sentinels
          * U.S. suffragists
            * publications
          * History of direct democracy
        

Related|

        
                  * Ballot access
          * Campaign finance
          * Citizenship
            * Native Americans
          * Disfranchisement
          * Election
          * Election law
          * Elections
          * Electoral reform
          * Electoral College
          * Ranked choice voting
          * Redistricting
          * Secret ballot
          * Suffrage
          * Voting
          * Voting system
          * Voter registration
          * National Voting Rights Museum
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Suffrage

* * *

Basic topics|

        
                  * Universal suffrage
          * Women
          * Black
          * Youth
          * Resident foreigners
          * Expatriates in country of origin
          * Voting age
          * Demeny voting
          * Suffragette
          * Compulsory voting
          * Disfranchisement
          * Women's liberation movement
        

By country|

        
                  * Australia
            * 1902 Commonwealth Franchise Act
            * aboriginal
            * women
          * Japan
          * Hong Kong
          * Kuwait
          * New Zealand
          * Sweden
          * Switzerland
          * United Kingdom
            * women
              * Wales
            * laws 
              * 1832
              * 1918
              * 1928
          * United States
            * women
            * Native Americans
            * foreigners
            * felons
            * District of Columbia
            * Puerto Rico
            * amendments 
              * 15th
              * 19th
              * 23rd
              * 24th
              * 26th
            * 1965 Voting Rights Act
        

Events|

|

        
                  * International Woman Suffrage Alliance conferences 
            * 1st
            * 2nd
            * 3rd
            * 4th
            * 5th
            * 6th
            * 7th
            * 8th
          * Hong Kong 1 July marches
          * 2014 Hong Kong protests
        

* * *

UK|

        
                  * WSPU march (1906)
          * Mud March (1907)
          * Women's Sunday (1908)
          * Black Friday (1910)
          * Battle of Downing Street (1910)
          * Women's Coronation Procession (1911)
          * Great Pilgrimage (1913)
          * Open Christmas Letter (1914)
        

US|

        
                  * Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
          * Declaration of Sentiments (1848)
          * Rochester Convention (1848)
          * Ohio Women's Convention (1850)
          * National Women's Rights Convention (1850–1869)
          * Trial of Susan B. Anthony (1872–1873)
          * Suffrage Hikes (1912–1914)
          * Woman Suffrage Procession (1913)
          * Silent Sentinels (1917–1919)
            * Night of Terror
            * Prison Special
          * "Give Us the Ballot" (1957)
          * Selma to Montgomery marches (1965)
        

Related|

|

        
                  * Age of candidacy
          * US Voting Rights Museum
          * Umbrella Movement
        

* * *

Women  
(memorials)|

        
                  * Suffragists
          * Timeline of women's suffrage
            * US
            * in majority-Muslim countries
          * Women's suffrage organizations and publications
          * Women's rights activists
          * Suffragette Memorial
          * _Great Petition_ (2008 sculpture)
          * Pankhurst Centre
          * Pankhurst Memorial
          * _Emmeline Pankhurst_ statue
          * Belmont-Paul Monument
          * _Kate Sheppard National Memorial_
          * _Centenary of Women's Suffrage Commemorative Fountain_
          * _Millicent Fawcett_ statue
          * International Women's Day
          * Susan B. Anthony Day
          * Women's Equality Day
          * Eagle House
          * Paulsdale
          * Justice Bell
          * 1920 US presidential election
          * _Leser v. Garnett_
        

Popular culture|

        
                  * "The March of the Women" (1910 song)
          * _The Mother of Us All_ (1947 opera)
          * "Sister Suffragette" (1964 song)
          * Women's suffrage in film
          * _Shoulder to Shoulder_ (1974 series)
          * _Not for Ourselves Alone_ (1999 documentary)
          * _Iron Jawed Angels_ (2004 film)
          * _Selma_ (2014 film)
          * _Suffragette_ (2015 film)
          * Susan B. Anthony dollar
          * New Zealand ten-dollar note
          * 2020 US ten-dollar bill
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Susan B. Anthony

* * *

Co-founder with  
Elizabeth Cady Stanton|

        
                  * Women's Loyal National League,
          * American Equal Rights Association
          * National Woman Suffrage Association
          * National American Woman Suffrage Association
          * _The Revolution_ newspaper
          * International Council of Women
        

Writings|

        
                  * _History of Woman Suffrage_ (1881 book)
          * Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony Papers
        

Homes|

        
                  * Susan B. Anthony Birthplace Museum (Adams, Massachusetts)
          * Susan B. Anthony Childhood House (Battenville, New York)
          * Susan B. Anthony House (Rochester, New York)
        

Honors and  
depictions|

        
                  * Susan B. Anthony dollar
          * Susan B. Anthony Day
          * 2020 United States ten-dollar bill
          * _Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth Cady Stanton& Susan B. Anthony_ (1999 documentary)
        

Family|

        
                  * Daniel Read Anthony (brother)
          * Mary Stafford Anthony (sister, associate)
        

Related|

        
                  * 1873 trial for unauthorized voting
          * Women's suffrage
          * Women's suffrage in the United States
          * National Women's Rights Convention
          * Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
          * Susan B. Anthony abortion dispute
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Elizabeth Cady Stanton

* * *

Seneca Falls|

        
                  * Seneca Falls Convention, 1848, co-founder
          * _Declaration of Sentiments_ (1848)
        

Co-founder with  
Susan B. Anthony|

        
                  * Women's Loyal National League,
          * American Equal Rights Association
          * National Woman Suffrage Association
          * National American Woman Suffrage Association
          * _The Revolution_ newspaper
          * International Council of Women
        

Books|

        
                  * _History of Woman Suffrage_ (1881)
          * _The Woman's Bible_ (1895, 1898)
        

Other writings|

        
                  * Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony Papers
        

Homes|

        
                  * Elizabeth Cady Stanton House (Seneca Falls, New York)
          * Elizabeth Cady Stanton House (Tenafly, New Jersey)
        

Honors and  
depictions|

        
                  * 2020 United States ten-dollar bill
          * USS _Elizabeth C. Stanton_
          * _Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth Cady Stanton& Susan B. Anthony_ (1999 documentary)
        

Family|

        
                  * Henry Brewster Stanton (husband)
          * Theodore Stanton (son)
          * Harriot Stanton Blatch (daughter)
          * Nora Stanton Barney (granddaughter)
          * Daniel Cady (father)
          * James Livingston (grandfather)
        

Related|

        
                  * Women's suffrage
          * Women's suffrage in the United States
          * National Women's Rights Convention
          * Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Alice Paul

* * *

Initiated and  
co-strategized|

        
                  * 1913 Woman Suffrage Procession
          * Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage
            * _The Suffragist_
          * National Woman's Party
          * Silent Sentinels
            * Night of Terror
          * Equal Rights Amendment
          * Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
        

|

![Alice Paul 155017u

original.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Alice_Paul_155017u_original.jpg/90px-

Alice_Paul_155017u_original.jpg)

Main  
associates|

        
                  * Alva Belmont
          * Lucy Burns
          * Crystal Eastman
          * Inez Haynes Irwin
          * Dora Lewis
          * Inez Milholland
          * Doris Stevens
          * Mabel Vernon
        

Life|

        
                  * Paulsdale
          * Women's Social and Political Union
        

Legacy|

        
                  * Belmont-Paul Women's Equality National Monument
          * 2012 ten-dollar coin
          * 2020 United States ten-dollar bill
          * _Iron Jawed Angels_ (2004 film)
        

Related|

        
                  * Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
          * Women's suffrage in the United States
          * Women's suffrage
        

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

        
                  * LCCN: n82044753
          * VIAF: 178217512
          * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 178217512
        

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nineteenth_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution&oldid=900641129"

Categories:

        
                  * 1920 in American law
          * 1920 in American politics
          * Amendments to the United States Constitution
          * History of the United States (1918–45)
          * History of voting rights in the United States
          * History of women's rights in the United States
          * Presidency of Woodrow Wilson
          * Progressive Era in the United States
          * Women's suffrage in the United States
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * CS1: long volume value
          * CS1 maint: others
          * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
          * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
          * Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
          * Use American English from March 2019
          * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
          * Articles with short description
          * Use mdy dates from August 2018
          * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
          * Commons category link is on Wikidata
          * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Ænglisc
          * Беларуская
          * Català
          * Čeština
          * Deutsch
          * Español
          * فارسی
          * Français
          * 한국어
          * עברית
          * Malti
          * Nederlands
          * 日本語
          * Polski
          * Русский
          * Shqip
          * Simple English
          * Српски / srpski
          * Українська
          * Tiếng Việt
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 6 June 2019, at 20:23 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

