

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile

    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out
  * Mental Health

  * Substance Abuse and Addiction

# Recreational Marijuana FAQ

![marijuana

leaves](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2016/10_2016/marijuana_leaves/650x350_marijuana_leaves.jpg)

### In this Article

#### In this Article

#### In this Article

  * How does marijuana work on the brain?
  * Marijuana vs. Alcohol
  * What effects can marijuana have?
  * What are the health effects of marijuana?
  * How does marijuana affect teens?
  * What are the different ways you can take marijuana, and how do they affect you?
  * How do edibles affect you compared to smoking marijuana?
  * How can marijuana affect your ability to drive?
  * If you're pregnant, how does marijuana affect your unborn baby?
  * Can marijuana use lead to harder drugs?
  * What's the difference between recreational and medical marijuana?
  * Is marijuana addictive?

More than 20 million Americans on average use marijuana each month, making it
the most popular street drug in the country. Nine states -- Oregon,
Washington, Colorado, Alaska, Nevada, Maine, Massachusetts, California,
Vermont -- and the District of Columbia have legalized recreational marijuana.
Many other states are considering laws to make it legal.

The number of Americans who are in favor of legalizing recreational marijuana
has risen. More than 60% of people surveyed now support the idea. Most
Americans don't think marijuana is harmful. Yet despite the increasing
acceptance, marijuana use does have some risks.

Here's a look at how marijuana can affect your health.

## How does marijuana work on the brain?

When you smoke or eat marijuana, chemicals called cannabinoids are released
into your body. One main cannabinoid is THC.

Cannabinoids move from your lungs or stomach into your blood. From there, they
travel to your brain and the rest of your body. THC acts on certain receptors
in your brain. This creates the "high" some people feel.

## Marijuana vs. Alcohol

Is marijuana safer than alcohol, or vice versa? Each substance has different
effects on the body. Here's how the two compare. In most cases, these effects
have been studied in heavy, chronic smokers and drinkers, not occasional
users.

## What effects can marijuana have?

"Marijuana has a range of effects that vary based on the person and the
potency," says Christian Hopfer, MD, associate professor of psychiatry in the
division of substance dependence at the University of Colorado. The more
marijuana you use, the longer you use it, and the more THC it contains, the
more effects you'll feel.

In the short term, marijuana can affect your:

  * Ability to think and solve problems
  * Coordination
  * Reaction time
  * Judgment
  * Memory
  * Mood

Over the long term, regular use can lead to:

  * Memory loss
  * Trouble learning and thinking
  * Changes in brain structure
  * Trouble at work or in school

## What are the health effects of marijuana?

Marijuana affects your body in many ways. Some of them are:

  * Lung problems, such as a chronic cough and trouble breathing
  * Intense nausea and vomiting
  * Faster heart rate, which may raise your risk for a heart attack
  * Mental health disorders such as depression, anxiety, and psychosis

## How does marijuana affect teens?

The effects of marijuana can be even more serious in young people. "There's a
much higher risk in people whose brains are developing -- those 25 and under,"
says Kevin Hill, MD, assistant professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical
School and director of the Substance Abuse Consultation Service at McLean
Hospital. "If you're a young person and you're using regularly, there's a
whole host of problems that can occur."

Regular marijuana use during the teen years has been linked to:

  * Lower IQ
  * Changes to areas of the brain involved with learning, memory, and attention
  * Anxiety, depression, and other mental health problems
  * Dropping out of school
  * Worse performance in college

The ABCD study will help researchers learn more about the effects of marijuana
on young people. It launched in 2015 and will follow 10,000 kids from age 9 or
10 into early adulthood to see how drugs, alcohol, and other exposures affect
brain development.

## What are the different ways you can take marijuana, and how do they affect

you?

Smoking is probably the most common way to use marijuana. When you smoke from
a joint, pipe, or bong, the heat releases active chemicals from the plant into
the smoke, which you breathe in.

Marijuana comes in other forms, too.

  * **Vaporization.** Similar to an e-cigarette, a vaporizer heats dried marijuana and releases a vapor. This vapor contains THC and other cannabinoids, but without the toxic smoke. It is unknown if this method is less harmful to the lungs than smoking marijuana.
  * **Dabbing.** In this newer delivery method, you heat and breathe in concentrated cannabis oils that contain up to 80% THC. Dabbing produces a strong high. Its safety is still unknown.
  * **Edibles.** Marijuana can be baked into foods like cookies or brownies. You can also take it by mouth in an oil, capsule, or tincture.

## How do edibles affect you compared to smoking marijuana?

The way you take marijuana affects how quickly your body absorbs the THC and
other chemicals. "It's going to be a more rapid onset of action with an
inhaled product," Hopfer says.

Because edibles work more slowly, there's a greater chance you'll take too
much. "You take a bite of an edible product and nothing happens. Then you take
another bite and another bite, not understanding that it takes time for the
effects to occur," Hill explains. Eating large amounts of marijuana can expose
you to dangerously high THC levels.

## How can marijuana affect your ability to drive?

Marijuana affects many of the skills you need to drive safely, including your:

  * Judgment
  * Motor skills
  * Reaction time
  * Perception

Your risk of getting into a car accident goes up significantly after you've
used marijuana. "Marijuana definitely affects your ability to drive, just like
alcohol does, but you make different errors," Hill says.

Alcohol makes you forgetful. You might neglect to check your mirrors or drive
over the speed limit. With marijuana, you're more aware that you're impaired,
so you become overly cautious. "When you're drunk you run red lights, and when
you're stoned you stop at green lights," Hill says.

After you've used marijuana there's no way to tell whether you're safe to
drive. "We don't have the technology to test the amount of impairment with
cannabis like we do with alcohol," Hill says. A breathalyzer test can tell if
your blood alcohol level is over the legal limit. No test can tell whether
you're too high to drive.

The best advice is to avoid driving after you've used marijuana. Or at least
wait a few hours before you get behind the wheel.

## If you're pregnant, how does marijuana affect your unborn baby?

We know the effects of alcohol on pregnancy. Miscarriage, birth defects, low
birth weight, and developmental problems are possible. The effects of
marijuana during pregnancy aren't as well known, Hill says.

Early research suggests that children born to mothers who smoked marijuana
during pregnancy have more problems with:

  * Emotions
  * Attention
  * Memory
  * Impulsive behavior

THC can also get into breast milk. It's not clear what effect this might have
on a baby's brain. Some studies show that marijuana use during pregnancy can
cause low birth weight in newborns.

## Can marijuana use lead to harder drugs?

One of the biggest arguments against legalizing marijuana is that it is a
"gateway" drug. The idea is that smoking marijuana might lead people to use
other, harder drugs. There is a link between marijuana use and other drug use.
Yet there's no proof smoking pot drives people into hard drugs. "Just because
they happen to use marijuana doesn't mean they're going to use opioids in 6
years," Hill says.

Drug use has many causes, including genes, exposure to drugs at home, and
stress. It's possible that people who are more likely to use drugs take
marijuana first because it's easy for them to get. Most people who use
marijuana don't go on to use harder drugs, according to the National Institute
on Drug Abuse.

## What's the difference between recreational and medical marijuana?

"There really isn't a difference," Hopfer says. "Medical marijuana is just
marijuana that a doctor has recommended." Both contain THC and have the same
effects on the brain and body. Medical marijuana is used to treat a number of
conditions including seizures, nausea and vomiting from chemotherapy, and
pain. But there isn't much research into how well it works.

## Is marijuana addictive?

"There's no question about it," Hill says. "Marijuana is both physically and
psychologically addictive, but most people who use it don't become addicted."
Around 9% of adults who use marijuana and 17% of teens will get addicted.

WebMD Medical Reference Reviewed by Laura J. Martin, MD on September 26, 2018

#### Sources

SOURCES:

Arria, A. _Psychology of Addictive Behaviors_ , September 2015.

Drug Policy Alliance: "How Marijuana is Consumed."

Filbey, F. _Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience_ , December 2015.

Gallup: "In U.S., 58% Back Legal Marijuana Use."

Hancock-Allen, J. _Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_ , July 2015.

Kevin Hill, MD, assistant professor of psychiatry, Harvard Medical School;
director, Substance Abuse Consultation Service, McLean Hospital.

Christian Hopfer, MD, associate professor of psychiatry, division of substance
dependence, University of Colorado.

Kuzma, E. _The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry_ , October 2014.

March of Dimes: "Alcohol during pregnancy."

The Centers for Disease Control: "What You Need to Know About Marijuana Use
and Pregnancy

Meier, M. _PNAS_ , October 2012.

National Institute on Drug Abuse: "Can marijuana use during pregnancy harm the
baby?" "Does marijuana use affect driving?" "DrugFacts: Marijuana," "Is
marijuana addictive?" "Is marijuana a gateway drug?" "Is there a link between
marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?" "Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Brain Development (ABCD Study)," "Marijuana's Lasting Effects on the Brain."

News release, The University of Texas at Dallas.

NORML: "Legalization."

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.: "Marijuana use and
perceived risk of harm from marijuana use varies within and across states."

Governing: "State Marijuana Laws in 2018 Map."

© 2018 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

### further reading

  * Slideshow: Lung Cancer Risks -- Myths and Facts
  * Slideshow: Commonly Abused Drugs
  * Video: How Does Smoking Marijuana Hurt Your Brain?
  * Medical Marijuana in Colorado
  * Infertility: Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Drugs
  * What Is Marijuana Abuse?
  * Infertility, Smoking and Drugs
  * Marijuana Topics

### Top Stories

  * Does Pot Really Dull a Teen's Brain? 
  * Marijuana Doesn't Seem to Harm the Kidneys 
  * Will Smoking Pot Harm Your Heart? 
  * Pot a Factor in ER Admissions for Colorado Teens 
  * More Than Half of Americans Have Tried Marijuana 
  * Synthetic Pot Tied to Risky Sex, Violence in Teens 

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

