

~~~~~~~~~~~~

  *     * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space
  * * * *

Live Science

* * *

  * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

  *     *       *         *           *   * Live Science

  * Health

# Marijuana vs. Alcohol: Which Is Really Worse for Your Health?

By Joe Brownstein | January 21, 2014 03:04pm ET

  *     *       *         *           *             * MORE

![Marijuana vs. Alcohol: Which Is Really Worse for Your

Health?](https://img.purch.com/rc/300x200/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA2MS81Mzcvb3JpZ2luYWwvd29tYW4tc21va2luZy1tYXJpanVhbmEtMTQwMTIxLmpwZw==)

Research into the health effects of marijuana is still in its infancy.

Credit: Marijuana photo via Shutterstock

The question of whether alcohol or marijuana is worse for health is being
debated once again, this time, sparked by comments that President Barack Obama
made in a recent interview with The New Yorker magazine.

"As has been well documented, I smoked pot as a kid, and I view it as a bad
habit and a vice, not very different from the cigarettes that I smoked as a
young person up through a big chunk of my adult life," Obama said during the
interview. "I don't think it is more dangerous than alcohol."

But how apt is the comparison between these substances? While both are
intoxicants used recreationally, their legality, patterns of use and long-term
effects on the body make the two drugs difficult to compare.

Both alcohol consumption and pot smoking can take a toll on the body, showing
both short- and long-term health effects, though alcohol has been linked to
some 88,000 deaths per year, according to the CDC, while for a number of
reasons those associated with marijuana use are harder to come by. And
research into marijuana's health effects is still in its infancy, compared
with the rigorous studies looking at alcohol and human health.

**Short-term health consequences**

Drinking too much alcohol can quickly kill a person. The inability to
metabolize alcohol as quickly as it is consumed can lead to a buildup of
alcohol in the brain that shuts down areas necessary for survival, such as
those involved with heartbeat and respiration. [7 Ways Alcohol Affects Your
Health]

"You can die binge-drinking five minutes after you've been exposed to alcohol.
That isn't going to happen with marijuana," said Ruben Baler, a health
scientist at the National Institute on Drug Abuse. "The impact of marijuana
use is much subtler."

(Of course, subtle effects don't equate with no danger, as is the case with
smoking cigarettes, which is linked with 440,000 deaths per year in the U.S.)

Marijuana affects the cardiovascular system, increasing heart rate and blood
pressure, but a person can't fatally overdose on pot like they can with
alcohol, Baler said.

Alcohol is more likely than marijuana to interact with other drugs. The way
that alcohol is metabolized, or broken down, in the body, is common to many
drugs that are taken for a variety of conditions, said Gary Murray, acting
director of the Division of Metabolism and Health Effects at the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

This means that for people taking drugs or medications while drinking, the
alcohol can increase or decrease levels of the active drug in the body.

"Those things can make it very hit and miss, whether you're getting an active
dose of a medication," Murray said.

Still, both drugs can affect health in indirect ways, too.

Because marijuana can impair coordination and balance, there is the risk of
hurting oneself, particularly if someone drives or chooses to have unprotected
sex while their inhibitions are lowered, Baler said. These are two areas where
people using marijuana could hurt themselves for the short and long term.

You might not think marijuana and quizzes go together, but on the assumption
that you arrived at this quiz sober, we pose some serious questions that will
require your utmost attention and critical thinking skills. Good luck.

Start the Quiz

![marijuana, cooking with

hemp](https://img.purch.com/h/156/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA2NC8yODAvaTIzNS9tYXJpanVhbmEuanBnPzEzOTU5NDc1ODI=)

0 of 10 questions complete

Pot Quiz: Test Your Marijuana Knowledge, Dude!

You might not think marijuana and quizzes go together, but on the assumption
that you arrived at this quiz sober, we pose some serious questions that will
require your utmost attention and critical thinking skills. Good luck.

![Start Quiz](/images/site/quizzes/start-the-quiz.png)

0 of questions complete

Start Over | More Quizzes

**Long-term health consequences**

The long-term effects of drinking heavily are well known. "Excess alcohol is
going to lead to very severe consequences, and chronic excess alcohol is the
most likely to lead to a lot of threatening issues," Murray said.

Drinking can lead to alcoholic liver disease, which can progress to fibrosis
of the liver, which in turn can potentially lead to liver cancer, Murray said.

"I emphasize 'can' - it's not even clear to the best scientists what are the
triggers that allow that progression to happen," he said, noting that why some
people have a higher risk than others of developing liver disease from
drinking is not understood medically or biochemically.

Unlike alcohol, Baler said, the effects of chronic marijuana use are not as
well established. Animal studies have indicated some possible impact on
reproduction. Additionally, there is evidence marijuana can worsen psychiatric
issues for people who are predisposed to them, or bring them on at a younger
age. Finally, Baler said, because the drug is typically smoked, it can bring
on bronchitis, coughing and chronic inflammation of the air passages.

But while early studies showed some evidence linking marijuana to lung cancer,
subsequent studies have debunked that association. Baler said it's unclear why
marijuana smoke does not have the same result as tobacco smoke on the lungs,
but perhaps some beneficial compounds in the marijuana smoke cancel out the
ill effects, or perhaps the other health habits of marijuana smokers are
different from those of cigarette smokers.

But cigarette smoking plays a complicated role in studying the impact of
marijuana smoke, Baler said. Marijuana smokers tend to smoke much less than
cigarette smokers, as some may smoke one joint a few times a week.

"It's a very tough epidemiological nut to break," Baler said.

Additionally, researchers looking to study long-term marijuana use have had
difficulty in finding people who regularly smoke marijuana but don't also
smoke tobacco cigarettes. And the illegality of marijuana has also limited
research in this field.

For marijuana, much of the concern is with young people who use the drug,
because the drug interferes with the development of the brain while it is
still maturing, Baler said. [10 Facts Every Parent Should Know About Their
Teen's Brain]

Smoking marijuana interferes with connections being made in the brain "at a
time when the brain should be at a clear state of mind, and accumulating,
memory and data and good experiences that should be laying out the foundation
for the future," Baler said.

"How much you're impaired depends on the person, and how much you smoke,"
Baler said. Because some people are stoned a lot of the time, while others may
use marijuana only on weekends, the health effects become difficult to
generalize.

"You're cumulatively impairing your cognitive function. What's going to be the
ultimate result, nobody can say."

**Benefits**

There is no known medical use for consumed alcohol, but there are health
benefits observed in moderate drinkers, including lower rates of
cardiovascular disease and possibly fewer colds, Murray said.

"We always counsel people to avoid drinking to excess, but moderate drinking
is not something that's very dangerous," he said.

As for marijuana, whose legalization for medical uses has been a matter of
strong public policy debate for years, there is ample evidence that beneficial
compounds can be found in the plant.

"Researchers are working around the clock to try to identify the ingredients
in marijuana that have potential," to benefit human health, Baler said.

Once such chemicals are in a pure form, and researchers understand their
effects on the body, then they could be put in clinical trials for use in
cancer, multiple sclerosis, diabetes, glaucoma and other diseases, he said.

"There are segments of the population that want to bypass the entire process,
grabbing this nugget of truth â€¦ and claiming smoking marijuana can be good for
your health and have medical uses," Baler said.

Although for palliative care, he said, "that would be a different realm of
medicine," in which the goal is to drug a person so they do not feel pain.

The year 2014 has brought with it the first legal sales of marijuana to people
who aren't using the drug for medical reasons in the United States since the
1930s, as voters in Colorado and Washington state brought about this policy
change.

Public health researchers have said studying rates of injuries, accidents,
mental illness and teen use in the wake of the new laws will lead to a better
understanding of marijuana's public health effects.

_Follow us_ _@livescience_ _,_ _Facebook_ _  & __Google+ __. Original article
on Live Science._

### You'd Also Like

  * #### What Is CBD Oil, and Does It Really Work?

LiveScience __

  * #### Here's the Latest Study on the Links Between Alcohol and Cancer

LiveScience __

  * #### Lemons: Health Benefits & Nutrition Facts

LiveScience __

  * #### No, Drinking Alcohol Won't Make You Live Past 90

LiveScience __

Author Bio

* * *

Joe Brownstein,

Joe Brownstein is a contributing writer to Live Science, where he covers
medicine, biology and technology topics. He has a Master of Science and
Medical Journalism from Boston University and a Bachelor of Arts in creative
writing and natural sciences from Johns Hopkins University.

    
    
     **Joe Brownstein,** on
    

Science Newsletter: Subscribe

Submit

Follow Us

Most Popular

  1. Mysterious, Gaping Holes in Antarctic Ice Explained

  2. 12,000-Year-Old 'Headless' Horse Engraving Discovered in France

  3. Lightning Strikes and Kills Motorcyclist. Why Rubber Tires Didn't Protect Him.

  4. Night Owls and Morning Larks, Make Room for 'Afternoon People' and 'Nappers'

  5. Why Trump's Tweet About (Not) Going to the Moon Is a Problem for Space Exploration

HomeAbout Us

Company

  * Company Info
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Advertise with Us
  * Using Our Content
  * Licensing & Reprints
  * Terms of Use
  * Copyright Policy
  * Privacy Policy

Network

  * Top Ten Reviews
  * Tom's Guide
  * Laptop Mag
  * Tom's Hardware
  * Space.com
  * Live Science
  * AnandTech
  * Dignifyed

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

