

## Get a free, confidential consultation. Austin: 512-729-7757 Scottsdale:

480-210-0248

We can help. __844-876-5568

Promises Treatment Centers Toggle navigation Menu __

_Search_

  * Treatment Programs 
    * Treatment Programs
    * Drug and Alcohol Detox
    * Residential Drug Rehab
    * Scottsdale Executive Program for Men
    * Professionals Drug Rehab
    * Men’s Mental Health Treatment
    * Women’s Mental Health Treatment
    * Addiction Aftercare
    * What We Treat
  * Locations 
    * Locations
    * Austin
    * Scottsdale
  * The Experience 
    * The Promises Experience
    * Why Choose Promises
    * Success Rates
    * Promises Staff
    * Therapies
    * Testimonials
    * For Clinical Professionals
    * Careers
  * Resources 
    * Addiction Resources
    * Addiction Articles
  * Admissions 
    * Admission Process
    * Insurance
  * Contact Us

Search Here Search __

  * View All Resources
    * Addiction Articles
    * Drug Rehab Treatment
    * How Does Alcohol Affect the Nervous System?
    * The Social Effects of Alcoholism
    * Street Names for Common Drugs
    * Detox Information
    * Alcohol Detox: How Long Does It Take and What Happens?
    * Is Quitting Alcohol Cold Turkey a Bad Idea?
    * Help For Family & Friends
    * 3 Things You Can (and Can’t) Do to Help an Addicted Loved One
    * 10 Reasons Teens Abuse Alcohol or Drugs
    * Overdose Information
    * How Long Does It Take to Overdose on Drugs?
    * How Many People Have Died From Weed?

# How Many People Have Died From Weed?

Learn about the chances of dying from marijuana use — both directly and
indirectly. Review the physical and mental health risks associated with weed
use and read about the dangers of synthetic marijuana.

#### At a Glance

  1. Has Anyone Ever Died From Marijuana?
  2. What Are Synthetic Cannabinoids?
  3. Can You Die from Synthetic Weed?
  4. Is it Dangerous to Drive on Marijuana?

![marijuana

plant](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20871%20426'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![marijuana

plant](https://www.promises.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/shutterstock_662149828-871x426.jpg)

The likelihood of dying from marijuana alone is extremely remote, although
marijuana use can lead to death because of the activities people engage in
when high.

What the research says:

  * A study conducted in California involving 65,177 men and women aged 15-49 found after 10 years, marijuana users died no sooner than those who did not smoke it.
  * Another study looked at 45,450 Swedish army conscripts aged 18-20 and found after 15 years, both users and nonusers had a similar life expectancy.
  * According to a 1988 ruling from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, a marijuana smoker would have to consume 20,000 to 40,000 times the amount of THC in a joint in order to risk dying.
  * A 2009 study in American Scientist on the relative toxicity of recreational drugs indicated one would have to use more than 1,000 times the effective dose of marijuana in order for it to be potentially fatal – not even a certain death.

## How Does Marijuana Impact Health?

Marijuana may not be deadly like other drugs, but it can impact physical and
mental health. Health consequences of marijuana abuse include:

  * Chronic cough and frequent respiratory infections.
  * Mental and cognitive issues, including problems with learning and memory, hallucinations, anxiety, panic attacks and psychosis, especially in youth.
  * A 2012 study indicated people who smoked marijuana before age 17 were 3.5 times more likely to attempt suicide than those who started smoking marijuana later in life.
  * Those dependent on marijuana had a higher risk of experiencing major depression and suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
  * Subsequent research published in 2014 indicated daily adolescent users were 18 times more likely to become dependent on marijuana, seven times more likely to attempt suicide and eight times more likely to use other illegal drugs in the future.

#### Quick Links

  * __Marijuana Deaths
  * __Marijuana and Health
  * __Weed and Driving
  * __Synthetic Cannabinoid Deaths

![marijuana

infographic](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20900%20900'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![marijuana

infographic](https://www.promises.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/marijuana-

infographic.jpg)

## Has Anyone Ever Died From Marijuana?

A German study published in Forensic Science International in February 2014 is
the first known documented case of somebody dying from marijuana use alone,
other than car accidents in which marijuana was implicated, or polydrug use.

Other research on marijuana deaths:

  * Researchers found the drug was to blame in two isolated cases out of 15 analyzed, in two seemingly healthy people, aged 23 and 28.
  * Autopsies revealed the younger man had a serious undetected heart problem, suggesting people with cardiovascular issues should be aware of marijuana risks, and the older man had a history of alcohol and drug use.

“To our knowledge, these are the first cases of suspected fatal cannabis
intoxications where full post-mortem investigations … were carried out,” study
researchers wrote. “After exclusion of other causes of death we assume that
the young men experienced fatal cardiovascular complications evoked by smoking
cannabis.”

## Can You Die of Cannabis Poisoning?

In late January 2014, British media reported the tragic death of a 31-year-old
mother of three named Gemma Moss, who reportedly “died as a result of cannabis
poisoning.” Here are the details:

  * Medical science was skeptical that marijuana was the cause of death.
  * Moss was reportedly a pot smoker for many years, had stopped using two years before her death, but recently began smoking just half a joint at night to help her fall asleep.
  * Although no organ damage was found during her autopsy, medical examiners suggested she may have suffered cardiac arrest triggered by what they deemed “moderate to high” levels of the drug in her system. The BBC reported she suffered from "cannabis poisoning" but the findings were controversial.

## Medical Marijuana Doctor’s Take on The Moss Case

“There’s been no history of any verified reports of a death from cannabis
ever,” said Dr. Alan Shackelford, a high-profile, Harvard-trained Colorado
physician who evaluates individuals for medical marijuana prescriptions. He
questioned the medical examiner’s diagnosis when interviewed about this case.

“Cannabis can cause an increased heart rate, and there’s a possibility that it
could cause a problem with someone with a pre-existing heart disease – for
example, somebody with an elevated heart rate. But there’s no known dose of
cannabis that could kill a human.”

### Why all the middle-aged potheads?

### Helpful Articles

  * After 30 Years of Marijuana Use, the Smoke Clears
  * New Synthetic Marijuana Among ‘Most Dangerous’ Compounds
  * 4 Conditions That Absolutely Do Not Mix With Marijuana
  * Nearly Half of Marijuana Users Transition to Other Drugs, Study Finds

## What Are Synthetic Cannabinoids?

Widely referred to as synthetic marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids (e.g.,
spice, K2 and kush) are unfortunately marketed as safe alternatives to genuine
marijuana.

  * They include a growing number of manmade mind-altering chemicals either sprayed on dried, shredded plant material to be smoked (herbal incense) or vaporized and inhaled in e-cigarettes and other devices (liquid incense).
  * More than 150 different types of synthetic marijuana compounds currently exist.
  * Chemical tests show the active, mind-altering ingredients are cannabinoid compounds made in laboratories.
  * They may affect the brain far more powerfully than marijuana and the actual effects can be unpredictable, severe and even life-threatening.

## Can People Die from Synthetic Cannabinoid Use?

To date, hundreds of people across the U.S. have overdosed on synthetic
cannabis and 20 deaths have been linked to its use.

Massive overdose outbreaks caused by bad batches of synthetic cannabis led to
nearly 70 people being hospitalized over a brief period in June through July
2016.

  * On June 23,16 people in Houston’s Hermann Park overdosed on K2 and were hospitalized.
  * On July 12, 33 people on a single block in Brooklyn, New York, were suspected of overdosing on K2.
  * A few weeks after the Brooklyn episode, 20 people in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, were treated for kush overdoses in a two-day period. Kush is unlike heroin, where people overdose and generally die quickly.
  * People on kush wander into traffic, have seizures or strokes not easily traced back to the drug or are left paralyzed and fighting for their lives.
  * Emily Bauer, a teenage girl in suburban Houston, suffered five strokes related to her 2013 overdose. Doctors said 70 percent of her brain tissue was dead and she would never recover. However, as of 2016, she was slowly regaining some functioning.
  * One of the newest banned synthetic pot substances, MDMB-CHMICA is thought to be responsible for 42 overdoses and 29 deaths in Europe.

## Does Marijuana Use Contribute to Car Accidents?

The devastating effects of driving drunk are well-documented, but studies show
marijuana is catching up. “If a driver is under the influence of alcohol,
their risk of a fatal crash is 13 times higher than the risk of the driver who
is not under the influence of alcohol,” said Dr. Guohua Li, a researcher
involved in a study analyzing drivers who died in crashes. “But if the driver
is under the influence of both alcohol and marijuana, their risk increases to
24 times that of a sober person.”

That study also found:

  * Drugged driving caused more than 28 percent of deaths in 2010, compared to 16 percent in 1999.
  * Marijuana was the primary drug responsible for this increase, contributing to 12 percent of 2010 crashes versus 4 percent in 1999.
  * Most tests look for delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive substance in marijuana, and 11-OH-THC, its active metabolite.
  * Combined use of alcohol and marijuana dramatically increases a driver’s risk of death.

## Driving High on Weed Facts and Stats

  * A report by the American Automobile Association (AAA) found that the percentage of drivers who were high on pot during fatal accidents in Washington state more than doubled between 2013 and 2014, with 85 deaths involving THC in 2014.
  * In 2007, 8.6 percent of weekend nighttime drivers tested positive for THC versus 12.6 percent of drivers in 2013 to 2014, a 48 percent increase.
  * Utah officials said the number of fatal car wrecks in the state in which drivers tested positive for marijuana rose from 11 in 2012 to 38 in 2015, an increase from 6 percent of crashes to 15 percent. Analysts said the uptick in marijuana-related crashes may be tied to legalization in nearby states. Concurrently, the percentage of drivers in fatal crashes tested for drugs increased from 42 percent in 2011 to 62 percent in 2015.
  * Seven of nine analyzed research studies showed the risk of a motor vehicle collision increased when drivers had consumed cannabis a few hours before the crash.
  * The same meta-analysis showed acute cannabis consumption nearly doubled the risk of a driver being involved in a motor vehicle collision resulting in serious injury or death.

Proponents of recreational marijuana legalization point to its relative safety
and the fact medical marijuana has some therapeutic benefits.

### “After exclusion of other causes of death we assume that the young men

experienced fatal cardiovascular complications evoked by smoking cannabis.”

### Weed Calling the Shots? Reclaim Your Life.

__ 844-876-5568

#### Sources

Posted on December 29, 2017 and modified on April 26, 2019

![No Image

Available](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20180%20180'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![No

Image Available](https://www.promises.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/no-

image-180x180.png)

#### Written by

Promises Editorial Staff

Verify Insurance

![Insurance

Logos](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20100%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Insurance

Logos](https://www.promises.com/wp-content/themes/promises-

site-2016/img/insurance.png) ![Insurance Logos

Smaller](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20100%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Insurance

Logos Smaller](https://www.promises.com/wp-content/themes/promises-

site-2016/img/insurance@2X.png)

## We Work With Multiple Insurance Providers

Learn More About Using Insurance to Pay for Treatment

## Recent Posts

![Becky](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20180%20180'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Becky](https://www.promises.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/09/becky-180x180.jpg)

### Imprisoned by Addiction, Freed by Recovery

Becky R. believes in miracles. How else can she explain the change in her life
from two years ago when she heard a judge say these words after her arrest for
selling ecstasy to […]

![whippets side

effects](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20180%20180'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![whippets

side effects](https://www.promises.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/francisco-

gonzalez-583853-unsplash-180x180.jpg)

### Effects of Inhalants

Inhalant abuse doesn’t just provide a quick high. Abusing inhalants can have
serious adverse effects. Inhalants are substances people inhale through their
nose to achieve a mind-altering state. They come in the form of […]

![effects of

OCD](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20180%20180'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![effects

of OCD](https://www.promises.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/woman-1006100_1920-180x180.jpg)

### Effects of OCD

Obsessive compulsive disorder can turn your life upside down. You feel like
your thoughts and behaviors have control over you and that you’re powerless to
change them. Obsessive compulsive disorder is a serious psychiatric […]

![How Long Does Xanax

Last?](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%20180%20180'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![How

Long Does Xanax Last?](https://www.promises.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/pills-384846_1920-180x180.jpg)

### How Long Does Xanax Last?

Xanax is a short-acting benzodiazepine. Psychiatrists may prescribe it to
reduce symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder or panic disorder. The quick
answer to “how long does Xanax last” is four hours. However that number […]

View All

* * *

## Get a free, confidential consultation.

Call 844-876-5568 or fill out the form below.

  * Your Name * Required

  * Your Phone * Required

  * What is your timezone?

    * EST
    * CST
    * MST
    * PST
    * Other
  * Your E-mail

  * How did you hear about us?

Doctor/HospitalEmployeeInternet/Web
AdInterventionistLegal/CourtMedia/NewsPrevious Client/AlumniPrint
AdTherapist/ClinicianWord of Mouth/FriendTVRadioOther

  * How can we help?

  * Infinity VisitorID

  *     *       *         * Subscribe To Email
    * Yes, I'd like to receive emails with information that helps my journey to recovery.

  * Opt-Out

  * Timestamp - Opt-Out

  * Phone

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

**Promises Austin**  
840 Co Rd 420  
Spicewood, TX 78669

(512) 842-7060

**Promises Scottsdale**  
12816 E Turquoise Ave,  
Scottsdale, AZ 85259

(480) 320-3037

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter

(C) 2019 Promises Treatment Centers. All Rights Reserved. __ 844-876-5568

  * Promises Alcohol & Drug Rehab
  * Careers
  * Promises Behavioral Health
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use
  * Photo Disclaimer
  * Sitemap

![fb

pixel](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1371196122907368&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

