

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Journal list
  * Help

  * Journal List

  * Dialogues Clin Neurosci
  * v.5(2); 2003 Jun
  * PMC3181622

![Logo of diaclinneuro](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-diaclinneuro.gif)

Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2003 Jun; 5(2): 175–185.

PMCID: PMC3181622

PMID: 22033899

Language: English | Spanish | French

# Alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, and mental disorders

# Alcohol, nicotina, cafeina y trastornos mentales

# Alcool, nicotine, cafeine et troubles mentaux

Marc-Antoine Crocq, MD*

### Marc-Antoine Crocq

FORENAP, Institute for Research in Neuroscience and Neuropsychiatry, Rouffach,
France

Find articles by Marc-Antoine Crocq

Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer

Marc-Antoine Crocq, FORENAP, Institute for Research in Neuroscience and
Neuropsychiatry, Rouffach, France;

  * E-mail: rf.hcaffuor-hc@qcorc.am

Copyright : (C) 2003 LLS

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
nd/3.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## Abstract

Alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine are the most widely consumed psychotropic
drugs worldwide. They are largely consumed by normal individuals, but their
use is even more frequent in psychiatric patients, Thus, patients with
schizophrenia tend to abuse all three substances. The interrelationships
between depression and alcohol are complex. These drugs can all create
dependence, as understood in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV). Alcohol abuse is clearly deleterious to
the brain, provoking acute and chronic mental disorders, ranging from
intoxication with impairment of cognition, to delirium tremens, halluosis, and
dementia. In contrast, the main health consequences of nicotine, notably
cancer and cardiovascular disases, lie outside the realm of psychiatry
However, the mes of nicotine dependence and motivation to smoke or quit are of
concern to psychiatrists.

**Keywords:** _alcohol_ , _nicotine_ , _caffeine_ , _depression_ ,
_dependence_ , _Withdrawal_

## Abstract

El alcohol, la nicotina y la cafeina son las sustancias psicotropicas
utilizadas mas ampliamente en todo el mundo. Ellas son consumidas en gran
cantidad por sujetos normales y su utilizacion es mucho mas frecuente en los
pacientes psiquiatricos. De hecho los pacientes esquizofrenicos tienden a
abusar de estas tres sustancias. Las interrelaciones entre depresion y alcohol
son complejas. Todas estas sustancias pueden crear dependencia, de la manera
en que esta definida en el Manual Diagnostico y Estadistico de los Trastornos
Mentales, 4a edicion (DSM-IV). El abuso de alcohol es claramente deletereo
para el cerebro, provocando trastornos mentales agudos y cronicos, que van
desde la intoxicacion con deterioro cognitivo hasta el delirium tremens, la
alucinosis y la demencia. En cambio, las principales consecuencias para la
salud de la nicotina, especialmente el cancer y las enfermedades
cardiovasculares, estan fuera del dominio de la psiquiatria. Sin embargo, el
tema de la dependencia de la nicotina y la motivacion para fumar o para dejar
de hacerlo le conciernen a los psiquiatras.

## Résumé

Alcool, nicotine et cafeine sont les substances psychotropes les plus
largement utilisees a travers le monde. Si elles sont largement consommees par
les individus normaux, leur utilisation est encore plus frequente chez les
patients psychiatriques. Ainsi, les schizophrenes ont tendance a abuser de ces
trois substances. Par ailleurs, les relations mutuelles entre depression et
alcool sont complexes. Ces substances peuvent etre a l'origine d'une
dependance, ainsi qu'elle est definie dans le Manuel Diagnostique et
Statistique des Troubles Mentaux, 4e edition (DSM-IV). L'abus d'alcool est
clairement deletere pour le cerveau, provoquant des troubles mentaux aigus et
chroniques allant de l'intoxication avec deficit de la cognition, au delirium
tremens, a l'hallucinose et a la demence. En revanche, les principales
consequences de la nicotine en termes de sante, notamment cancer et maladies
cardio-vasculaires, sont hors du domaine de la psychiatrie. Il n'en reste pas
moins que le probleme de la dependance a la nicotine et la motivation pour
fumer ou s'arreter font partie des preoccupations des psychiatres.

Alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine share several common features. Being palatable
for their mild psychotropic properties, they are the most widely consumed
drugs worldwide. As licit psychoactive drugs, they are used mostly by "normal"
people, in contrast to Illicit "hard drugs," which are traditionally viewed as
the province of the deviant. Known to mankind for several centuries, alcohol,
nicotine, and caffeine have become an important part of culture, serving as a
vehicle for social Interaction, shaping the urban landscape with dedicated
places - from the Ottoman coffeehouse to the German Brauhaus and the Parisian
cafe - stimulating the opening of International trade routes and bringing
substantial tax revenues to governments. Abnormal patterns of substance use
have been described since antiquity Aristotle recorded the effects of alcohol
withdrawal and warned that drinking could be Injurious during pregnancy1; the
Roman physician Celsus held that dependence on intoxicating drink was a
disease.2 Today, alcohol and nicotine are public health problems because of
their association with physical ailments such as cirrhosis, cancer, and
cardiovascular disease. Of these three substances, only alcohol causes clear
neuropsychiatrie sequelae. Frequent heavy drinking, especially when associated
with malnutrition, has been shown to lead to central nervous system (CNS)
deterioration. The _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fourth Edition (DSM-IV),3_ the current nomenclature of the American
Psychiatric Association, has specific diagnostic categories for alcohol-,
nicotine-, and caffeine-related disorders. According to _DSM-IV'_ s
definition, all three substances can Induce dependence. Conversely, patients
presenting with various mental disorders may be more prone than the general
population to use or abuse these three common substances. Thus, patients with
bipolar depression are more likely to abuse alcohol at certain times In the
course of their Illness. Patients with schizophrenia have high rates of
consumption of all three substances, which they use to relieve dysphoria.4

## Alcohol

The consumption of alcoholic beverages, In the form of beer or wine, Is
mentioned In the records of the earliest known civilizations. Physicians'
prescriptions of beer were found on Sumerlan clay tablets (c 2100 bc).
Egyptian doctors In their medical papyri (c 1500 bc) Included beer or wine In
about 15% of their prescriptions.5 Alcohol - an Inebriating substance - is
consumed because It relieves the mind from anxiety and Inhibitions. In the
19th century medical literature, alcohol was recognized as a major cause of
mental morbidity, and the phenomenology of acute and chronic alcoholism was
already well known. Ball,6 a renowned professor of psychiatry in Paris, wrote
in 1880 that "of all the poisons that, to a variable degree, exert a
deleterious Influence on the constitution, alcohol Is without doubt the
substance whose effects have been most thoroughly described and meticulously
Investigated."

### Alcohol and the _DSM-IV_ classification

_DSM-IV_ offers two categories of _alcohol use disorders: alcohol abuse_ and
_alcohol dependence._ Abuse Is a maladaptive pattern of drinking, resulting In
adverse consequences (neglect of children or work, marital problems) or
dangerous behavior (driving while drunk). Dependence Is Indicated by loss of
control and continued drinking despite alcohol-related problems, and by
evidence of tolerance or symptoms of withdrawal Typically, the dependent
subject wants to stop drinking but cannot, and morning drinking Is
characteristic. The disorders Induced by alcohol are well known, and will not
be detailed here. _DSM-IV_ lists withdrawal delirium (delirium tremens),
psychotic disorders with delusions or hallucinations, persisting dementia, and
persisting amnestic disorder. Recognizing the frequent association between
alcohol and depression, _DSM-W_ also Includes the category _alcohol-induced
mood disorder_ to diagnose mood disorders developing during, or within a
month, of alcohol intoxication or withdrawal.

### Depression ami alcohol

The Interrelationship between depression and alcohol Is complex, but highly
Important in clinical practice. About 100 years ago, the readers of a booklet
written by Bode, a German physician,7 could learn that depression and alcohoi
abuse are often linked. The author thought that regular drinking could be a
consequence of the "depression" caused by an unfavorable climate, stating for
instance that alcoholism had been observed in Italians moving to the fog and
rain of London, or in German colonial officers posted In tropical countries.
In a more modern vein, Bode also added that alcohol abuse could be one of the
first symptoms of "melancholia," the usual term at the time for today's major
depression. He wrote that the melancholic patient "turned to the bottle" to
alleviate feelings of anxiety, guilt, sorrow, sadness, and mental vacuity.
This statement would still be considered pertinent today Intuitively, the
association between depression and alcohol seems to have good face value.
However, this association Is much more complex than meets the eye.
Interestingly, a Ushaped relationship of depression and alcohol consumption
has been observed In large population samples. It was found that lower-level
drinkers had lower depression scores than both nondrinkers and heavy
drinkers.8 The fact that moderate alcohol users are merrier than teetotalers
Is Illustrated by Sir John's comment in Shakespeare's play, _Henry IV, Part 2_
(act 4): "A man cannot make him laugh; but that's no marvel; he drinks no
wine."

The causal element In the association between depression and alcoholism is
debatable. Is depression secondary to alcoholism, or vice versa? Or, are both
possible? In the case of alcohol-Induced mood disturbances, alcoholism Is
clearly primary, and depression secondary. Mood disturbances are
characteristic of heavy drinkers, particularly during withdrawal. When not
drinking, alcoholics often report depression, Irritability, suspiciousness,
lethargy, apprehension, anxiety, and poor concentration. About a quarter of
recently detoxified alcoholics have a depressive syndrome. _Alcohol-induced
depression_ usually remits In less than 1 month without specific treatment.
The clinical course of depression when it coexists with alcoholism Is
generally benign and self-limited, with most patients becoming euthymlc within
2 to 3 weeks of abstention without antidepressant treatment. In some depressed
alcoholics, however, a more chronic depression persists, and may predict a
worse outcome for the alcoholism. In that case, antidepressants should
definitely be used, since they may lower the relapse rate.

The reverse of alcohol-Induced depression, namely _depression-induced
alcoholism,_ can also be observed. Drinking may be secondary to depression,
when alcohol Is used as self -medication by the patient. The alcoholic may
drink to relieve his mind from sorrow, fear, and despondency, or to combat
loneliness or the blues. Since alcohol absorption may have a transient
arousing or mood-lifting effect, this strategy has some short-term benefit,
but It Is doomed in the long run. In fact, as described In the paragraph
above, the paradox is that chronic use of alcohol Is more likely to make the
subject more withdrawn, more depressed, or more anxious. However, It should be
remembered that, although depression can lead to alcoholism, most cases of
alcoholism are not explained by primary depression, contrary to popular
belief.

A primary mood disorder should be particularly suspected In certain
circumstances, notably In females and In the cases of early-onset drinking.
Also, the possibility of bipolar disorder should be kept In mind.

Women may be more at risk than men to develop this form of secondary
alcoholism. The hypothesis that depressive symptoms predicted subsequent
alcohol problems for females, whereas alcohol problems predicted subsequent
depressive symptoms for males, was tested In a random sample of 1306 adults
from Erie County, New York, assessed In 1986, 1989, and 1993. 9 Measures of
alcohol problems In the previous year included an alcohol abuse/dependence
diagnosis and a heavy alcohol use Index. The Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale was used to assess depressive symptoms over 1 month. For
females, depressive symptoms predicted subsequent alcohol problems over 3
years (odds ratio 3.04; 95% confidence Interval [CI] 1.35-6.80; P<0.01) and 4
years (odds ratio 2.42; 95% CI 1.14-5.12; P<0.05), but not for 7 years.
Similarly, another study showed that the risk of heavy drinking was 2.6 times
greater In women with a history of depressive disorder than in women with no
history of depressive disorder.10

Early-onset drinking may often be secondary to a primary psychiatric disorder.
This notion Is supported by a study11 that found that 81% of 339 alcoholics
had associated mental disorders. Alcoholics with onset of heavy drinking
before 20 years of age had significantly more antisocial personality traits,
drug abuse, bipolar disorder, panic disorder, suicide attempts, and paternal
alcoholism than alcoholics with onset after age 20 years. Alcoholics with
onset before and after 20 years of age also differed significantly from each
other for cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of somatostatin.

### Bipolar disorder

It Is too often ignored that episodic drinking may be a symptom of bipolar
illness. In a recent study,12 the independent familial aggregation of bipolar
disorder and alcoholism, and the finding that the onset of bipolar disorder
tended to precede that of alcoholism, were compatible with a self-medication
hypothesis as the explanation for the frequent cooccurrence of these
disorders; In contrast, the independent familial aggregation and the tendency
toward an earlier onset of alcoholism than that of nonbipolar depression
suggest that unipolar mood disorders are frequently secondary to alcoholism.
Other authors13 evaluating the prevalence of substance abuse and dependence
among subjects with bipolar I disorder versus bipolar II disorder found that
alcohol was the most commonly abused drug among both bipolar I and bipolar II
subjects; bipolar I subjects appear to have higher rates of substance abuse
and dependence than bipolar II subjects.

### Genetics of alcoholism

An association between alcohol and depression can be inferred from the
findings of numerous familial, epidemiological, and molecular genetics
studies. Adoption and twin studies had concluded, a few decades ago, that
genetics exerts a small but definite effect on the development of
alcoholism.14 An Important caveat Is the difficulty of discerning whether the
biological mother's contribution is genetic or environmental (eg, drinking
during the critical periods of gestation and nursing). Also, clinical and
epidemiological studies have consistently revealed an association between
alcohol use disorders and both bipolar and nonbipolar mood disorders. However,
the evidence regarding the nature of this association is unclear. Wlnokur15
advanced the "depressive spectrum" hypothesis, on the basis of his findings
that persons developing unipolar depression prior to age 40 had more
alcoholism and antisocial personality In their male relatives. However,
subsequent researchers who Investigated the relatives of patients with
unipolar or bipolar depression were unable to replicate a genetic association
between mood disorders and drinking. There is a consensus that genetic factors
play a role in the vulnerability to mood disorder, and It Is likely that
hereditary factors Influence the appearance of alcoholism too. However, both
class of disorders are probably influenced by distinct genetic factors. Data
on family studies or genetic studies generally suggest that alcoholism and
depression are two independent Illnesses, albeit both quite common. Individual
differences in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of alcohol were known
long before the advent of molecular genetics. Men metabolize a significant
fraction of alcohol in the stomach prior to absorption, In contrast to women
who have less active stomach enzymes. Alcohol is absorbed Into the bloodstream
through the stomach (20%) and Intestine (80%). In women, alcohol absorption
through the stomach is higher premenstrually and during ovulation.16 Up to 90%
of alcohol consumed Is metabolized In the liver. The rapidly developing
tolerance to some of the effects of alcohol Is partly attributable to enzyme
Induction In the liver. The ability to metabolize acetaldehyde, a compound
produced by the catabolic breakdown of alcohol, is impaired in some Japanese
or Chinese Individuals, resulting In flushing and discomfort after moderate
amounts of alcohol.

Molecular genetics made it possible to Identify polymorphisms In genes that
Intervene In the pharmacokinetics of alcohol (eg, the enzymes aldehyde
dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase).17 Recent research findings have
shown the genetic association or linkage of alcoholism to genes that also play
a role In other psychiatric disorders and In the response to drug treatment.
Examples Include the association of alcoholism with the y-amlnobutyric acid
receptor GABAA 18 (GAB A is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the CNS);
the linkage of suicidally, severe suicide attempts, and alcoholism to the
tryptophan hydroxylase gene19 (the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of
serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT]); the linkage of antisocial alcoholism
to the autoreceptor 5-HT1B gene20; and the linkage of severe and antisocial
alcoholism to the dopamine D2 and D4 receptor genes.21

### Alcoholism and drug treatment

Alcohol Interferes with the central metabolism of the neurotransmitters -
especially indolamines - involved In the pathophysiology and drug treatment of
mood disorders. Several lines of research support an important role for brain
5-HT pathways in the control of alcohol drinking behavior. It Is known that
drinking Increases the rate of 5-HT turnover and decreases the platelet uptake
of 5-HT.22 Serotonergic compounds reduce ethanol selfadministration In
conditioned rats.23 Results are consistent with activation of 5-HT1A and
5-HT1B receptor subtypes In mediation of the conditioned or secondary
reinforcing properties of ethanol. The observation that alcohol modifies
neurotransmitter function Is part of the rationale for the
psychopharmacological treatment of alcoholism.

It was shown that men and women who are diagnosed with major depression at the
time that they are admitted for Inpatient treatment of alcohol dependence have
shorter times to first drink and alcohol relapse.24 This suggests that It is
of paramount Importance to diagnose and treat comorbid depression In alcoholic
patients who are seen for treatment. Antidepressants have shown efficacy In
the treatment of alcoholism with comorbid depression, and sometimes even In
the absence of comorbid depression. In particular, antidepressants have been
helpful In the reduction of craving and relapse rates during detoxification.

When antidepressant treatment should be started Is debatable. Antidepressant
treatment should certainly be Initiated If depression persists after 2 to 4
weeks of alcohol withdrawal. However, certain authors recommend using
antidepressant drugs much earlier, in order to diminish alcohol consumption,
craving, and the risk of relapse. It should be kept In mind that the adverse
effects of the drug may be potentiated by alcohol Intake If treatment is
started early, when the patient is still drinking or when detoxification Is
not complete. Also, the patient's medical condition may necessitate lower
antidepressant doses. Particular attention should be paid to anticholinergic
and cardiovascular adverse effects. The use of tricyclic compounds may be
limited by the occurrence of hepatic and myocardial abnormalities In alcoholic
patients. Also, the pharmacokinetics of the drug may be changed In the
alcoholic. For Instance, Imipramlne clearance Is Increased In the alcoholic,
its half -life Is shortened, and much lower plasma levels will be observed.25

The choice of medication Is likely to be determined by the availability of
various classes of drugs, which differs between countries. Serotonergic drugs
have been extensively studied in depressive alcoholics and they have proven
effective In maintaining abstinence. They may, therefore, be a useful adjuvant
In the therapy of alcoholism. Selective serotonin reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
seem to have short-term effects in alcohol dependence, and are probably more
effective In men and In the presence of comorbid depression.26 Citalopram27
was shown to decrease alcohol consumption in nondepressed subjects with
alcohol dependence. Fluoxetine28 at antidepressant doses was able to prevent
relapses In weaned alcoholics. Trazodone,29 a relatively selective inhibitor
of 5-HT reuptake, was able at low doses to significantly decrease craving for
alcohol In detoxified alcohol-dependent subjects. TIaneptlne,30 a compound
that increases 5-HT reuptake, was shown to be particularly suitable In
depressed patients after withdrawal from alcohol abuse or dependence, because
of Its relative lack of sedative, anticholinergic, and cardiovascular effect.
Viloxazine,31 an inhibitor of norepinephrine reuptake, was shown to be
superior to placebo on the reduction of alcohol consumption. Besides
antidepressants, some studies Investigated the effect of mood-regulating
agents. Overall, little benefit was found with lithium, whereas valproate
seemed more promising.

Recently, acamprosate has been Introduced as a clinical treatment to reduce
relapse In recovering alcoholics In Europe, while naltrexone has been approved
for a similar use by the US Food and Drug Administration. Acamprosate exerts
agonist-like effects at GABA receptors and antagonist effects at the A-methyl-
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor; its ability to modulate the expression of NMDA
receptor subunlts In specific brain regions may be of relevance for Its
anticravlng properties.32 Naltrexone Is hypothesized to reduce ethanol
consumption by blocking central opioid receptors, which in turn modulate the
positive reinforcing properties of ethanol.33

## Nicotine

Tobacco Is native to America, where It may have been cultivated by man as
early as 5000 to 3000 bc.34 Columbus came Into contact with Indians smoking
tobacco when he landed In Cuba, on his very first trip to America. The rest of
the story of how the plant quickly conquered the world Is well known. Like
caffeine, nicotine may be regarded as a stimulant. Nicotine Is not directly
associated with psychiatric disorders, apart from the observation that
psychiatric patients smoke more than the general population. Nicotine's
toxicity concerns mostly the cardiovascular system and cancer. The neurotoxic
and neuroprotective properties of nicotine had not been thoroughly
Investigated until recently. A study In rats35 has shown that nicotine
produces selective degeneration In the medial habenula, a region with a dense
concentration of nicotinic cholinergic receptors. A significant public health
concern Is the risk to pregnant women. Prenatal exposure to tobacco probably
Inflicts damage to the developing brain, as suggested by a recent study
showing upregulation of nicotinic cholinergic receptors in the brains of
monkeys exposed to tobacco In gestation and the early neonatal period.36
Nicotine has a neuroprotective action In neurodegenerative disorders such as
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. It protects neurons against the
neurotoxicity caused by p-amyloid, the major component of senile plaques.37

### Psychological, sociological, and biological factors associated with

nicotine use

The onset of smoking typically occurs In the teenage years. Some American
studies found that the median age of initiation is 16 to 17 years.38 According
to recent French epidemiological data, the mean age of smoking onset is as
early as 14 years.39 People choose to smoke because they appreciate the
psychoactive, stimulant effect of nicotine. Smokers report that smoking helps
them concentrate, reason, and perform - observations consistent with studies
demonstrating that nicotine improves attention, learning, reaction time, and
problem solving. For example, studies suggest that nicotine Increases the
speed of sensory Information processing In smokers.40 Smokers also report that
smoking helps them relax, particularly In stressful situations, and improves
their mood. They report pleasure and reduced anger, tension, depression, and
stress. One explanation for the use of nicotine Is that smokers rely on these
positive reinforcements to cope with their environment. This hypothesis is
borne out by the fact that Individuals with psychiatric or psychological
problems characterized by negative affect and difficulty coping are more
likely to be smokers than Individuals who are more emotionally stable.41 The
psychological and societal factors that Influence experimentation with tobacco
will also Influence the propensity to experiment with other substances and,
generally, different patterns of behavior. As expected, there Is an
association among the use of various psychoactive substances In adolescents.
For Instance, the National Household Survey conducted by the National
Institute on Drug Abuse In 1985 found that, among 12- to 17-yearolds, the
proportion using alcohol and marijuana was 74.2% and 47.3%, respectively,
among current smokers, as compared with only 23.5% and 5.8%, respectively,
among nonsmokers. Similarly, a recent Canadian study of 13 549 students showed
that adolescents who used alcohol or cannabis or who smoked cigarettes were
also more likely to use stimulants (amphetamines, diet pills) for recreational
purposes.42 One Important factor in smoking initiation is the example provided
by parents and peers. Smoking Is more frequent among adolescents whose parents
smoke or whose boyfriend or girlfriend smokes.43 Societal tolerance, the
absence of a clear set of rules, and the permissive attitude of some parents
toward smoking also bear, without a doubt, some responsibility for Initiation
of smoking in the young.

A variety of psychological, sociological, and biological factors have a role
In the progression from smoking experimentation to regular smoking. While many
young people are exposed to the pleasurable effects of nicotine, only a
minority go on to become regular smokers. According to a recent Sofres poll,44
approximately 22% of the French population aged 15 or more continues smoking
despite their knowledge of the actual or potential adverse consequences.
Admittedly, possessing the theoretical knowledge that a substance Is dangerous
In the long term does not automatically entail that one feels emotionally,
personally, and directly concerned. Psychological factors have been described
by various authors, Including psychoanalysts.45 They include a difficulty
solving Intrapsychic conflicts and resorting to acts, substances, or food to
alleviate feelings of boredom, emptiness, or anxiety that cannot be elaborated
psychologically Individuals who rely on cigarette smoking to cope with their
environment generally consider it an efficient strategy because of Its
rapidity of action (nicotine reaches the brain within seconds) and
availability (purchasing cigarettes requires relatively moderate cost and
effort). The psychological factors that lead to smoking are often the same
factors that lead to the use of other substances. Thus, cigarette smoking Is
often associated with the use of other substances, and the quantity of alcohol
and nicotine consumed tends to follow parallel curves (moderate drinkers
tending to be moderate smokers, and heavy drinkers tending to be heavy
smokers).46 Statistically, cigarette smoking and nicotine dependence are more
prevalent in persons with a history of child abuse and neglect, in children
whose parents have problems with alcohol and other drugs, In single teenage
mothers and their children, In children and adolescents In foster care, In
school dropouts, unemployed youths,47 adolescents who are Incarcerated and
those In vocational schools,48 and In persons with a history of incarceration.
By high-school graduation, 28% of adolescents smoke cigarettes, but their
peers who have dropped out of high school have rates approaching 70 %.49 In
adults, smoking is more frequent among divorcees and single parents.
Vulnerability factors may be undesirable states from which relief Is sought.
Resorting or not to smoking - or to other substances - in order to deal with
life stressors or boredom Is largely determined by an Individual's repertoire
of coping mechanisms. Delinquent behavior and experimentation with liquor,
beer, and marijuana are also associated with teenage smoking. Smoking is also
strongly linked to a variety of lifestyle indicators: it Is associated with
alcohol and caffeine consumption.50

Whether genetic factors explain some of the variation in cigarette smoking Is
not yet clear. Twin studies have produced variable estimates of the
heritabllity of smoking behavior, ranging from 33% to 84% In American and
Australian samples.51,52 Interindlvidual differences have been shown in
nicotine intake per cigarette and cotlnine (the metabolite of nicotine) half
-life.53 CYP2A6, a genetically variable liver enzyme, is largely responsible
for metabolizing nicotine to cotlnine.54 One study found that subjects
carrying one or two Inactive CYP2A6 alleles have Impaired nicotine metabolism
and are underrepresented in tobacco-dependent populations.55 Different
frequencies of the inactive CYP2A6 alleles have been reported In various
populations.56 However, a recent study, based on a more exact genotyplng
method, found no relation between genetic characteristics of nicotine
metabolism and cigarette consumption.57 Dopamine pathways are thought to
mediate the pleasurable effects of nicotine In the brain. Studies suggest a
relationship between genetic polymorphisms of the dopamine D2 receptor gene
and the dopamine transporter gene and smoking, Indicating that these genes may
belong to a multifactorial set of risk factors associated with smoking.58,59
More studies will be required before these genetic issues are settled.

### Nicotine dependence

"Tobacco dependence" was Included for the first time In the nomenclature of
mental disorders with the publication of the _Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders .Thkd_ Edition _(DSM-III)_ in 1980.60 The diagnosis
of tobacco dependence or addiction did not exist In second edition, **_DSM-
II_** (the previous classification in 1968).61 The definitions of dependence
are based on consensus and have been repeatedly modified during the last
decades. Prevalence rates of tobacco dependence are greatly Influenced by the
definitions chosen. Thus, _DSMIII_ criteria were so overlnclusive that a
study62 of 1006 middle-aged, male smokers showed that 90% were tobacco
dependent according to **_DSM-III._** Using _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders,_ Third EditionRevised _(DSM-III-R)63_ criteria, Stanton
studied the 12month prevalence rate of dependence of 967 daily cigarette-
smoking 18-years-olds and found 19.3% to be dependent.64 In **_DSM-IV,3_**
this diagnostic category Is called "nicotine" dependence Instead of "tobacco"
dependence. A similar historical evolution was observed with _ICD,_ the World
Health Organization's Classification of Diseases.

_ICD-10,_ published In 1992,65 contains a category for tobacco dependence,
whereas the previous edition, _ICD_ 9,66 devised In the mid-1970s, had no such
specific category and offered only a category for nicotine abuse.

### Smoking withdrawal and cessation

Motivation and education are key factors. Clinical practice shows that smoking
cessation can only be successful when an Individual has made up his or her
mind, is motivated, and has devised a personal strategy for how and when to
stop. The subjective difficulty and the degree of discomfort entailed In the
process vary markedly among Individuals, from minimal In some to substantial
in others. This is greatly Influenced by an Individual's psychological
motivation. As part of the smoking cessation process, the smoker will have to
overcome the discomfort due to dependence and will also have to reverse
established habits reinforced by sociocultural factors. Individuals have to
give up the Immediate and short-lived gratification provided by cigarettes,
and they have to change their lifestyle and routine. The practice of smoking
is In large part a habit, a learned behavior with elements of conditioning,
which Is elicited by many stimuli (colors, smells, tastes, aromas, locations,
times of the day such as the cigarette In the morning or after dinner,
persons, familiar surroundings). Lighting up a cigarette is largely a
conditioned ritual that has to be extinguished. The changes produced by
withdrawal are physiological (eg, decreased heart rate), behavioral, and
subjective (increased craving, le, a strong subjective drive to use the
substance, anxiety, Irritability, etc). The prevalence of signs and symptoms
at 2 days postcessation In individuals who quit smoking without assistance
(self-quitters) is as follows67: anxiety 49%; craving 37%; decreased heart
rate 61%; depression 31%; difficulty concentrating 43%; hunger 53%;
Irritability 38%; nocturnal awakening 39%; restlessness 46%. Most symptoms
begin 6 to 12 hours following smoking cessation, peak In 1 to 3 days, and last
on average 3 to 4 weeks.68 Craving and hunger are generally the only remaining
symptoms 4 weeks after cessation. The apparent degree of dependence and
severity of withdrawal symptoms are not well correlated with ultimate success
In smoking cessation.

### Decline In the prevalence of smoking

A decline In the prevalence of smoking has been witnessed since the 1950s.
According to a Sofres poll,43 exsmokers are more numerous than current smokers
In the French population (27% and 22% of the population, respectively). During
the late 1950s, almost 80% of men In Western European countries were tobacco
smokers. A prevalence of 42% was reported In the USA in 1965. Thanks In large
part to educational efforts, smoking prevalence has declined to approximately
20% to 25% In many Western countries. A striking feature of the decline In
cigarette smoking over the last past two decades In these countries has been
the emergence of a marked socioeconomic gradient. In Britain, In 1990, only
16% of professional men and women were cigarette smokers, while 48% of men and
36% of women In unskilled manual occupations continued to smoke.69 This
distinction cannot be explained by biological differences between the two
groups70; rather, It seems likely that while many people across all
socioeconomic strata are potential smokers, education and prevention efforts
can reduce smoking frequency. A similar trend has emerged In the USA, where
smoking has declined very significantly among persons with substantial formal
education. When compared with figures from 1974, 1976, and 1977, cigarette
smoking prevalence had declined by 1990 to 1991 from 18.8% to 3.3% among
physicians (average annual decline of 1.15 percentage points); from 31.7% to
18.3% among registered nurses (average annual decline of 0.88 percentage
points); and from 37.1% to 27.2% among licensed practical nurses (average
annual decline of 0.62 percentage points).71

### NRT and drng treatment

Even though various treatment programs are available, most smokers quit by
using their own, personally devised method, and most quit without any
pharmacological or professional assistance. Nonetheless, pharmacotherapy such
as nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) can be used to assist smokers who find
It difficult to quit on their own. NRT Is available In the form of nicotine
gum or transdermal patches. NRT facilitates the initial period of cessation by
reducing the severity of withdrawal symptoms such as craving and affective
discomfort. Studies have demonstrated that (I) pharmacological treatment Is
efficacious - NRT doubles the success rate In some cases at 6 months of
follow-up72; (II) behavioral treatment Is Itself more efficacious than NRT;
and (III) success rates are almost always higher when NRT and behavioral
treatment are combined.73 In general, adding NRT to a behavioral Intervention
doubles the cessation rate. However, clinical practice shows that a strong
personal commitment and motivation to quit are the essential preconditions to
successful abstinence and, without these, pharmacological aids will not have a
significant Impact on cessation success. NRT should not be considered If
motivation, the mainstay of smoking cessation, is not clearly present. One
Important limitation of NRT Is that the urge to smoke, or craving, is not
solely determined by nicotine deprivation.74 As discussed earlier, the urge to
use tobacco is also elicited by many environmental stimuli.

Bupropion, which was originally Introduced as an antidepressant, tends to
double the abstinence rate. For Instance, In a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study75 the abstinence rates at 12 months were 15.6% In the placebo
group, as compared with 16.4% In the nicotine -patch group, 30.3% in the
sustained-release bupropion group, and 35.5% In the group given bupropion and
the nicotine patch. It has been hypothesized that bupropion, a weak inhibitor
of synaptic reuptake of dopamine, may maintain stimulation of pleasure
response areas In the absence of nicotine by enhancing dopamine activity In
the nucleus accumbens.

## Caffeine

Tea and coffee are major sources of caffeine. Caffeine Is also found In mate,
In small concentrations In cocoa, and In caffelnated soft drinks. Coffee
originates from Ethiopia. It was In widespread use throughout the Islamic
world by the end of the 15th century. A couple of centuries later, Europeans
started cultivating the plants In their colonies. The history of tea Is
considerably older, since It was already being planted and processed In China
around the 3rd century AD. It Is estimated that an average cup of coffee
contains 100 mg caffeine, whereas a cup of tea or a 0.3 L glass of cola
beverage contains about 40% of that amount.

### Caffeine use

Approximately 80% of the inhabitants of affluent countries drink coffee or tea
daily. Caffeine Is appreciated because it Is a stimulant; It induces
alertness, elevates mood, and facilitates Ideation. Subjectively, caffeine
Increases feelings of well-being, motivation for work, and desire to
socialize. Blockade of A1 and A2a adenosine receptors appears to be the most
likely mechanism of action for caffeine In brain.76

Patients with schizophrenia have high caffeine intakes.77 In nonhumans,
caffeine enhances dopamine function by blocking the A2a adenosine receptor.
Thus, caffeine might be expected to worsen positive symptoms and Improve
negative symptoms.

Caffeine consumption seems to be Influenced by genetic factors, to the same
degree as alcohol and nicotine. A study in 486 monozygotic and 335 dizygotic
female twin pairs showed that the resemblance for total caffeine consumption,
heavy caffeine use, caffeine intoxication, caffeine tolerance, and caffeine
withdrawal was substantially greater In monozygotic than In dizygotic twins,78
and the heritability of caffeine consumption was estimated at 35% to 77%.

### Caffeine dependence

_DSM-IV_ has diagnostic categories for caffeine intoxication, and caffeine-
induced anxiety and sleep disorder.3 The existence of caffeine dependence Is
debated. _DSM-TV_ criteria for substance dependence, as applied to caffeine,
are often met In the general population. For Instance, about one quarter of 21
adolescents who consumed caffeine daily met these criteria in a study in New
England.79 A study of the generic _DSM-IV_ criteria for dependence In 162
caffeine users found that the "strong desire or unsuccessful attempt to stop
use" criterion was endorsed by 56% of interviewees.80 _DSM-IV-IR,81_ the
recently published text revision of _DSM-IV,_ proposes research criteria for
caffeine withdrawal.

### Caffeine withdrawal

One of the reasons for proposing caffeine as a model of dependence-Inducing
drug Is the fact that it Induces withdrawal symptoms, although they are
limited. Like nicotine, caffeine use Is reinforced by the taste and smell of
coffee, the hedonlc psychoactive effect of mental stimulation, and the desire
to avoid the discomfort of withdrawal. The severity of withdrawal symptoms
Increases with the caffeine maintenance dose. Even short periods of caffeine
deprivation, equivalent to skipping a regular morning coffee, can produce
deficit In sustained attention.82 Withdrawal symptoms are rapidly relieved by
caffeine Intake. Signs and symptoms of withdrawal, In decreasing order of
frequency, Include headache, drowsiness, Impaired concentration, work
difficulty, depression, anxiety, irritability, nausea or vomiting, and muscle
aches and stiffness.83 The withdrawal syndrome usually shows an onset 18 to 24
h after cessation; Its Intensity peaks between 20 to 48 h after abstinence;
its duration ranges from 2 days to a week. Tolerance to the sleep-disturbing
effects of caffeine has been demonstrated. However, there Is little evidence
for upward dose adjustment, possibly because of the unpleasant effects of
higher doses.

Since caffeine is not associated with significant health hazards or
Incapacitation, Its potential to Induce dependence does not pose a serious
problem for the Individual or society.

## Overlapping addictions

No psychoactive drug has been studied In so many individuals as have alcohol,
nicotine, and caffeine. The experience that we have with these compounds Is
tantamount to an open trial conducted over a couple of millennia In billions
of subjects! This review of mankind's most consumed drugs could also have
encompassed betel and khat, which are both widely consumed In Africa and Asia
for their mild stimulant properties. In the near future, we are likely to gain
more experience with cannabis, the use of which Is tending to be
decriminalized. Since these drugs are so much appreciated, It may be assumed
that they procure beneficial and pleasant effects. The benefits obtained in
terms of creativity, anxiety reduction, social disinhibition, and pleasure
have been extensively described In poetry and literature, rather that In
medical treatises.

There exists a tendency for some normally functioning adults to have multiple
addictions. This led many authors to discuss theories of addictive
personality. A study84 of overlapping addictions to common substances
(alcohol, caffeine, chocolate, or cigarettes) and activities (exercise,
gambling, Internet use, television, or video games) In college men and women
found moderate to large correlations, both within and between substances and
activities. Several gender differences In addictive tendencies were also
revealed: men scored higher than women on addiction to alcohol, cigarettes,
gambling, television, and Internet use, but women scored higher on caffeine
and chocolate. Animal studies have shown that rewards obtained from various
drugs, as well as food, playing, and sex, stimulate a midbrain reward circuit,
involving dopamine and structures such as the nucleus accumbens. The Issue of
addiction Is more complex In humans, who have the conscious capacity to
evaluate, In the prefrontal cortex, whether pleasurable activities are
appropriate and acted upon, or should be deferred or resisted. This
fascinating duality of the human, oscillating between biological urges and
conscious choice, has always been a fundamental question In our history, as
exemplified by the fact that our attitude toward intoxicants and games is
discussed In religious texts.

## REFERENCES

1\. O'Brien JM. Alexander and Dionysius: the invisible enemy. _Ann
Scholarship._ 1980;1:83–105. [Google Scholar]

2\. Berrios G., Porter R. eds. _A History of Clinical Psychiatry. The Origin
and History of Mental Disorders. London, UK: The Athlone Press;_ 1995;656
[Google Scholar]

3\. American Psychiatric Association. _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. Fourth Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association;_ 1994 [Google Scholar]

4\. Fowler IL., Carr VJ., Carter NT., Lewin TJ. Patterns of current and
lifetime substance use in schizophrenia. _Schizophr Bull._ 1998;24:443–455.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

5\. Alcohol consumption. _Encyclopaedia Britannica, http://www.britannica.com.
Chicago, III: Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. Accessed February 12,_ 2003
[Google Scholar]

6\. Ball B. De tous les poisons qui peuvent, a divers degres, exercer une
influence deletere sur l'economie, l'alcool est incontestablement celui dont
les effets ont ete le plus soigneusement decrits et le plus minutieusement
etudies. _Le çons sur les maladies mentales. Paris, France: Asselin et Ce;_
1880-1883;608 [Google Scholar]

7\. Bode W. _Die Trunksucht als Krankheit und ihre Behandlung [Alcoholism as
an illness and its treatment]. Weimar, Germany: W. Bodes Verlag_. 1901; 15
[Google Scholar]

8\. Rodgers B., Korten AE., Jorm AF., et al. Risk factors for depression and
anxiety in abstainers, moderate drinkers and heavy drinkers. _Addiction._
2000;12:1833–1845. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

9\. Moscato BS., Russell M., Zielezny M., et al. Gender differences in the
relation between depressive symptoms and alcohol problems: a longitudinal
perspective. _Am J Epidemiol._ 1997;146:966–967. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

10\. Dixit AR., Crum RM. Prospective study of depression and the risk of heavy
alcohol use in women. _Am J Psychiatry._ 2000;157:751–758. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

11\. Roy A., DeJong J., Lamparski D., et al. Mental disorders among
alcoholics. Relationship to age of onset and cerebrospinal fluid
neuropeptides. _Arch Gen Psychiatry._ 1991;48:423–427. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

12\. Preisig M., Fenton BT., Stevens DE., et al. Familial relationship between
mood disorders and alcoholism. _Compr Psychiatry._ 2001;42:87–95. [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

13\. Chengappa KN., Levine J., Gershon S., et al. Lifetime prevalence of
substance or alcohol abuse and dependence among subjects with bipolar I and II
disorders in a voluntary registry. _Bipolar Disord._ 2000;2(3 pt 1):191S–195S.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

14\. Saunders JB., Williams R. The genetics of alcoholism: is there an
inherited susceptibility to alcohol-related problems?. _Alcohol Alcohol._
1983;49:430–435. [Google Scholar]

15\. Winokur G., Cadoret R., Dorzab J., et al. Depressive disease. A genetic
study. _Arch Gen Psychiatry._ 1971;24:135–144. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

16\. Littrell J. _Understanding and Treating Alcoholism. Vol. 2. Biological,
Psychological and Social Aspects of Alcohol Consumption and Abuse. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates;_ 1991 [Google Scholar]

17\. Radel M., Goldman D. Pharmacogenetics of alcohol response and alcoholism:
the interplay of genes and environmental factors in thresholds for alcoholism.
_Drug Metab Dispos._ 2001;29(4 pt 2):489–494. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

18\. Loh EW., Bail D. Role of the GABA(A)beta2, GABA(A)alpha6, GABA(A)alpha1
and GABA(A)gamma2 receptor subunit genes cluster in drug responses and the
development of alcohol dependence. _Neurochem Int._ 2000;37:413–423. [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

19\. Nielsen DA., Virkkunen M., Lappalainen J., et al. A tryptophan
hydroxylase gene marker for suicidally and alcoholism. _Arch Gen Psychiatry._
1998;55:593–602. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

20\. Lappalainen J., Long JC., Eggert M., et al. Linkage of antisocial
alcoholism to the serotonin 5-HT1B receptor gene in 2 populations. _Arch Gen
Psychiatry._ 1998;55:989–994. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

21\. Hill SY., Zezza N., Wipprecht G., et al. Linkage studies of D2 and D4
receptor genes and alcoholism. _Am J Med Genet._ 1999;88:676–685. [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

22\. Kent TA., Campbell JL., Pazdernik TL., et al. Blood platelet uptake of
serotonin in men alcoholics. _J Stud Alcohol._ 1985;46:357–359. [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

23\. Wilson AW., Costall B., Neill JC. Manipulation of operant responding for
an ethanol-paired conditioned stimulus in the rat by pharmacological
alteration of the serotonergic system. _J Psychopharmacol._ 2000;14:340–346.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

24\. Greenfield SF., Weiss RD., Muenz LR., et al. The effect of depression on
return to drinking. _Arch Gen Psychiatry._ 1998;55:259–265. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

25\. Ciraulo DA., Barnhill JG., Jaffe JH. Clinical pharmacokinetics of
imipramine and desipramine in alcoholics and normal volunteers. _Clin
Pharmacol Ther._ 1988;43:509–518. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

26\. Schaffer A., Naranjo CA. Recommended drug treatment strategies for the
alcoholic patient. _Drugs._ 1998;56:571–585. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

27\. Naranjo CA., Knoke DM., Bremner KE. Variations in response to citalopram
in men and women with alcohol dependence. _J Psychiatry Neurosci._
2000;25:269–275. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

28\. Janiri L., Gobbi G., Mannelli P., et al. Effects of fluoxetine at
antidepressant doses on short-term outcome of detoxified alcoholics. _Int Clin
Psychopharmacol._ 1996;11:109–117. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

29\. Janiri L., Hadjichristos A., Buonanno A., et al. Adjuvant trazodone in
the treatment of alcoholism: an open study. _Alcohol Alcohol._
1998;33:362–365. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

30\. Malka R., Loo H., Ganry H., et al. Long-term administration of tianeptine
in depressed patients after alcohol withdrawal. _Br J Psychiatry Suppl._
1992;15:66–71. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

31\. Altamura AC., Mauri MC., Girardi T., et al. Alcoholism and depression: a
placebo-controlled study with viloxazine. _Int J Clin Pharmacol Res._
1990;10:293–298. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

32\. Rammes G., Mahal B., Putzke J., et al. The anti-craving compound
acamprosate acts as a weak NMDA receptor antagonist, but modulates NMDA
receptor subunit expression similar to memantine and MK-801 .
_Neuropharmacology._ 2001;40:749–760. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

33\. Stromberg MF., Mackler SA., Volpicelli JR., O'Brien CP. Effect of
acamprosate and naltrexone, alone or in combination, on ethanol consumption.
_Alcohol._ 2001;23:109–116. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

34\. Gately I. _La Diva Nicotina. The Story of How Tobacco Seduced the World.
London, UK: Simon & Schuster_. 2001;3 [Google Scholar]

35\. Carlson J., Noguchi K., Ellison G. Nicotine produces selective
degeneration in the medial habenula and fasciculus retroflexus. _Brain Res._
2001;906:127–134. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

36\. Slotkin TA., Pinkerton KE., Auman JT., Qiao D., Seidler FJ. Perinatal
exposure to environmental tobacco smoke upregulates nicotinic cholinergic
receptors in monkey brain. _Dev Brain Res._ 2002;133:175–179. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

37\. Zanardi A., Leo G., Biagini G., Zoli M. Nicotine and neurodegeneration in
aging. _Toxicol Lett._ 2002;127:207–215. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

38\. Pierce J., Gilpin E. How long will today's adolescent smoker be addicted
to cigarettes?. _Am J Public Health._ 1996;86:253–256. [PMC free article]
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

39\. Comite Française d'Education pour la Sante (CFES). _Barom etre Sante
1997\. Vanves, France: CNAM-TS, DGS;_ 1998 [Google Scholar]

40\. Kishimoto T., Domino EF. Effects of tobacco smoking and abstinence on
middle latency auditory evoked potentials. _Clin Pharmacol Ther._
1998;63:571–579. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

41\. Kane GP. Psychosocial factors and nicotine dependence. In: Cocores JA,
ed. _The Clinical Management of Nicotine Dependence. New York, NY:
SpringerVerlag;_ 1991:28–35. [Google Scholar]

42\. Poulin C. Medical and nonmedical stimulant use among adolescents: from
sanctioned to unsanctioned use. _CMAJ._ 2001;165:1039–1044. [PMC free article]
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

43\. Wang MQ., Fitzhugh EC., Westerfield RC., Eddy JM. Family and peer
influences on smoking behavior among American adolescents: an age trend. _J
Adolesc Health._ 1995;16:200–203. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

44\. S'arreter de fumer: etude realisee aupres des anciens fumeurs. Montrouge,
France: Sofres; 2001. Available at:
http://www.sofres.com/etudes/sante/110601_nonfum.htm. Accessed February 12.
2003 [Google Scholar]

45\. Sztulman H. Vers le concept de personnalites limites addictives. _Ann Med
Psychol._ 2001;159:201–207. [Google Scholar]

46\. Batel P., Pessione F., Maitre C., Rueff B. Relationship between alcohol
and tobacco dependencies among alcoholics who smoke. _Addiction._
1995;90:977–980. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

47\. Jones CL., Battjes RJ. The context and caveats of prevention research and
abuse. In: Jones CL, Battjes RJ, eds. _Etiology of Drug Abuse: Implications
for Prevention. NIDA Research Monograph No. 56. Washington, DC: USDHHS, Public
Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
National Institute on Drug Abuse;_ 1985:1–12. [Google Scholar]

48\. Colby SM., Tiffany ST., Shiffman S., Niaura RS. Are adolescents smokers
dependent on nicotine? A review of the evidence. _Drug Alcohol Depend._
2000;59(suppl 1):S83–S95. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

49\. Moolchan ET., Ernst M., Henningfield JE. A review of tobacco smoking in
adolescents: treatment implications. _J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry._
2000;39:682–693. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

50\. Jarvis MJ. Does caffeine intake enhance absolute levels of cognitive
performance?. _Psychopharmacology._ 1993;110:45–52. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

51\. Maes HH., Woodard CE., Murrelle L., et al. Tobacco, alcohol and drug use
in eight- to sixteen-year-old twins: the Virginia Twin Study of Adolescent
Behavioral Development. _J Stud Alcohol._ 1990;60:293–305. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

52\. Heath AC., Cates R., Martin NG., et al. Genetic contribution to risk of
smoking initiation: comparisons across birth cohorts and across cultures. _J
Subst Abuse._ 1993;5:221–246. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

53\. Perez-Stable EJ., Herrera B., Jacob P 3rd., Benowitz NL. Nicotine
metabolism and intake in black and white smokers. _JAMA._ 1998;280:179–180.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

54\. Nakajima M., Yamamoto T., Nunoya K., et al. Role of human cytochrome
P4502A6 in C-oxidation of nicotine. _Drug Metab Dispos._ 1996;24:1212–1217.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

55\. Pianezza ML., Sellers EM., Tyndale RF. Nicotine metabolism defect reduces
smoking. _Nature._ 1999;393:750. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

56\. Oscarson M. Genetic polymorphisms in the cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6)
gene: implications for interindividual differences in nicotine metabolism.
_Drug Metab Dispos._ 2001;29:91–95. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

57\. Loriot MA., Rebuissou S., Oscarson M., et al. Genetic polymorphisms of
cytochrome P450 2A6 in a case-control study on lung cancer in a French
population. _Pharmacogenetics._ 2001;11:39–44. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

58\. Lerman C., Caporaso NE., Audrain J., et al. Evidence suggesting the role
of specific genetic factors in cigarette smoking. _Health Psychol._
1999;18:14–20. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

59\. Comings DE., Ferry L., Bradshaw-Robinson S., Burchette R., Chiu C.,
Muhleman D. The dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) gene: a genetic risk factor in
smoking. _Pharmacogenetics._ 1996;6:73–79. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

60\. American Psychiatric Association. _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association;_
1980 [Google Scholar]

61\. American Psychiatric Association. _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association;_
1968 [Google Scholar]

62\. Hughes JR., Gust SW., Pechacek TF. Prevalence of tobacco dependence and
withdrawal. _Am J Pscychiatry._ 1987;144:205–208. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

63\. American Psychiatric Association. _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders._ 3rd ed, revised. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association; 1987 [Google Scholar]

64\. Stanton WR. DSM-III-R tobacco dependence and quitting during late
adolescence. _Addict Behav._ 1995;20:595–603. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

65\. World Health Organization. _The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and
Behavioral Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization;_ 1992 [Google Scholar]

66\. World Health Organization. _International Classification of Diseases. 9th
Revision. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization;_ 1977:177–213.
[Google Scholar]

67\. Hughes JR., Hlggins ST., Bickel WK. Nicotine withdrawal versus other drug
withdrawal syndromes: similarities and dissimilarities. _Addiction._
1994;89:1461–1470. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

68\. Hughes JR. Why does smoking so often produce dependence? A somewhat
different view. _Tobacco Control._ 2001;10:62–64. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

69\. Smyth M., Browne F. _General Household Survey. London, UK: HMSO;_ 1990
[Google Scholar]

70\. Henningfield JE., Schuh LM., Jarvik ME. Pathophysiology of tobacco
dependence. In: Bloom FE, Kupfer DJ, eds. _Psychopharmacology: The Fourth
Generation of Progress. New York, NY: Raven Press;_ 1995:1715–1729. [Google
Scholar]

71\. Nelson DE., Giovino GA., Emont SE., et al. Trends in cigarette smoking
among US physicians and nurses. _JAMA._ 1994;271:1273–1275. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

72\. Silagy C., Lancaster T., Stead L., Mant D., Fowler G. _Nicotine
Replacement Therapy for Smoking Cessation (Cochrane Review). The Cochrane
Library. Oxford, UK: Update Software;_ 2002;1 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

73\. Shifman S., Mason KM., Henningfield JE. Tobacco dependence treatments:
review and prospectus. _Annu Rev Public Health._ 1998;19:335–358. [PubMed]
[Google Scholar]

74\. Report of the Surgeon General. _Nicotine Addiction. The Health
Consequences of Smoking. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human
Services;_ 1988:210. [Google Scholar]

75\. Jorenby DE., Leischow SJ., Nides MA., et al. A controlled trial of
sustained-release bupropion, a nicotine patch, or both for smoking cessation.
_N Engl J Med._ 1999;340:685–691. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

76\. Daly JW., Fredholm BB. Caffeine - an atypical drug of dependence. _Drug
Alcohol Depend._ 1998;51:199–206. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

77\. Hughes JR., McHugh P., Holtzman S. Caffeine and schizophrenia. _Psychiatr
Services._ 1998;49:1415–1417. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

78\. Kendler KS., Prescott CA. Caffeine intake, tolerance, and withdrawal in
women: a population-based twin study. _Am J Psych ia try._ 1999;156:223–228.
[PubMed] [Google Scholar]

79\. Oberstar JV., Bernstein GA., Thuras PD. Caffeine use and dependence in
adolescents: one-year follow-up. _J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol._
2002;12:127–135. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

80\. Hughes JR., Oliveto AH., Liguori A., Carpenter J., Howard T. Endorsement
of DSM-IV dependence criteria among caffeine users. _Drug Alcohol Depend._
1998;52:99–107. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

81\. American Psychiatric Association. _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. 4th ed, Text Revision. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association;_ 2000 [Google Scholar]

82\. Lane JD., Phillips-Bute BG. Caffeine deprivation affects vigilance
performance and mood. _Physiol Behav._ 1998;65:171–175. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

83\. Griffiths RR., Chausmer AL. Caffeine as a model drug of dependence:
recent developments in understanding caffeine withdrawal, the caffeine
dependence syndrome, and caffeine negative reinforcement. _Jpn J
Neuropsychopharmacol._ 2000;20:223–231. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

84\. Greenberg JL., Lewis SE., Dodd DK. Overlapping addictions and selfesteem
among college men and women. _Addict Behav._ 1999;24:565–571. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar]

* * *

Articles from Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience are provided here courtesy of
**Les Laboratoires Servier**

## Formats:

  * Article |

  * PubReader |

  * ePub (beta) |

  * PDF (200K) |

  * Citation

## Share

  * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
  * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
  * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+ 

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=diaclinneuro&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC3181622/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

