

* * *

Receive the Latest News & Research

Search Responsibility.org

  * __Prevent Underage Drinking ****

### Prevent Underage Drinking

Leading efforts to eliminate underage drinking.

    
    
    * __Discuss Alcohol with Kids
      * Advice for Parents - By Parents
      * Talking with Kids Ages 6-9
      * Talking to Tweens & Teens About Alcohol
    * __End Teenage Drinking
      * Teen Drivers
      * Celebrities Against Drunk Driving & Underage Drinking
      * Advice on Parenting Teens Responsibly
      * Smashed
      * What We Support
    * __College Students& Alcohol
      * Student-Led Campaigns
      * Parents, You’re Not Done Yet
    

  * __End Drunk Driving ****

### End Drunk Driving

Leading efforts to eliminate drunk driving and working with others to end all
impaired driving.

    
    
    * __Drunk Driving Solutions
      * Prevention of Drunk Driving
      * Punishment for Drunk Driving
      * Alcohol Treatment and Rehabilitation
      * What We Support
    * __Drunk Driving Initiatives
      * CARS – Screening & Assessment Tool
      * eWarrants
      * DWI Court Expansion Project
      * Hardcore Drunk Driving Project
    * __Drunk Driving Resources
      * Policymakers
      * Law Enforcement
      * Prosecutors
      * Judges
      * Community Supervision
    

  * __Drink Responsibly ****

### Drink Responsibly

Empowering adults to make a lifetime of responsible alcohol choices as part of
a balanced lifestyle.

    
    
    * __Virtual Bar& BAC Calculator
      * This Quiz Will Tell You If You're a Responsible Drinker
    * Chafetz Professorship
    * #StartsWithMe
    * Think Responsibly
    

  * __Alcohol Statistics ****

### Alcohol Statistics

What you need to know to stay up-to-date on drinking in the US.

    
    
    * State Profiles And Facts
    * Underage Drinking Statistics
    * Drunk Driving Statistics
    

  * __Who We Are ****

### Who We Are

Inspiring a lifetime of responsible alcohol choices.

    
    
    * Our Members
    * Staff
    * Our History
    * Contact Us
    * __What We Believe
      * Global Commitments
      * Open Conversations
    * __Advisory Boards
      * National Advisory Board
      * Educational Advisory Board
      * Judicial Advisory Board
    * __Media Center
      * Press Releases
      * Videos
      * Infographics
      * Glossary
    

  * Blog

En Español

  *   *   *   *   * 

WELCOME TO RESPONSIBILITY.ORG

You have been redirected to Responsibility.org because you entered a date
below the legal drinking age in the U.S. Join us in starting a lifetime of
conversations around alcohol responsibility – keep reading to learn more.

En Español

  *   *   *   *   * 

![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-

content/themes/faar/assets/img/logo-v1.png)

__

  * Prevent Underage Drinking ****

### Prevent Underage Drinking

Leading efforts to eliminate underage drinking.

    
    
    * Discuss Alcohol with Kids
      * Advice for Parents - By Parents
      * Talking with Kids Ages 6-9
      * Talking to Tweens & Teens About Alcohol
    * End Teenage Drinking
      * Teen Drivers
      * Celebrities Against Drunk Driving & Underage Drinking
      * Advice on Parenting Teens Responsibly
      * Smashed
      * What We Support
    * College Students & Alcohol
      * Student-Led Campaigns
      * Parents, You’re Not Done Yet
    

  * End Drunk Driving ****

### End Drunk Driving

Leading efforts to eliminate drunk driving and working with others to end all
impaired driving.

    
    
    * Drunk Driving Solutions
      * Prevention of Drunk Driving
      * Punishment for Drunk Driving
      * Alcohol Treatment and Rehabilitation
      * What We Support
    * Drunk Driving Initiatives
      * CARS – Screening & Assessment Tool
      * eWarrants
      * DWI Court Expansion Project
      * Hardcore Drunk Driving Project
    * Drunk Driving Resources
      * Policymakers
      * Law Enforcement
      * Prosecutors
      * Judges
      * Community Supervision
    

  * Drink Responsibly ****

### Drink Responsibly

Empowering adults to make a lifetime of responsible alcohol choices as part of
a balanced lifestyle.

    
    
    * Virtual Bar & BAC Calculator
      * This Quiz Will Tell You If You're a Responsible Drinker
    * Chafetz Professorship
    * #StartsWithMe
    * Think Responsibly
    

  * Alcohol Statistics ****

### Alcohol Statistics

What you need to know to stay up-to-date on drinking in the US.

    
    
    * State Profiles And Facts
    * Underage Drinking Statistics
    * Drunk Driving Statistics
    

  * Who We Are ****

### Who We Are

Inspiring a lifetime of responsible alcohol choices.

    
    
    * Our Members
    * Staff
    * Our History
    * Contact Us
    * What We Believe
      * Global Commitments
      * Open Conversations
    * Advisory Boards
      * National Advisory Board
      * Educational Advisory Board
      * Judicial Advisory Board
    * Media Center
      * Press Releases
      * Videos
      * Infographics
      * Glossary
    

  * Blog

Stay up to date with Responsibility.org

  *   *   *   *   * 

Share

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

Alcohol Statistics Drunk Driving Statistics Drunk Driving Fatality Statistics

# Drunk Driving Fatality Statistics

Since 1982, **drunk driving fatalities on our nation's roadways have decreased
48%** , while total traffic fatalities have declined nearly 16%. Among persons
under 21, drunk driving fatalities have decreased 80%. Despite this progress,
we still have more work to do, and our commitment to eliminate drunk driving
is stronger than ever. Hardcore drunk drivers continue to wreak havoc on our
nation’s road accounting for 70% of drunk driving fatalities, where there is a
known alcohol-test result for the driver - a trend that has remained
relatively unchanged for more than a decade.

Our state map allows you to search and review individual state drunk driving
and under 21 drinking statistics and see how they compare to the national
trends. Also available to download and share is our State of Drunk Driving
Fatalities in America summary (PDF) which includes tables and graphs
summarizing the latest information available on drunk driving fatality
statistics.  
![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/02/StateofDrunkDrivingFatalitiesinAmerica_graphic-300x180.png)

#### **Drunk Driving Fatalities** **–** **National Statistics**

In 2017, the rate of alcohol-impaired driving fatalities per 100,000
population was 3.4, representing a 63% decrease since 1982, when record-
keeping began, and a 46% decrease since the inception of The Foundation for
Advancing Alcohol Responsibility in 1991.

Alcohol-impaired driving fatalities accounted for 29% of the total vehicle
traffic fatalities in 2017. Between 1991 and 2017, the rate of drunk driving
fatalities per 100,000 population has decreased 46% nationally, and 68% among
those under 21. These statistics and others are positive indicators of the
gains being made to fight drunk driving.

According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 37,133 people
died in traffic crashes in 2017 in the United States (latest figures
available), including an estimated 10,874 people who were killed in drunk
driving crashes involving a driver with an illegal BAC (.08 or greater). Among
the people killed in these drunk driving crashes, 68% (7,368) were in crashes
in which at least one driver in the crash had a BAC of .15 or higher.

**View Individual National Drunk Driving Fatalities Charts (PDFs) below:**

  * Factors Involved in Fatal Crashes

| | |

  * Rate of Drunk Driving Fatalities Trend (1982 - 2017)

\---|---|---|---

  * Lives Saved over 25 Years

| | |

  * Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities Trend (1982 - 2017)

  * Motor Vehicle Fatalities (1982 - 2017)

| | |

  * Rate of Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities (1982 - 2017)

  * Drunk Driving Fatalities by BAC Test Result

| | |

  * Repeat Offenders

  * Drunk Driving Fatalities Trend (1982 - 2017)

| | |

  * Traffic Fatalities by Holiday

#### **Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities** **–** **National Statistics**

Since the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) began
recording alcohol-related statistics in 1982, the number of persons under 21,
killed in drunk driving crashes decreased 80% from the record high of 5,215 in
1982 to 1,064 in 2017. These fatalities account for about 10% of the drunk
driving fatalities in the U.S.

For every 100,000 Americans under the age of 21, 1.2 people were killed in
drunk driving fatalities in 2017. The rate of under 21 drunk driving
fatalities per 100,000 population has declined 29% over the past decade.

#### **Drunk Driving Fatalities** **–** **State Statistics**

Since the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) estimates
national and state alcohol-impaired statistics, drunk driving statistics can
vary by state for many reasons. The rate of alcohol-impaired fatalities per
100,000 population represents the number of drunk driving fatalities for every
100,000 persons in the population being measured (e.g., U.S. total vs.
specific state) which allows for more like comparisons in the data.

In 2017, the drunk driving fatality rate was 3.4 per 100,000 population
nationally. In 26 states and D.C., the drunk driving fatality rate per 100,000
population was at or below the national level.

**View Individual State Drunk Driving Fatalities Charts (PDFs) below:**

  * Drunk Driving Fatalities

| | |

  * Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities per 100,000

\---|---|---|---

  * Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities

| | |

  * 10-Year Change in Rate of Drunk Driving Fatalities 

  * Change in Drunk Driving Fatalities

| | |

  * 10-Year Change in Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities 

  * Change in Underage Drunk Driving Fatalities

| | |

  * Drunk Driving Fatal Crashes by BAC

  * Rate of Drunk Driving Fatalities per 100,000

| |

## More from Responsibility.org

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/New-Drunk-Driving-Blog-Thumbnail-01.png) Ignition interlock

As a popular PSA once noted “It's a long, long ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/FAAR_Whats-Happening-Thumbnails-Final-1.jpg)

Celebrating April’s Alcohol Responsibility Month & our 25 years of ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/FAAR_Whats-Happening-Thumbnails-Aaron.png)

For Aaron, being responsible when it comes to alcohol seems to be all about
taking control of yourself and your life.

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/featured-image-hill-event-740x440.jpeg) DUI

On May 29th, Responsibility.org and the National Center for DWI ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/R-orgLogo_Facebook-Card.png) Kevin Quinlan Award

Every once and awhile there is a special individual who ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/2018-Award-Winners_Jen-and-Ed.png) Kevin Quinlan Award

Colorado is home to some of the most innovative leaders ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/FAAR_DefaultLogo.png) Drunk driving legislation

Throughout 2018, Responsibility.org has supported impactful legislation across
the nation ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/2018LeadershipAwards.jpg) Drunk driving legislation

This year has been filled with leadership in the fight ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/GraphicStorytelling-WhatDrivesYoutoSafety-web.jpg) #GHSA2018

Shaquille O’ Neal joined Responsibility.org at the Governors Highway Safety
...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/GovHogan.jpg) Drunk driving legislation

Leading a state like Maryland necessitates a keen awareness of ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/What-Does-Responsibility-Mean-To-You-ASCA.jpg) American School Counselors Association

Over the years, we’ve learned a lot about our education ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Website_Thumbnail.jpg) Drunk driving legislation

Responsibility.org has focused on 200 bills in 37 states so ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CARS_Thumbnail-1.jpg) CARS

Judge Richard Vlavianos of San Joaquin County, California often relays ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/CARS_May_Resource.png) CARS

Practitioners in the justice system need as much information about ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/STOP_DUI2_BlogPost.png) Drunk driving legislation

The fate of important legislation to prevent repeat DUI offenses ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/FAAR_DefaultLogo.png) drug impaired driving

At the end of January, NHTSA’s Deputy Administrator Heidi King ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Legislative_WrapUp_Final_BlogPost.jpg) Drunk driving legislation

In 2017, Responsibility.org supported legislation in 47 states. In all, ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners_glenn-Davis.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

In 2017, Responsibility.org highlighted the groundbreaking work of individuals
from ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners_CW.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

In 2017, Responsibility.org highlighted the groundbreaking work of individuals
from ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners_ALexV2.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

This year, we celebrate Congressional Staffer Alex Etchen's achievements in
...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners-04.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

Today we celebrate Alexandria’s Chief of Police Michael Brown, for ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners-03-1.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

Jared Olson is one of the longest serving Traffic Safety ...

Read More

  * ![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Kevin-E-Award-Winners-01-1.jpg) Kevin Quinlan Award

We are excited to announce 2017 Kevin Quinlan Awardee, Ali ...

Read More

In the News

  * How to talk to kids, teens about underage drinking: Before school lets out for the summer, Dr. Ben Nordstrom is giving parents a homework assignment: Talk to your kids about alcohol. 
  * Lyft partnering with NY bars to help reduce drunk driving: New York bars want to make sure you get home safe after a night out. 
  * New program aims to help parents talk to kids about alcohol: The Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Authority has launched a new program to help parents address the dangers of alcohol with their teens. 
  * State Highway Patrol, Gov. DeWine stress responsible teen driving as prom approaches: The Ohio State Highway Patrol and Governor Mike DeWine are reminding students and parents that teens are one of the most at-risk groups for crashes. 
  * Opinion/Commentary: Drunken driving vs. technology: With warmer weather and longer days, more Virginians are getting on the road to enjoy our state’s wineries, breweries, festivals, and nightlife 

![](https://www.responsibility.org/wp-

content/themes/faar/assets/img/logo-v1.png)

  *   *   *   *   * 

Receive the Latest News & Research

© Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility. All rights reserved. 2345
Crystal Drive, Suite 710, Arlington, VA 22202

  * Site Map
  * Responsibility.org Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use
  * Contact Us

Back to top

![](//

googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1053853723/?guid=ON&script=0)

### Receive the Latest News and Research

Welcome to Responsibility.org! We’d love to have you as part of our community.
We send updates on how you can help end drunk driving, prevent underage
drinking, and make responsible choices about alcohol. Get our news straight to
your inbox.

No Thanks

__

![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=676466&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

