

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

### Lung Cancer Health Home

  * News
  * Reference
  * Slideshows
  * Videos
  * Questions & Answers
  * Message Board
  * Medications
  * Find an Oncologist

### Lung Cancer Guide

  * Overview & Facts
  * Symptoms & Types
  * Diagnosis & Tests
  * Treatment & Care
  * Support & Resources

### Related to Lung Cancer

  * Lung Cancer With Genetic Mutation
  * Lung Cancer Treatment
  * Lung Health
  * Mesothelioma
  * Second Opinions
  * Smoking Cessation
  * Cancer Guide A-Z
  * More Related Topics

  * Lung Cancer

  * Reference

![](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/mobile/icons/target_icon.png)

#### Metastatic NSCLC: What You Need at Home Slideshow

# Marijuana and Your Risk of Lung Cancer

### In this Article

#### In this Article

#### In this Article

  * Why It Might Be Harmful
  * Questions Remain
  * The Future

Marijuana, both for recreation and medical use, is becoming legal in more
states. Even as more people use it, health experts aren’t sure whether smoking
pot raises your odds of getting lung cancer. Here’s what researchers know --
and don’t know -- about the connection.

## Why It Might Be Harmful

The link between tobacco smoke and lung cancer is well-known. Studies show
that marijuana smoke has many of the same harmful substances as tobacco, and
often more of them. Among the hazards are:

  * Benzo(a)pyrene
  * Benz(a)anthracene
  * Phenols
  * Vinyl chlorides
  * Nitrosamines
  * Reactive oxygen species

People also smoke marijuana in a different way than tobacco, possibly posing
greater danger to the lungs:

  * You usually inhale marijuana smoke deeply and hold it in, which gives the toxins more contact with your lung tissue and more chance to stick there.
  * You generally a smoke a joint all the way to the end. Tar, the sticky stuff left after burning, has high levels of harmful substances, and it’s concentrated at the end of a joint.

When scientists looked at lung tissue of some people who smoked weed
regularly, they found changes that are known to signal the future growth of
cancer.

## Questions Remain

Given what scientists already know, why is it so hard to say how smoking pot
affects your chances of getting lung cancer?

Studies that have looked for a direct link between the two have conflicting
results -- some found evidence that ties marijuana to lung cancer, while other
data show little to no connection.

The topic is also tough to investigate. Scientists say a few factors limit how
reliable the research is.

Most of the research on marijuana dates to when it was still widely illegal.
It’s hard to gather information about behavior that’s against the law. Most
studies have asked people to report how often they smoked marijuana, and
researchers know that these kinds of surveys, called “self-reported,” aren’t
as reliable as when they collect data in other ways. That’s because people
don’t remember their behavior perfectly or might underestimate or conceal how
often they do something that others think is wrong.

#### Continued

Illegal marijuana, unlike tobacco, doesn’t have any controls on its strength
or quality. People don’t use the same amount in one “dose.” That makes it hard
for researchers to set standards to measure its effects.

Another problem is that many people who smoke marijuana also smoke tobacco,
sometimes mixed in the same cigarette. So if they get lung cancer, it’s
impossible to sort out what substance caused it.

Some marijuana smokers in the studies have been fairly young, which could skew
the results. Cancers can take time to grow.

On the other hand, most people who use weed don’t smoke as much as a tobacco
user, which could lower their odds for a problem.

Animal research suggests that some chemicals in marijuana work against tumor
growth, which could explain why lung cancer isn’t showing up as often as
scientists might expect in people who smoke it. The studies on this are in
their early days, and researchers need to take a deeper look into this theory.

## The Future

Now that marijuana is legal in more places, growers are making the product
more standard and stronger. More people are smoking pot, too.

Any link between marijuana smoking and lung cancer isn’t clear now, but
researchers have a chance to move beyond some of the problems that have made
studies unclear in the past.

WebMD Medical Reference Reviewed by Neha Pathak, MD on June 28, 2017

#### Sources

SOURCES:

National Conference of State Legislatures: "State Medical Marijuana Laws."

National Institute on Drug Abuse: "Marijuana."

American Cancer Society: "Small Cell Lung Cancer Risk Factors."

University of Washington Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute: “Learn About
Marijuana.”

_Chest_ : “Cannabis Smoking in 2015.”

_NPJ Primary Care Respiratory Medicine_ : “Effect of cannabis smoking on lung
function and respiratory symptoms: a structured literature review.”

© 2017 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

Pagination

### Top Picks

  * Chemo: 3 Things You Need to Know
  * Complementary Treatments for Cancer
  * What to Expect During Radiation Therapy
  * Lung Cancer's Link to Bone Metastasis
  * 13 Best Quit-Smoking Tips Ever
  * Breathless? Take the COPD Health Check

### Today on WebMD

![Xray

analysis](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_lung_cancer_1_other/110x70_generic_lung_cancer_1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Lung Cancer Risks

Do you know the myths from the facts?

![woman taking

pills](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/woman_taking_pills_other/110x70_woman_taking_pills_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Lung Cancer Side Effects

Tips to managing them.

![Lung cancer

xray](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/lung_cancer_overview_slideshow/110x70_lung_cancer_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Lung Cancer

See it in pictures, plus read the facts.

![woman kissing

dog](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/ease_cancer_side_effects_ref_guide/110x70_ease_cancer_side_effects_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Cancer Side Effects

And how to best treat them.

### Recommended for You

![Lung Cancer Risks Myths and

Facts](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/lung_cancer/69x75_thumbnail_lung_cancer_risks_myths_and_facts.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Lung Cancer Risks: Myths and Facts

![Woman getting ct

scan](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/articles/thumbnails_daily_images/2011/06_2011/69x75_ct_scan_lung_cancer.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Lung Cancer Treatment Options

![Improving Lung Cancer Survival Targeted

Therapy](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/lung_cancer/69x75_thumbnail_improving_lung_cancer_survival_with_targeted_therapy.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) VIDEO

#### Improving Lung Cancer Survival with Targeted Therapy

![cancer fighting

foods](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/thumbnails/69x75_thumbnail_cancer_fighting_foods.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Eat These Cancer-Fighting Foods

![Lung Cancer Surprising Differences Between

Sexes](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/lung_cancer/69x75_thumbnail_lung_cancer_surprising_differences_between_the_sexes.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) VIDEO

#### Lung Cancer: Surprising Differences Between the Sexes

![Pets Improve Your

Health](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/69x75_thumbnail_how_pets_improve_health_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### How Pets Can Help Your Health

![Vitamin

D](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/thumbnails/69x75_thumbnail_vitamin_d.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Vitamin D: Nutrition’s Newest Star

![Lung Cancer Surgery

Options](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/lung_cancer/69x75_thumbnail_lung_cancer_surgery_options.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) VIDEO

#### Lung Cancer Surgery Options

### Tools & Resources

  * Lung Cancer: A Visual Guide
  * Lung Cancer Risks: Myth vs. Fact
  * Dealing with Chemo Nausea
  * Assess Your Cancer Risk
  * Lung Cancer: Men vs. Women
  * 13 Best Quit-Smoking Tips Ever

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

