

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

뉴스

이미지

동영상

쇼핑

더보기

지도도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 417,000개 (0.65초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 웹 검색결과

### Is marijuana a gateway drug? | National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)

https://www.drugabuse.gov/.../research.../marijuana-gateway-drug

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

These findings are consistent with the idea of marijuana as a " _gateway
drug_. ... typically used before a person progresses to other, _more harmful
substances_.

### Is marijuana addictive? | National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)

https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/.../marijuana-addictive

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Recent data suggest that 30 percent of those who use marijuana may _have_ some
degree of ... age of 18 are four to seven times _more_ likely to develop a
marijuana use disorder than adults.19. ... in part because epidemiological
_studies_ of _substance_ use often use dependence as a proxy for ... Is
marijuana a _gateway drug_?

### Is Marijuana A Gateway Drug? | Psychology Today

https://www.psychologytoday.com/.../is-marijuana-gateway-drug

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 7. 24. - Marijuana's use as a pain relief _drug has been_ touted for
decades and its ... This means there 's an _increased_ opportunity and access
to 'heavier' _substances_. ... What these _studies_ seem to have in common, is
the inability to draw a ... use and marijuana _has been shown_ to have other
potential problems…

### Is Marijuana Really a 'Gateway Drug'? - FactCheck.org

https://www.factcheck.org/.../is-marijuana-really-a-gateway-drug/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2015\. 4. 23. - Chris Christie said that marijuana is a “ _gateway drug_ ”
while arguing for enforcement ... The “gateway hypothesis” or theory refers to
the idea that one _substance_ ... are _more_ likely to use other drugs, these
_studies_ show a correlation without ... “There are some _studies_ that _have
been_ done in animals and they ...

누락된 검색어: ~~MJ~~ ‎ ~~shown~~ ‎ ~~dangerous~~

### Gateway drug theory - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gateway_drug_theory

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Gateway drug_ theory is a comprehensive catchphrase for the theory that the
use of a ... Students who regularly consume caffeinated energy drinks have a
_greater_ ... A recent review of 39 _studies_ which examined the relation
between cannabis ... in the human brain in relation to the liability to the
use of _further_ drugs _has been_ ...

누락된 검색어: ~~MJ~~ ‎ ~~shown~~

### Is cannabis addictive? Is it a gateway drug? - News 1130

https://www.citynews1130.com/.../cannabis-addictive-gateway-dr...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 10. 16. - Marijuana is not _addictive_ in the same way harder _drugs_
are, but many ... Some tests on animals _have shown_ that tobacco, alcohol and
marijuana can all “prime” the brain ... _Studies_ such as this one by the Mayo
Clinic show cannabis ... or who _have_ already _been_ addicted to another
_substance_ , are _more_ ...

누락된 검색어: ~~MJ~~ ‎ ~~dangerous~~

### Is Cannabis a 'Gateway Drug'? | Leafly

https://www.leafly.com/news/cannabis.../is-cannabis-a-gateway-dr...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2017\. 8. 28. - It's a theory that's _been_ presented as fact by marijuana
foes since the Harry ... used before a person progresses to other, _more
harmful substances_.” ... Exhibit C : the array of scientific _studies_ that
_have_ tested the “ _gateway drug_ ” theory and ... On a related note,
_studies have shown_ that cannabinoids can help ...

### Adverse Health Effects of Marijuana Use - NCBI

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4827335/

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

ND Volkow 저술 - ‎2014 - ‎1300회 인용 - ‎관련 학술자료

2014\. 6. 5. - Currently, marijuana is the _most_ commonly used “illicit”
_drug_ in the ... Although multiple _studies have_ reported detrimental
effects, others _have_ not, ... This view _has_ received considerable support
from _studies_ in animals, which _have shown_ , for ... Reduced functional
connectivity _has_ also _been_ reported in the ...

### Journal of Neuroscience and Neurosurgery - Archive

https://www.boffinaccess.com/.../nicotine-and-cannabis-use-in-jnn...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

There are many _studies_ that show non-ADHD adolescents, whose brains develop
... Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) children are at _greater_ risk for
_substance_ use ... It _has_ already _been shown_ that adolescent cannabis
users are _more_ likely to try ... are vulnerable to recreational _drugs_ that
are potentially _harmful_ and _addictive_.

### (DOC) The Gateway Hypothesis | Nick Marsico - Academia.edu

https://www.academia.edu/39131220/The_Gateway_Hypothesis

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Some _studies_ have determined that while the gateway hypothesis may be _more_
... others have viewed how cannabis use may lead to harder, _more dangerous_
... to see which _gateway drug_ led to the highest risk of the use of illicit
_substances_. ... _studies_ , rats who _have been_ pre-exposed to alcohol have
_shown increased_ ...

### 관련 검색: MJ has been shown is studied to be a gateway drug for more

addictive and dangerous substances"

gateway drug 뜻

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

