

Subscribe to the FREE #1 Natural Health Newsletter

Loading Please Wait ![Loading Please

Wait](/themes/mercola/images/loadingDotDot.gif)

__

Want Access to My All-Time Top 30 Health Tips? It's Free!

![Loading](//media.mercola.com/Assets/images/image.gif)

You'll also receive my FREE Natural Health newsletter | Privacy Policy

  * 0
  *     *       * 

![Father's Day](https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/cads/fathers-

day-061019-desktop-cs.jpg) ![Father's

Day](https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/cads/fathers-day-061019-mobile-

cs.jpg)

ADVERTISEMENT

![Loading](//media.mercola.com/themes/mercola/images/loading1.gif) **Loading
Please Wait**

# What Happens to Your Body When You Smoke?

  * 0
  *     *       *   * 972523

  * Available in: English __

    * Deutsch
    * Español
    * Français
    * Polski
    * Português
    * русский
    * 中文
    * 日本語
  * 

You can skip this video in seconds

Skip Ad

## _Visit the Mercola Video Library_

Table of Contents

  * Background of Cigarette Smoking
  * What Are the Side Effects of Smoking Cigarettes?
    * Short-Term Effects
    * Long-Term Effects
  * Radioactive Chemical Found in Fertilizers Leads to Lung Cancer
  * What Happens When a Smoker Quits
  * Tips on How to Quit Smoking

According to statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), approximately 15.5 percent (37.8 million) of all adults in the United
States are cigarette smokers. This accounts for 17.5 percent of males and 13.5
percent of females in the total U.S. population.

Cigarette smoking also accounts for more than 480,000 deaths per year in the
country, which is roughly 1,300 deaths per day.1 It is expected that 8 million
people will die in 2030 if the current smoking rate continues.

## Background of Cigarette Smoking

Cigarette smoking is said to stimulate pleasing and enjoyable emotions.
Smokers claim that it helps boost their mood, alleviate minor depression and
small fits of anger, improve concentration and short-term memory, as well as
provide a modest sense of well-being. This is because cigarettes contain
nicotine, an addictive substance that stimulates dopamine in the brain, which
is responsible for the pleasurable sensations.2

However, the more you smoke, the more your nerve cells become immune to the
pleasure brought on by smoking. As a result, smokers tend to increase their
intake of nicotine to get that desirable feeling from smoking.3

If you think smoking an e-cigarette is a better option, it actually isn't .
Researchers found that a brand of e-cig contains more than 10 times the level
of carcinogens in a regular cigarette. Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde, both
harmful toxins, were also found in the vapor produced by several types of
e-cigarettes.4

While smoking makes you feel good for a period of time, it slowly kills your
body. In fact, it is the leading preventable cause of death in the U.S.5

## What Are the Side Effects of Smoking Cigarettes?

Cigarette smoking can harm your body and cause permanent damage to your
health. If you're still not convinced about its dangers, take a look at some
of the side effects associated with smoking:

## Short-Term Effects

Smokers tend to have smelly clothes and hair, bad breath and yellow or brown
teeth stains. Smoking may also affect your physical appearance, as it can lead
to premature wrinkles, gum and tooth loss, and sudden weight change. Stomach
ulcers and weakened immune system are also possible side effects that you
might experience.6

People who started smoking at a young age are more likely to continue smoking
into adulthood, which could eventually lead to impaired lung function and
stunted growth. Teens who smoke are also 22 times more likely to use cocaine.

According to an Australian study, female smokers may experience worse
menstrual cramps due to the decreased amount of oxygen that travels to the
uterus. Moreover, women who started smoking at the tender age of 13 have a 59
percent risk of having painful menstruation, while those who started smoking
at ages 14 or 15 have a 50 percent risk.7

## Long-Term Effects

Many people don't begin to feel the severe side effects of smoking until years
later, when irreversible health damage has already been done. Some long-term
side effects of smoking cigarettes include:

• **Cardiovascular diseases —** Smoking damages the structure of your heart
and disrupts the function of your blood vessels. 8 It also increases your risk
of heart disease by two to four times, as it causes the blood vessels in your
heart to thicken, thus causing the pathways to become narrower.

Cigarette smoking also increases your heartbeat, raises your blood pressure
and causes your blood to clot. A clot can block the blood flow to your heart,
cutting off its oxygen supply and eventually damaging a part of its muscle.

Smokers have a higher risk of atherosclerosis, a disease wherein the plaque
liquids build up in the arteries. As time progresses, this will cause your
arteries to harden and narrow, which will limit the flow of oxygen-filled
blood to other parts of your body.

Smoking may also lead to coronary heart disease (CHD) once the plaque liquids
build up in the coronary arteries. This condition may cause chest pain, heart
attack, heart failure, arrhythmias or death.

Another side effect of smoking cigarettes is peripheral arterial disease
(PAD), which occurs when plaque liquids build up inside the vessels that
deliver blood to the head, organs and limbs. Smokers who are diabetic or
taking birth control pills have a greater risk of having serious ailments to
the heart and blood vessels.9

• **Increased risk of stroke** **—** Smokers are four times more likely to
experience a stroke than non-smokers. This fatal condition occurs when a clot
blocks the blood flow to your brain or when an artery around your brain
erupts. 10

• **Respiratory problems —** The lungs are equipped with a layer of internal
mucus that serves as a protective shield against foreign materials that you
inhale. These contaminants are wiped off by small hairs called cilia. However,
with smokers, the cilia do not function properly. As a result, smokers cannot
cough, sneeze or swallow to get these toxins out of their body. 11

Smoking can also trigger or make an asthma attack worse.12 It may cause
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as well, which manifests in two
forms: emphysema and chronic bronchitis. In emphysema, the air sacs in the
lungs eventually lose their elasticity and start to deteriorate. Chronic
bronchitis, on the other hand, occurs when there is a swelling in the linings
of your lungs, resulting in constrained breathing.13

• **Pregnancy complications —** Pregnant women who smoke have a higher risk of
preterm (early) delivery, miscarriage or stillbirth. They're also more prone
to weaker bones after menopause. 14 Cigarette smoking is linked to sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS), ectopic pregnancy and orofacial clefts in
newborns as well.

• **Reproductive health issues —** Men who smoke are at risk of erectile
dysfunction, poor sperm quality and sperm defects. For women, smoking may
cause reduced fertility. 15

Additionally, cigarettes contain over 7,000 potentially harmful chemicals,
some of which are known to cause cancer, including formaldehyde, benzene,
polonium-210 and vinyl chloride.16 Cigarette smoking has been linked to
increased risk of cancer of the follow body parts:17

  * Bladder
  * Blood (acute myeloid leukemia)
  * Cervix
  * Colon and rectum (colorectal)
  * Esophagus
  * Kidney and ureter
  * Larynx
  * Liver
  * Oropharynx
  * Pancreas
  * Stomach
  * Trachea, bronchus and lungs

## Radioactive Chemical Found in Fertilizers Leads to Lung Cancer

Your body accumulates harmful radioactive chemicals from cigarettes. These
dangerous elements come from the calcium phosphate fertilizers used on tobacco
fields, which contain polonium-210. When polonium-210 decays, it releases
alpha particles that can damage the human cells they come into contact with.

Research suggests that main lung damage comes from the radiation emitted by
these fertilizers. The radiation that you get from smoking one and a half
cigarette packs is tantamount to 300 chest X-ray films per year. Polonium has
also been found to cause cancer in laboratory animals.18

A 2011 report from Nicotine and Tobacco Research19 also revealed there are
internal documents stating that the tobacco industry has recognized the danger
brought by these radioactive chemicals. According to these papers, acid wash
was found to be an effective solution in removing polonium-210 from the
tobacco leaves, but the industry avoided using it, as it would lessen the
pleasurable effect of nicotine to smokers.

The tobacco industry will certainly not motivate you to stop smoking, even if
they know that this may lead to your death. It is now your decision to throw
away your smoking habit for good and choose a healthier lifestyle, which can
add more years to your life.

## What Happens When a Smoker Quits

The process of quitting requires determination and patience, since the
withdrawal period will affect you physically and mentally. Although quitting
is hard, rest assured that it would benefit your health in many ways. In fact,
you may already feel positive effects just after a few minutes of quitting
cigarettes.

![Quit Smoking](https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/infographic/quit-

smoking-preview.jpg)

**> >>>> Click Here <<<<<**

Embed this infographic on your website:

![Quit Smoking](https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/infographic/quit-

smoking.jpg)

The side effects of smoking can recede if you make the conscious decision to
quit. Discover what happens when you stop smoking in this infographic "What
Happens When a Smoker Quits?" Use the embed code to share it on your website.

    
    
    <img
    src="https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/infographic/quit-smoking.jpg"
    alt="Quit Smoking" border="0" style="max-width:100%; min-width:300px; margin:
    0 auto 20px auto; display:block;"><p style="max-width:800px; min-
    width:300px; margin:0 auto; text-align:center;"> The side effects of
    smoking can recede if you make the conscious decision to quit. Discover what
    happens when you stop smoking in this infographic "What Happens When a Smoker
    Quits?" Use the embed code to share it on your website. </p&gt

Click on the code area and press CTRL + C (for Windows) / CMD + C (for
Macintosh) to copy the code.

## Tips on How to Quit Smoking

Addicted smokers still have hope in turning over a new leaf. I suggest that
you practice these prevention techniques to help you quit smoking:20

• **Choose a quit day —** Pick a day that's not stressful for you so that you
can prepare yourself. It can be your birthday, an anniversary or even just the
first day of the month.

• **Don't quit alone —** Telling someone about your decision to stop smoking
may provide you an enormous support when you feel alone in your battle to
quit.

• **Know your nicotine replacement options —** Nicotine replacement therapy
(NRT) may help you quit smoking, as it aids in overcoming withdrawal symptoms.
It's considered safe for all smokers except for pregnant women and people with
heart disease.21 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved five
forms of NRT: patch, gum, nasal spray, inhalers and lozenges. However, it's
still best to ask a medical professional about which form of NRT is most
suitable for you.22

• **Get smart about your smoking —** Keeping a journal can help you track the
situations that helped you up or pushed you down in your attempt to quit
smoking, allowing you to determine how you can deal with them without reaching
for a cigarette.

• **Identify your triggers —** Make a list of all the things that you have
done in the past that involves smoking. Before your quit day, plan out how you
will deal with these triggers.

• **Change what, where, when and how you smoke —** Altering your smoking
habits, such as the time and places where you used to smoke, may help you
during your attempt to quit.

• **Spring clean —** Wash and throw away everything that reminds you of
smoking.

• **Get support —** It's a great idea to seek support from communities of
former smokers or from a clinic that specializes in helping those who want
quit.

• **Quit day and beyond —** You have to adjust your behavior to identify what
triggers you to smoke.

• **If you're going to do it, do it —** Commitment is key to be successful in
your attempt to quit. It will certainly be hard but it is worth it.

Quitting smoking may be hard, but I advise you to do it as early as now. I
really believe that having a healthy, smoke-free lifestyle will not only
benefit you but your family as well.

Health Questions Directory

  * 0
  *     *       *   * 0

  *     *   * Sources and References

  * 1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Smoking and Tobacco Use

  * 2 N Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 17; 362(24): 2295–2303.
  * 3 Medscape July 18, 2018
  * 4 International Business Times November 27, 2014
  * 5, 10, 12, 14, 17 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Health Effects of Cigarette Smoking
  * 6 Center for Substance Abuse Research, Tobacco
  * 7 Reuters, December 9, 2014
  * 8, 9 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, How Does Smoking Affect the Heart and Blood Vessels 
  * 11, 13 American Heart Association, How Cigarettes Damage Your Body 
  * 15 Fertility and Sterility April 2004 Volume 81, Issue 4, Pages 1181–1186
  * 16 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Chemicals in Tobacco Smoke
  * 18 Am J Public Health. 2008 September; 98(9): 1643–1650.
  * 19 Nicotine and Tobacco Research, September 27, 2011
  * 20 HuffPost Healthy Living, November 20, 2014
  * 21 American Cancer Society, Nicotine Replacement Therapy
  * 22 American Cancer Society, What Are the Types of Nicotine Replacement Therapy

![Loading](//media.mercola.com/themes/mercola/images/loading1.gif) **Loading
Please Wait**

Show Comments (33)

Post your comment

![Loading](//media.mercola.com/themes/mercola/images/loading1.gif) **Loading
Please Wait**

Please Enter Your Comment

![]()

Leave a comment...

  * **Sort Comments by :**
  * Discover the comments that have the most impact on our readers. 

  * View this article’s most recent comments. 

  * Read your fellow readers’ comments arranged from oldest to newest. 

  * See what our top posters have to say about this article. 

### Related Articles

  * Smoking Rots You from the Inside
  * Study: Women Who Quit Smoking by Age 40 Avoid 90% of Death Risk
  * 6 Things to Do Instead of Smoking

Post your comment

**Reply to this thread** (2000 Characters only)

Characters remaining:

  * Please enter your comment!

**Edit Your Comment** (2000 Characters only)

Characters Remaining:

  * Please enter your comment!

__

## Comment deleted violating the aspect of our terms of use

#### Most Popular

  * ![Yoga Poses](//media.mercola.com/ImageServer/Public/2018/November/EnglishBanner/yoga-poses.jpg)

* * *

  * ![Dandelion Tea](//media.mercola.com/ImageServer/Public/2018/November/EnglishBanner/dandelion-tea.jpg)

* * *

  * ![Planting Garlic](//media.mercola.com/ImageServer/Public/2019/April/EnglishBanner/planting-garlic.jpg)

* * *

  * ![Mercola SMS Messaging](//media.mercola.com/ImageServer/Public/2019/January/EnglishBanner/mercola-sms-messaging.jpg)

* * *

Days

:

Hours

:

Minutes

:

Seconds

__

x

By continuing to browse our site you agree to our use of cookies, revised
Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

I agree

Top

__

__

![Mercola.com](//media.mercola.com/assets/images/mercola/mercola-logo-

responsive.png)

__

  * __877-985-2695
  * __Cart
  * EN __
    * Deutsch
    * Español
    * Français
    * Italiano
    * Polski
    * Português
    * русский
    * 中文
    * 日本語
    * 한국어

Sign in Join

  * Health __
    * Body Hacks
    * Common Health Questions 
    * Diseases Directory
    * Gardening Tips
    * Herbal Oils
    * Herbs and Spices
    * Infographics
    * Nutrition Plan
    * Resolution Guide
    * Teas
    * Videos
    * Vitamins and Supplements
  * Pets __
    * Articles
    * Pet Food Facts
    * Raw Food 101
    * Videos
  * Fitness __
    * Articles
    * Exercises
    * Fitness Plan
    * Videos
  * Food Facts
  * Recipes __
    * Fruits
    * Meat
    * Nuts and Seeds
    * Poultry
    * Seafood
    * Vegetables
    * Ketogenic Diet Recipes
  * Blogs
  * Shop
  * About   
Dr. Mercola

  * English

    * Select Language
    * Deutsch
    * Español
    * Français
    * Italiano
    * Polski
    * Português
    * русский
    * 中文
    * 日本語
    * 한국어
  * Shop
  * Health
    * Body Hacks
    * Common Health Questions 
    * Diseases Directory
    * Gardening Tips
    * Herbal Oils
    * Herbs and Spices
    * Infographics
    * Nutrition Plan
    * Resolution Guide
    * Teas
    * Videos
    * Vitamins and Supplements
  * Pets
    * Pets
    * Articles
    * Pet Food Facts
    * Raw Food 101
    * Videos
  * Fitness
    * Fitness
    * Articles
    * Exercises
    * Fitness Plan
    * Videos
  * Food Facts
  * Recipes
    * Recipes
    * Fruits
    * Meat
    * Nuts and Seeds
    * Poultry
    * Seafood
    * Vegetables
    * Ketogenic Diet Recipes
  * Blogs
  * About Dr. Mercola
  * Contact Us 
  * Disclaimer
    * Disclaimer
    * Disclaimer: The entire contents of this website are based upon the opinions of Dr. Mercola, unless otherwise noted. Individual articles are based upon the opinions of the respective author, who retains copyright as marked. The information on this website is not intended to replace a one-on-one relationship with a qualified health care professional and is not intended as medical advice. It is intended as a sharing of knowledge and information from the research and experience of Dr. Mercola and his community. Dr. Mercola encourages you to make your own health care decisions based upon your research and in partnership with a qualified health care professional. If you are pregnant, nursing, taking medication, or have a medical condition, consult your health care professional before using products based on this content.

If you want to use an article on your site please click here. This content may
be copied in full, with copyright, contact, creation and information intact,
without specific permission, when used only in a not-for-profit format. If any
other use is desired, permission in writing from Dr. Mercola is required.

Terms & Conditions | Updated Privacy Policy | Sitemap

(C) 1997-2019 Dr. Joseph Mercola. All Rights Reserved.

  * Charities and Organizations
    * Charities and Organizations
    * Organic Consumers Association
    * NVIC
    * Consumers for Dental Choice
    * Regeneration International
    * GrassrootsHealth
    * Fluoride Alert
    * Center for Nutrition Advocacy
    * Cornucopia Institute
    * Vitamin D Council
    * Alliance for Natural Health USA
    * Institute for Responsible Technology
    * Caminos de Agua
    * Organic and Natural
    * American Botanical Council
    * IFOAM - Organics International
    * CANWI
    * MRSA Survivors Network
    * Rabies Challenge Fund
    * AHVMF
  * Mercola.org
  * FAQ
  * Sign in
  * Join

Subscribe to the FREE #1 Natural Health Newsletter

Loading Please Wait ![Loading Please

Wait](/themes/mercola/images/loadingDotDot.gif)

Connect with Dr. Mercola

__![MeWe](https://media.mercola.com/assets/images/mercola/mewe-icon.png)

* * *

Thank you! Your purchases help us support these charities and organizations.

  * Organic Consumers Association
  * National Vaccine Information Center
  * Mercury Free Dentistry
  * Regeneration International
  * Grassroots Health
  * Fluoride Alert
  * Center for Nutrition Advocacy

  * Cornucopia Institute

  * Vitamin D Council
  * Alliance for Natural Health USA
  * Institute for Responsible Technology
  * Caminos de Agua
  * Organic and Natural
  * American Botanical Council

  * IFOAM - Organics International

  * CANWI
  * MRSA Survivors Network
  * Rabies Challenge Fund
  * AHVMF

  * **Inside Mercola.com**

  * About Dr. Mercola

  * Contact Us
  * Employment Opportunities
  * En Espanol
  * Health Articles
  * Health Videos
  * Media Inquiries
  * Mercola Community FAQ
  * Mercola Social Responsibility
  * Press Room
  * Special Reports
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Updated Privacy Policy

  * **Special Info Sites**

  * Aspartame

  * Cancer
  * Fitness
  * Fluoride
  * Fructose/Sugar
  * GMO
  * Mercury
  * Nutritional Typing
  * Pets
  * Vaccines
  * Vitamin D

  * **Shopping**

  * Autoship Program

  * California Supply Chains Act
  * FAQs
  * GMO-Free Products
  * Healthy Rewards Program
  * Low Price Guarantee
  * Online Shopping
  * Our Service Commitment

* * *

  * Premium Products
  * Product Badge Glossary
  * Return Policy
  * Shipping Policy (Domestic)
  * Shipping Policy (International)
  * Store Locator
  * Wholesale Program

**Disclaimer:** The entire contents of this website are based upon the
opinions of Dr. Mercola, unless otherwise noted. Individual articles are based
upon the opinions of the respective author, who retains copyright as marked.
The information on this website is not intended to replace a one-on-one
relationship with a qualified health care professional and is not intended as
medical advice. It is intended as a sharing of knowledge and information from
the research and experience of Dr. Mercola and his community. Dr. Mercola
encourages you to make your own health care decisions based upon your research
and in partnership with a qualified health care professional. If you are
pregnant, nursing, taking medication, or have a medical condition, consult
your health care professional before using products based on this content.

If you want to use an article on your site please click here. This content may
be copied in full, with copyright, contact, creation and information intact,
without specific permission, when used only in a not-for-profit format. If any
other use is desired, permission in writing from Dr. Mercola is required.

Terms & Conditions | Updated Privacy Policy | Sitemap

(C) 1997-2019 Dr. Joseph Mercola. All Rights Reserved.

  * ![Mercola Health Resources, LLC BBB Business Review](https://seal-chicago.bbb.org/seals/blue-seal-280-80-bbb-22002555.png)

  * ![McAfee SECURE sites help keep you safe from identity theft, credit card fraud, spyware, spam, viruses and online scams](//images.scanalert.com/meter/shop.mercola.com/23.gif)

  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=25d2a2d6-712e-4176-8b4f-67002e042b9f)

  *   * ![Privacy Policy](//media.mercola.com/assets/images/privacy-policy.png)

×

Please Sign in or Join to continue.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

