

__Contact Us

__Insurance

__Admissions

__Teen Addiction

Search

![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-logo-Loch.png)
![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/apple-icon-152x152.png)

__

352.771.2700 Recovery Is Possible __

__

  * Drug Addiction __
    *       * Drug Addiction Overview
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Alcohol
    * Cocaine
    * Heroin
    * Marijuana
    * Meth
    * Xanax
    * Stimulants
    * Adderall
    * Amphetamines
    * Bath Salts
    * Crack
    * Ecstasy, MDMA
    * Spice, K2
    *       * Opioid/Opiates
    * Codeine
    * Fentanyl
    * OxyContin
    * Hydrocodone
    * Dilaudid
    * Lortab
    * Kratom
    * Morphine
    * Oxycodone
    * Vicodin
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Ativan
    * Klonopin
    * Valium
    * Librium
    *       * Prescription Drugs
    * Percocet
    * Methadone
    * Ambien
    * Tramadol
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
    * Narcan
    * Ultram
    * Fioricet
    * Trazodone
    * Drug Index
      * Ayahuasca
      * CBD (Cannabidiol)
      * Kava
      * Peyote
    *       * ![Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/psychological-vs-physical-addiction-social-150x150.jpg)

Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic

![Can you become addicted to Heroin the first

time?](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/addicted-

first-time-100x100.jpg)

Can You Become Addicted to Heroin the First Time?

* * *

__ Drug Abuse Hotline

__ Alcohol Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Mental Health __
    *       * Anxiety Disorders
      * Anxiety
      * Generalized Anxiety
      * Panic Disorder
      * Social Anxiety
    * Personality Disorders
      * Antisocial PD
      * Borderline PD
      * Dissociative Identity Disorder
      * Histrionic PD
      * Schizoid PD
    * Stress Related Disorders
      * Adjustment Disorder
      * PTSD
    *       * Eating Disorders
      * Anorexia
      * Binge Eating
      * Bulimia
      * Restrictive Food Intake
    * Depression & Mood Disorders
      * Bipolar Disorder
      * Depression
      * Major Depressive Disorder
      * Postpartum Depression
    * Obsessive Compulsive Disorders
      * Body Dysmorphia
      * Gender Dysphoria
      * Impulse Control Disorder
      * OCD
    *       * Other Mental Health Issues
      * ADHD/ADD
      * Phobias
      * Psychosis
      * Schizophrenia
      * Sleep Disorders
    * Common Co-Occurring Disorders
      * Process Addictions
      * Anxiety and Substance Abuse
      * Borderline PD and Drug Abuse
      * Depression and Drug Abuse
      * Panic Disorder and Drug Abuse
      * PTSD and Substance Abuse
      * Schizophrenia and Drug Abuse
    *       * ![comforting a woman experiencing a mental health crisis](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/What-is-mental-health-first-aid-150x150.jpg)

Mental Health First Aid

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Addiction Treatment __
    *       * Drug Addiction Treatment
      * Alcoholism Treatment
      * Medical Detox
      * Medication-Assisted Treatment
      * Inpatient Rehab
      * Partial Hospitalization
      * Intensive Outpatient
      * Outpatient Rehab
      * Aftercare
      * Dual Diagnosis
    *       * Understanding Treatment
      * Our Treatment Philosophy
      * Drug Rehab
      * Drug Detox
      * Intervention
      * Friends & Family Portal
    * Treatment Therapies
      * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
      * Dialectical Behavioral Therapy
      * Individual/Group Therapy
      * Intensive Therapy
      * Substance Abuse Treatment Centers and Rehab
      * Substance Abuse Counseling
    *       * Mental Health/Dual Diagnosis
      * Treatments for Anxiety
      * Bipolar Treatments
      * Treatments for Schizophrenia
      * Depression Treatments
      * PTSD Treatments
    *       * ![10 Tips to Help Family Members of Addicts Cope](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shutterstock_285296222-e1494436072654-150x150.jpg)

10 Tips to Help Family Members of Those Struggling With Addiction Cope

![](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/@istock_000013186202_large-600x400-150x150.jpg)

10 Signs You Need Professional Help

* * *

__ Heroin Hotline

__ Marijuana Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Our Rehab Centers __
    * Locations Overview
    *       * Nationwide Adult Rehab Centers
    * The Recovery Village Umatilla (FL)
    * Orlando Recovery Center (FL)
    * The Recovery Village at Palmer Lake (CO)
    * The Recovery Village Columbus (OH)
    * The Recovery Village Ridgefield (WA)
    *       * Specialty Rehab Centers
    * Next Generation Village (FL)
    * IAFF Recovery Center (MD)
    * Aftercare
    * Next Step Village (FL)
  * Treatment By State __
    *       * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    *       * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    *       * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    *       * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
  * Resources __
    *       * Sobriety Calculator
    * Friends and Family
    * Teen Addiction
    * College Students
    * LGBTQ+ Addiction
    * Active Duty Military
    * Military Veterans
    *       * Fitness & Nutrition
    * Spiritual Resources
    * Domestic Violence
    * Lawyers
    * Caregiver Resources
    * Cancer Patients
    * Elderly
  * Recovery Blog __
    * Inside Addiction
  * __Insurance
  * __Contact Us
  * __Admissions
  *     * Search

__ **Don't wait another day. Help is a phone call away.** 352.771.2700

_close_ What To Expect

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit to
treatment** until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help
you heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and we are **ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns.**

__

352.771.2700

Recovery Is Possible

Home ____ Opiate Addiction

__Share 114

__Tweet

__Share

114 Shares

# Opiate Addiction and Opioid Addiction

![Patrick Moser](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/Patrick-Moser-e1548280711688.jpg)

By The Recovery Village

Editor Camille Renzoni

Reviewer __Patrick Moser

Updated on02/25/19

* * *

The terms opiate and opioid are used interchangeably in medical practices
because opiates and opioids affect the same receptors in the brain tissues and
have the same effects on the central nervous system. However, there is a
difference between the two terms. Opiates are naturally occurring drugs
derived from the opium poppy plant, and include drugs like opium and morphine.
Opioids are man-made drugs derived from morphine, and include synthetic drugs
like oxycodone, hydrocodone and fentanyl.

All opiates are considered opioids, but not all opioids are naturally
occurring opiates. The term opioid is an umbrella term that encompasses both
naturally occurring opiates and synthetic opioid drugs.

While opiates are prescribed to relieve acute pain, prolonged use can lead to
opiate addiction (opioid addiction) and abuse. Common opioids include
prescription painkillers such as dilaudid, oxycodone, hydrocodone and
fentanyl, as well as the illicit drug heroin. Opiate addiction (including
opioid addiction) is the leading cause of the drug overdose in the United
States, with 47,600 deaths attributed to prescription and illicit opioids in
2017\. Opiate addiction is a disease that has destroyed the lives and families
of millions. While there is no cure for opiate addiction, this disease can be
treated in drug addiction rehabilitation or drug rehab.

To fully understand opiate and opioid addiction, it’s important to understand
what makes these drugs so addictive, as well as their intended medical
purposes.

## What Are Opiates? __

Opiates are drugs used to treat pain derived from the opium plant. These
substances are highly addictive and carry a high risk for opiate addiction
(including opioid addiction) for anyone who takes them for a prolonged period,
even if they are used as prescribed.

The Sumerians first cultivated the opium poppy plant, or Papaver somniferum,
in 3,400 B.C. They referred to it as the “joy plant,” and the wonder drug was
soon passed around the world as merchants learned of its multiple uses. Opium
was not only used to relieve pain, but it was also used to induce sleep and
relieve bowel issues. Opiates are also frequently used to treat coughs.

Opium byproducts have been used for medical purposes for many years. These
ingredients occur naturally in the sap of the opium poppy. Natural derivatives
of the opium poppy plant are called opiates. Opiates can be further
manipulated synthetically. Such man-made opiates are called opioids.
Collectively, these opiate and opioid derivatives of the poppy plant include
morphine, codeine, oxycodone and heroin, among other opioid drugs.

While there is no major difference in the effectiveness of the drugs, opioids
are synthetic or partly synthetic drugs that act similarly to opiates. With
opioids, the active ingredients are synthesized by chemical processes.
However, because they are similar in how they affect the body and brain, the
terms opiate and opioid are often used interchangeably.

For almost as long as opiates have existed, they have been used for both
medicinal and recreational (i.e., to get high) purposes. Opiates exist on the
drug market in a few different forms: as prescription pharmaceuticals
(morphine, codeine, methadone, etc.), and illicit street drugs (heroin, opium,
etc).

All of these drugs can be abused, potentially leading to opiate addiction
(opioid addiction), even if they are prescription medications. People
frequently refer to opioids using slang words and phrases to evade police
attention. Some of the street names for a variety of opiates and opioids
include:

  * H
  * Hammer
  * Skag
  * Gear
  * Smack
  * Horse
  * Elephant
  * Rock
  * Nose drops
  * Black tar
  * China white
  * White
  * Chinese H
  * White dynamite
  * Dragon

## Opiate Intended Use __

Opiate pain medications areprescribed mainly to treat moderate to severe pain.
In most cases, opiates are prescribed following surgery or a medical
procedure. Common legal opiate drugs include:

  * Morphine is a highly addictive, naturally occurring substance found in the opium plant
  * Meperidine, similar to morphine, is a synthetic prescription medicatio
  * Codeine, a less powerful but still addictive substance, is primarily used as a cough suppressant. Codeine is typically prescribed as a combination medication.
  * Hydrocodone is a semi-synthetic opioid. It’s the most frequently prescribed opiate medication on the market and is included in drugs like Lortab and Vicodin.
  * Oxycodone is another semi-synthetic opioid. Common brand names are Percocet (a combination drug containing oxycodone) and Oxycontin.
  * Fentanyl is a highly addictive opiate that is produced synthetically, so it is known as a synthetic opioid analgesic. Fentanyl is commonly prescribed as a transdermal patch.

![opiates](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/03/shutterstock_61669660-e1490650111916.jpg)

## What Do Opiates Look Like? __

Opiates can range in appearance. Drugs like oxycodone and hydrocodone come in
pill form. Because many opioids are combination drugs that are formulated with
acetaminophen or aspirin, different pill colors can denote different strengths
of the drug. These combinations may be pink, blue, peach or yellow.

Opiates are usually swallowed as pills to treat pain. However, if someone is
misusing opioids, they may use an unapproved route of administration to feel
the effects faster, including:

  * Chewing the drug in order to increase absorption
  * Crushing and snorting pills for faster entry into the bloodstream
  * Dissolving crushed pills in water and injecting them intravenously
  * Misusing opioid intravenous solutions (morphine, hydrocodone and fentanyl are manufactured as intravenous solutions for use in hospitals)

People who struggle with opiate addiction (opioid addiction) may store their
pills in traditional orange pill bottles or hide them in mint tins or candy
jars. If the person crushes their pills and snorts them, they may keep the
powder in small bags, twisted in a piece of cling wrap or in a foil pouch.

Many people begin their opiate addiction (opioid addiction) with a legitimate
prescription. These people may have had surgery or an illness for which they
were prescribed an opioid painkiller that they became addicted to. For many
people, prescription painkiller use leads to heroin addiction. In many cases,
people who are in treatment for heroin addiction resorted to using heroin
because prescription pills were more expensive and harder to obtain.

Heroin is derived from morphine and is typically sold in powder form. Heroin
varies in color from white to brown. Besides powder form, heroin can also be
found as granules and brown crystalline pieces called “rocks.”

## Are Opiates Addictive? __

Opiates are highly addictive drugs, making opiate addiction (opioid addiction)
a very real possibility for people who use these drugs. When a person takes an
opiate, the drug enters the brain through the bloodstream, creating a flood of
artificial endorphins and dopamine, which areneurotransmitters responsible for
feelings of reward, pleasure and satisfaction. These neurotransmitters create
a rush of euphoria. This high is so unlike any naturally-occurring rush of
dopamine or endorphins that the only way a person can experience it again is
by using the drug again.

After repeated use, however, the brain will stop creating dopamine and
endorphins naturally, limiting a person’s ability to experience these feelings
again to only when they use opiates. Because of the strong and desirable
feelings that flood the brain, and because they can no longer feel pleasure
naturally, they may crave an opiate high. People choose to abuse opiates in
order to lessen their pain and continue experiencing these euphoric feelings
on demand. This is one of the main reasons opiates are highly addictive and
why opiate addiction (opioid addiction) is such a concern.

There are several steps in developing opiate addiction (opioid addiction).
These include:

  * Tolerance: when a person has to use increasingly larger doses of opiates to experience the same high.
  * Physical dependence: when the body will enter withdrawal if the person stops taking the drug.
  * Psychological dependence: cravings for opiates set in, which are the hallmark of opiate addiction (opioid addiction).

Many people who experience opiate addiction (opioid addiction) become addicted
to opioids unintentionally. Some people begin using opioids with a legitimate
prescription in response to a painful accident or surgery. By the time they no
longer need the drugs for their pain, however, opiates have taken hold in the
brain and have caused a physical dependence starting an opiate addiction
(opioid addiction).

Some people may fake continued pain symptoms to get refills of their
prescription, or “doctor shop,” and visit different doctors to obtain multiple
prescriptions at once. Prescription painkillers are also available illicitly
on the black market or dark web, but can be expensive.

Many people who start their opiate addiction using prescription opiates end up
misusing heroin, as it is cheaper to use and easier to get a hold of.
According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, approximately 80 percent of
people who currently use heroin previously misused prescription opioids.

Long-term opioid use changes the way nerve cells work in the brain. This
happens even to people who take opioids for a long time to treat pain, as
prescribed by their doctor. The nerve cells grow used to the presence of
opioids, so when they are taken away suddenly, the brain has a volatile
reaction. This results in unpleasant feelings and reactions, known as
withdrawal symptoms.

One of the hallmarks of opiate addiction (opioid addiction) is a person abuses
opiates even though it has admitted negative effects on their life. They have
strong urges (called cravings) to take opiates and they no longer feel
satisfied by naturally pleasurable rewards (e.g., chocolate, sex, television
or a walk on the beach).

With stigma still surrounds opioid addiction, many people avoid going to
treatment and end up endangering themselves. At The Recovery Village, we
believe that there is no shame in opioid addiction or any addiction. Addiction
is a disease. And, as with any disease, it requires medical care and
attention. With the right course of action, detoxification, treatment plans
and supervision from the best staff, you can put opiate addiction (opioid
addiction) in the past and lead a happy and successful life. There is no
better time to seek treatment than now.

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now.

__352.771.2700 __What to expect when I call?

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit** to
treatment until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help you
heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and **we are ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns 24/7.**

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now. __352.771.2700

Sources

Ceida. “Opioids/Heroin.” (n.d.) Accessed 19 Mar. 2017.

Foundation for a Drug-Free World. “What Does Heroin Look Like?” (n.d.)
Accessed 19 Mar. 2017.

Rudd RA, Seth P, David F, Scholl L. “Increases in Drug and Opioid-Involved
Overdose Deaths — United States, 2010–2015.” Published on December 30, 2016.
Accessed March 2017.

The National Alliance of Advocates for Buprenorphine Treatment. “How Do
Opioids Work in the Brain?” NAABT, published 8 Dec. 2016. Accessed 21 Feb.
2017.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse. “Overdose Death Rates.” Last updated on
January 2019. Accessed February 2019.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse. “Opioid Overdose Crisis.” Revised
January 2019. Accessed February 2019.

Overdose Prevention & Education Network. “What is an Opioid?” (n.d.) Accessed
21 Feb. 2017.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “The Opioid Epidemic: By the
Numbers.” Published on June 2016. Accessed 21 Feb. 2017.

NEXT:Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects

__

Opiate Addiction

NEXT:Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects

__

Withdrawal& Detox

Opiate Addiction Treatment & Rehab

##### Have more questions about Opiate abuse?

Q.

How Long Do Opiates Stay in Your System?

Q.

How Do I Know If Someone Is On Opiates?

Q.

Can You Mix Opiates and Alcohol?

Q.

Are Opiates NSAIDS?

Q.

Which Opiates are Most Addictive?

Read the most frequently asked questions

##### See also

Guide to Opioid Replacement Therapy

Using Ibogaine for Opiate Detox

Methadone Treatment for Opiate Addiction

One Year Later, Prince’s Fentanyl Overdose Inspires Change

Opiate Hotline

See more topics

### Is Roid Rage Real?

May 17, 2019

Search

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now.

__352.771.2700 __What to expect when I call?

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit** to
treatment until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help you
heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and **we are ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns 24/7.**

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now. __352.771.2700

Opiate Addiction

4.5 (89.6%) 25 vote[s]

__Share 114

__Tweet

__Share

114 Shares

## Latest Related Posts:

  * Opiate Addiction Treatment and Rehab
  * Opiate Withdrawal and Detox
  * You Can Detox Safely From Opiates While Pregnant
  * 10 Ways to Get off Opiates
  * Opiate addiction & family support: how to help a loved one
  * Opiate Abuse: Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects
  * Opiate Addiction Related Topics
  * Opiate Addiction FAQ

## Ready to start? We're here for you.

__352.771.2700

![The Recovery Village Drug Rehab Center](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-

logo-Loch.png)

![The Recovery Village](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/The-Recovery-Village.jpg) The Recovery Village

633 Umatilla Blvd. Umatilla, FL 32784

(352) 771-2700

### About Us

  * About
  * Our Team
  * Philosophy
  * Careers

### Get Started

  * Admissions
  * Insurance
  * Locations
  * Contact Us

### Legal

  * Notice Of Privacy Practices
  * Terms and Conditions
  * Privacy Policy

* * *

(C) The Recovery Village at Umatilla All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

