

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

Marijuana and Public Health

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email
  * Syndicate

# Is it possible to “overdose” or have a “bad reaction” to marijuana?

Minus

Related Pages

A fatal overdose is unlikely, but that doesn't mean marijuana is harmless. The
signs of using too much marijuana are similar to the typical effects of using
marijuana but more severe. These signs may include extreme confusion, anxiety,
paranoia, panic, fast heart rate, delusions or hallucinations, increased blood
pressure, and severe nausea or vomiting. In some cases, these reactions can
lead to unintentional injury such as a motor vehicle crash, fall, or
poisoning.

  1. What is marijuana?
  2. How is marijuana used?
  3. What determines how marijuana effects a person?
  4. Is marijuana medicine?
  5. Is it possible for someone to become addicted to marijuana?
  6. How do I know if I am addicted to marijuana?
  7. What are the health risks of using marijuana?
  8. Is it possible to "overdose" or have a "bad reaction" to marijuana?
  9. What are the effects of mixing marijuana with alcohol, tobacco or prescription drugs?
  10. How harmful is K2/Spice (synthetic marijuana or synthetic cannabinoids)?
  11. Does marijuana use lead to other drug use?
  12. Is it safe for a breastfeeding mom to use marijuana?
  13. Can secondhand marijuana smoke affect nonsmokers, including children?
  14. How is eating and drinking foods that contain marijuana (edibles) different from smoking marijuana?
  15. It's legal in many states, so doesn't that mean marijuana is safe?

Page last reviewed: March 7, 2018

Content source: National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

home Marijuana and Public Health

  * Health Effects
  * Data and Statistics
  * Frequently Asked Questions
  * Resources and Tools expand
    * Fast Facts and Fact Sheets expand
    * Marijuana Use and Driving
    * Marijuana Use and Pregnancy
    * Marijuana Use and Teens
    * Related Websites
    * Publications
  * A Closer Look: How Cannabis Impacts Health
  * About Us

**Error processing SSI file**

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

  * About CDC
  * Jobs
  * Funding
  * Policies
  * File Viewers & Players

  * Privacy

  * FOIA
  * No Fear Act
  * OIG
  * Nondiscrimination
  * Accessibility

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Youtube
  * Instagram

  * Syndicate

  * CDC TV
  * RSS
  * Email

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

##### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

  * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
  * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
  * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
  * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

