

HempTraders.com

Home | About Us | My Account | Help | Shopping Cart
![](/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/template/carticon.gif)

![Submit](/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/template/search_btn.gif)

  * Hemp Textiles
  * Hemp Twine
  * Hemp Rope
  * Hemp Webbing
  * Hemp Fiber
  * Hemp Seeds/Seed Oil
  * Hemp Extracts
  * Hemp Board

![](https://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/Hemp%20Traders%20Logo%202008-1.jpg)

### Company Info

  * About Us
  * Wholesale Price List
  * Shipping
  * Returns
  * Incoming Products
  * Environmental Policies
  * Fair Trade
  * Site Help / FAQ

### Other Services

  * Hemp Samples
  * Dyeing/Converting
  * Hemp Paper
  * Closeout Products
  * Second Quality / Deals
  * Customer Hemp Products
  * Related Links

### Properties of Hemp

  * Hemp Textile Properties
  * Tips for Working with Hemp Textiles
  * Wash & Care
  * Hemp 101
  * Hemp Market Reports
  * Hemp Myths & Realities
  * Hemp Videos

![Email Newsletter icon, E-mail Newsletter icon, Email List icon, E-mail List

icon](https://imgssl.constantcontact.com/ui/images1/visitor/email1_trans.gif)
Receive our Monthly Newsletter and Special Deals

![](https://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/Like-Us-On-

Facebook%20small.jpg)

![](/a/i/seal_volusion2.png)

![](https://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/visa-

mastercard-discover-amex-paypal.jpg)

|

![Waiting...](/a/i/ajax-loader.gif)

## | | **Home > Hemp Textile Properties**

![](/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/clear1x1.gif)  
| | |

![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/properties_img_properties1.jpg)

![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/properties_img_properties3.jpg)

![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/properties_img_properties5\(1\).jpg)

| Hemp Textile Properties  
As the premier plant fiber, True Hemp or Cannabis sativa has served mankind
for thousands of years. This venerable fiber has always been valued for its
strength and durability. Materials made from hemp have been discovered in
tombs dating back to 8,000 B.C.E. Christopher Columbus sailed to America on
ships rigged with hemp. Hemp was grown extensively in colonial America by
numerous farmers including George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Betsy Ross
sewed the first American flag from hemp. In fact, its combination of
ruggedness and comfort were utilized by Levi Strauss as a lightweight duck
canvas for the very first pair of jeans made in California.

For thousands of years hemp was traditionally used as an industrial fiber.
Sailors relied upon hemp cordage for strength to hold their ships and sails,
and the coarseness of the fiber made hemp useful for canvas, sailcloth, sacks,
rope, and paper.

While hemp fiber was the first choice for industry, the coarseness of the
fiber restricted hemp from apparel and most home uses. Hemp needed to be
softened. Traditional methods to soften vegetable fibers used acids to remove
lignin, a type of natural glue found in many plant fibers. While this method
to remove lignin worked well with cotton or flax, it weakened the fibers of
hemp and left them too unstable for use. Hemp therefore remained as an
industrial fabric.

In the mid 1980's, researchers developed an enzymatic process to successfully
remove lignin from the hemp fiber without compromising its strength. For the
first time in history, de-gummed hemp fiber could be spun alone or with other
fibers to produce textiles for apparel. This technological breakthrough has
catapulted hemp to the forefront of modern textile design and fashion. Given
hemp's superiority to other fibers, the benefits of this breakthrough are
enormous.

Superior Properties  
Hemp fiber is one of the strongest and most durable of all natural textile
fibers. Products made from hemp will outlast their competition by many years.
Not only is hemp strong, but it also holds its shape, stretching less than any
other natural fiber. This prevents hemp garments from stretching out or
becoming distorted with use. Hemp may be known for its durability, but its
comfort and style are second to none. The more hemp is used, the softer it
gets. Hemp doesn't wear out, it wears in. Hemp is also naturally resistant to
mold and ultraviolet light.

Due to the porous nature of the fiber, hemp is more water absorbent, and will
dye and retain its color better than any fabric including cotton. This porous
nature allows hemp to "breathe," so that it is cool in warm weather.
Furthermore, air which is trapped in the fibers is warmed by the body, making
hemp garments naturally warm in cooler weather.

Environmental Advantages  
Hemp is an extremely fast growing crop, producing more fiber yield per acre
than any other source. Hemp can produce 250% more fiber than cotton and 600%
more fiber than flax using the same amount of land. The amount of land needed
for obtaining equal yields of fiber place hemp at an advantage over other
fibers.

Hemp grows best in warm tropical zones or in moderately cool, temperate
climates, such as the United States. Hemp leaves the soil in excellent
condition for any succeeding crop, especially when weeds may otherwise be
troublesome. Where the ground permits, hemp's strong roots descend for three
feet or more. The roots anchor and protect the soil from runoff, building and
preserving topsoil and subsoil structures similar to those of forests.
Moreover, hemp does not exhaust the soil. Hemp plants shed their leaves all
through the growing season, adding rich organic matter to the topsoil and
helping it retain moisture. Farmers have reported excellent hemp growth on
land that had been cultivated steadily for nearly 100 years.

Hemp Today  
As a fabric, hemp provides all the warmth and softness of a natural textile
but with a superior durability seldom found in other materials. Hemp is
extremely versatile and can be used for countless products such as apparel,
accessories, shoes, furniture, and home furnishings. Apparel made from hemp
incorporates all the beneficial qualities and will likely last longer and
withstand harsh conditions. Hemp blended with other fibers easily incorporates
the desirable qualities of both textiles. The soft elasticity of cotton or the
smooth texture of silk combined with the natural strength of hemp creates a
whole new genre of fashion design.

The possibilities for hemp fabrics are immense. It is likely that they will
eventually supersede cotton, linen, and polyester in numerous areas. With so
many uses and the potential to be produced cheaply, hemp textiles are the wave
of the future!

\---|---

Read This Interesting Information About Fibers Below!

![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/textile3.gif)
|
![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/textile2.gif)
|
![](http://www.hemptraders.com/v/vspfiles/templates/Jade2/images/textile1.gif)  
\---|---|---

Lab Tests Prove Hemp Possesses Anti-Bacterial Properties!

![](/v/vspfiles/assets/images/Anti-Bacterial Report pg1.jpg) |
![](/v/vspfiles/assets/images/Anti-Bacterial Report.jpg)  
\---|---

* * *

  * About Us
  * Company Info
  * Contact Us
  * Become an Affiliate

  * My Account

  * View Cart
  * Sign-In
  * Order Status

  * Products

  * Category Index
  * Product Index

  * Helpful Info

  * Shipping & Returns
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms & Conditions

  * Copyright (C) Hemp Traders. All Rights Reserved.

Built with Volusion

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

