

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile

    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out
  * A to Z Guides

# Medical Marijuana FAQ

![medical

marijuana](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/medical_marijuana_other/650x350_medical_marijuana_other.jpg)

### In this Article

#### In this Article

#### In this Article

  * What is medical marijuana?
  * What is medical marijuana used for?
  * How does it help?
  * Can medical marijuana help with seizure disorders?
  * Which states allow medical marijuana?
  * How do you get medical marijuana?
  * How do you take it?
  * Has the FDA approved medical marijuana?
  * What are the side effects of medical marijuana?

More than half of U.S. states and the District of Columbia have legalized
medical marijuana in some form, and more are considering bills to do the same.
Yet while many people are using marijuana, the FDA has only approved it for
treatment of two rare and severe forms of epilepsy, Dravet syndrome and
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.

Why hasn't more research been done? One reason is that the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) considers marijuana a Schedule I drug, the
same as heroin, LSD, and ecstasy, and likely to be abused and lacking in
medical value. Because of that, researchers need a special license to study
it, says Marcel Bonn-Miller, PhD, a substance abuse specialist at the
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine.

That may not change anytime soon. The DEA considered reclassifying marijuana
as a Schedule II drug like Ritalin or oxycodone, but decided ito keep it as a
Schedule I drug.

The agency did, however, agree to support additional research on marijuana and
make the process easier for researchers. ****"Research is critically needed,
because we have to be able to advise patients and doctors on the safe and
effective use of cannabis," Bonn-Miller says.

He shared some background on medical marijuana's uses and potential side
effects.

## What is medical marijuana?

Medical marijuana uses the marijuana plant or chemicals in it to treat
diseases or conditions. It's basically the same product as recreational
marijuana, but it's taken for medical purposes.

The marijuana plant contains more than 100 different chemicals called
cannabinoids. Each one has a different effect on the body.
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) are the main
chemicals used in medicine. THC also produces the "high" people feel when they
smoke marijuana or eat foods containing it.

## What is medical marijuana used for?

Medical marijuana is used to treat a number of different conditions,
including:

  * Alzheimer's disease
  * Appetite loss
  * Cancer
  * Crohn's disease
  * Eating disorders such as anorexia
  * Epilepsy
  * Glaucoma
  * Mental health conditions like schizophrenia and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
  * Multiple sclerosis
  * Muscle spasms
  * Nausea
  * Pain
  * Wasting syndrome (cachexia)

But it’s not yet proven to help many of these conditions, with a few
exceptions, Bonn-Miller says.

"The greatest amount of evidence for the therapeutic effects of cannabis
relate to its ability to reduce chronic pain, nausea and vomiting due to
chemotherapy, and spasticity [tight or stiff muscles] from MS," Bonn-Miller
says.

## How does it help?

Cannabinoids -- the active chemicals in medical marijuana -- are similar to
chemicals the body makes that are involved in appetite, memory, movement, and
pain.

Research suggests cannabinoids might:

  * Reduce anxiety
  * Reduce inflammation and relieve pain
  * Control nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy
  * Kill cancer cells and slow tumor growth
  * Relax tight muscles in people with MS
  * Stimulate appetite and improve weight gain in people with cancer and AIDS

## Can medical marijuana help with seizure disorders?

Medical marijuana received a lot of attention a few years ago when parents
said that a special form of the drug helped control seizures in their
children. The FDA recently approved Epidiolex, which is made from CBD, as a
therapy for people with very severe or hard-to-treat seizures. In studies,
some people had a dramatic drop in seizures after taking this drug.

## Which states allow medical marijuana?

Medical marijuana is legal in 33 states and the District of Columbia:

  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * District of Columbia
  * Florida
  * Hawaii
  * Illinois
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Missouri
  * Montana
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Dakota
  * Ohio
  * Oklahoma
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Washington
  * West Virginia

States that allow restricted use only include: Alabama, Georgia, Iowa,
Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina,South Carolina, Virginia,
Wisconsin and Wyoming.

## How do you get medical marijuana?

To get medical marijuana, you need a written recommendation from a licensed
doctor in states where that is legal. (Not every doctor is willing to
recommend medical marijuana for their patients.) You must have a condition
that qualifies for medical marijuana use. Each state has its own list of
qualifying conditions. Your state may also require you to get a medical
marijuana ID card. Once you have that card, you can buy medical marijuana at a
store called a dispensary.

## How do you take it?

To take medical marijuana, you can:

  * Smoke it
  * Inhale it through a device called a vaporizer that turns it into a mist
  * Eat it -- for example, in a brownie or lollipop
  * Apply it to your skin in a lotion, spray, oil, or cream
  * Place a few drops of a liquid under your tongue

How you take it is up to you. Each method works differently in your body. "If
you smoke or vaporize cannabis, you feel the effects very quickly," Bonn-
Miller says. "If you eat it, it takes significantly longer. It can take 1 to 2
hours to experience the effects from edible products."

## Has the FDA approved medical marijuana?

The FDA has approved two man-made cannabinoid medicines -- dronabinol
(Marinol, Syndros) and nabilone (Cesamet) -- to treat nausea and vomiting from
chemotherapy. The cannabidiol Epidiolex was approved in 2018 for treating
seizures associated with two rare and severe forms of epilepsy, Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome and Dravet syndrome.

## What are the side effects of medical marijuana?

Side effects that have been reported include:

  * Bloodshot eyes
  * Depression
  * Dizziness
  * Fast heartbeat
  * Hallucinations
  * Low blood pressure

The drug can also affect judgment and coordination, which could lead to
accidents and injuries. When used during the teenage years when the brain is
still developing, marijuana might affect IQ and mental function.

Because marijuana contains some of the same chemicals found in tobacco, there
have been concerns that smoking it could harm the lungs. The effects of
inhaled marijuana on lung health aren't clear, but there's some evidence it
might increase the risk for bronchitis and other lung problems.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse says marijuana can be addictive and is
considered a “gateway drug” to using other drugs. "The higher the level of THC
and the more often you use, the more likely you are to become dependent,"
Bonn-Miller says. "You have difficulty stopping if you need to stop. You have
cravings during periods when you're not using. And you need more and more of
it to have the same effect."

Another issue is that the FDA doesn't oversee medical marijuana like it does
prescription drugs. Although states monitor and regulate sales, they often
don’t have the resources to do so. That means the strength of and ingredients
in medical marijuana can differ quite a bit depending on where you buy it. "We
did a study last year in which we purchased labeled edible products, like
brownies and lollipops, in California and Washington. Then we sent them to the
lab," Bonn-Miller says. "Few of the products contained anywhere near what they
said they did. That's a problem."

WebMD Medical Reference Reviewed by Neil Lava, MD on December 15, 2018

#### Sources

SOURCES:

For FAQ

Marcel Bonn-Miller, PhD, adjunct assistant professor, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine.

National Conference of State Legislatures: "State Medical Marijuana Laws."

National Institute on Drug Abuse: "Drug Facts: Is Marijuana Medicine?" "Is
Marijuana Addictive?"

Drug Enforcement Administration: "Drug Schedules."

Department of Health and Human Services.

Kaur, R. _Current Clinical Pharmacology_ , April 2016.

PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board:
"Cannabis and Cannabinoids (PDQ)."

Schrot, R. _Annals of Medicine_ , May 2016.

Epilepsy Foundation: "Learn About Medical Marijuana and Epilepsy."

News release, Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s office.

News release, Insys Therapeutics, Inc.

For Marijuana Map:

Governing.com: “State Marijuana Laws Map.”

NCSL: “State Medical Marijuana Laws.”

© 2018 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

### further reading

  * Slideshow: All About CBD Oil
  * Slideshow: Medical Marijuana
  * Video: What Is Medical Marijuana Used to Treat?
  * Fibromyalgia and Medical Marijuana
  * Medical Marijuana and Cancer
  * Medical Marijuana: Regulations Clash
  * Forbidden Medicine
  * Medical Marijuana Topics

### Top Stories

  * Is Medical Pot a Blessing for Seniors? 
  * Medicinal Pot May Help Old-Age Ills, Study Says 
  * Why Are More Americans Using Medical Marijuana? 
  * Drug With Pot-Derived Ingredient Goes on Sale 
  * FDA OKs First Drug Containing CBD 
  * Can Marijuana Be The Answer For Pain? 

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

