

This content does not have an English version.

This content does not have an Arabic version.

![Mayo

Clinic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/~/media/386AC346D62D46A4944E0923CAF00D28.svg)

Menu

Search

Search

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now

  * Log in to Patient Account

  * English

    * Español
    * Português
    * العربية
    * 中文
  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

  * Patient Care & Health Info

    * Patient Care & Health Info
    * Healthy Lifestyle
    * Symptoms A-Z
    * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
    * Tests & Procedures A-Z
    * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
    * Appointments
    * Patient & Visitor Guide
    * Billing & Insurance
    * Patient Online Services

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

patientcare.jpg) **Quality Care** _Find out why Mayo Clinic is the right place
for your health care._ Make an appointment.

  * Departments & Centers

    * Departments & Centers
    * Doctors & Medical Staff
    * Medical Departments & Centers
    * International Services
    * Research Centers & Programs
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Contact Us

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

docsdepts.jpg) **Meet the Staff** _Find a directory of doctors and departments
at all Mayo Clinic campuses._ Visit now.

  * Research

    * Research
    * Explore Research Labs
    * Find Clinical Trials
    * Research Faculty
    * Postdoctoral Fellowships
    * Discovery's Edge Magazine
    * Search Publications
    * Training Grant Programs

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-research.jpg)
**Research and Clinical Trials** _See how Mayo Clinic research and clinical
trials advance the science of medicine and improve patient care._ Explore now.

  * Education

    * Education
    * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
    * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
    * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
    * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
    * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
    * Alumni Center

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-meded.jpg)
**Visit Our Schools** _Educators at Mayo Clinic train tomorrow’s leaders to
deliver compassionate, high-value, safe patient care._ Choose a degree.

  * For Medical Professionals

    * For Medical Professionals
    * Provider Relations
    * Referring Physician Portal
    * AskMayoExpert
    * Video Center
    * Publications
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-medprofs.jpg)
**Professional Services** _Explore Mayo Clinic's many resources and see jobs
available for medical professionals._ Get updates.

  * Products & Services

    * Products & Services
    * Health Books
    * Healthy Living Program
    * International Advisory Services
    * Sports Medicine
    * Licensable Content
    * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
    * Medical Products and Stores
  * Giving to Mayo Clinic

    * Giving to Mayo Clinic
    * Give Now
    * Philanthropy in Action
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Contact Us to Give

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2018/04/25/20/54/globalnav-

transform-3col.jpg) **Philanthropy at Mayo Clinic** _Your support accelerates
powerful innovations in patient care, research and education._ Give today.

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now
  * Log in to Patient Account
  *     * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube

Request an Appointment

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Diseases & Conditions

# Alcohol poisoning

  * Sections
  * Symptoms & causes
  * Diagnosis & treatment

Print

## Overview

Alcohol poisoning is a serious -- and sometimes deadly -- consequence of
drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much
too quickly can affect your breathing, heart rate, body temperature and gag
reflex and potentially lead to a coma and death.

Alcohol poisoning can also occur when adults or children accidentally or
intentionally drink household products that contain alcohol.

A person with alcohol poisoning needs immediate medical attention. If you
suspect someone has alcohol poisoning, call for emergency medical help right
away.

## Symptoms

Alcohol poisoning signs and symptoms include:

  * Confusion
  * Vomiting
  * Seizures
  * Slow breathing (less than eight breaths a minute)
  * Irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths)
  * Blue-tinged skin or pale skin
  * Low body temperature (hypothermia)
  * Passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened

#### When to see a doctor

It's not necessary to have all the above signs or symptoms before you seek
medical help. A person with alcohol poisoning who is unconscious or can't be
awakened is at risk of dying.

#### Alcohol poisoning is an emergency

If you suspect that someone has alcohol poisoning -- even if you don't see the
classic signs and symptoms -- seek immediate medical care. Here's what to do:

  * **Call 911** or your local emergency number immediately. Never assume the person will sleep off alcohol poisoning.
  * **Be prepared to provide information.** If you know, be sure to tell hospital or emergency personnel the kind and amount of alcohol the person drank, and when.
  * **Don't leave an unconscious person alone.** Because alcohol poisoning affects the way the gag reflex works, someone with alcohol poisoning may choke on his or her own vomit and not be able to breathe. While waiting for help, don't try to make the person vomit because he or she could choke.
  * **Help a person who is vomiting.** Try to keep him or her sitting up. If the person must lie down, make sure to turn his or her head to the side -- this helps prevent choking. Try to keep the person awake to prevent loss of consciousness.

#### Don't be afraid to get help

It can be difficult to decide if you think someone is drunk enough to warrant
medical intervention, but it's best to err on the side of caution. You may
worry about the consequences for yourself or your friend or loved one,
particularly if you're underage. But the consequences of not getting the right
help in time can be far more serious.

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

## Causes

Alcohol in the form of ethanol (ethyl alcohol) is found in alcoholic
beverages, mouthwash, cooking extracts, some medications and certain household
products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many
alcoholic beverages, especially in a short period of time.

Other forms of alcohol -- including isopropyl alcohol (found in rubbing
alcohol, lotions and some cleaning products) and methanol or ethylene glycol
(a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents) -- can cause other
types of toxic poisoning that require emergency treatment.

#### Binge drinking

A major cause of alcohol poisoning is binge drinking -- a pattern of heavy
drinking when a male rapidly consumes five or more alcoholic drinks within two
hours, or a female rapidly consumes at least four drinks within two hours. An
alcohol binge can occur over hours or last up to several days.

You can consume a fatal dose before you pass out. Even when you're unconscious
or you've stopped drinking, alcohol continues to be released from your stomach
and intestines into your bloodstream, and the level of alcohol in your body
continues to rise.

#### How much is too much?

Unlike food, which can take hours to digest, alcohol is absorbed quickly by
your body -- long before most other nutrients. And it takes a lot more time
for your body to get rid of the alcohol you've consumed. Most alcohol is
processed (metabolized) by your liver.

The more you drink, especially in a short period of time, the greater your
risk of alcohol poisoning.

One drink is defined as:

  * 12 ounces (355 milliliters) of regular beer (about 5 percent alcohol)
  * 8 to 9 ounces (237 to 266 milliliters) of malt liquor (about 7 percent alcohol)
  * 5 ounces (148 milliliters) of wine (about 12 percent alcohol)
  * 1.5 ounces (44 milliliters) of 80-proof hard liquor (about 40 percent alcohol)

Mixed drinks may contain more than one serving of alcohol and take even longer
to metabolize.

## Risk factors

A number of factors can increase your risk of alcohol poisoning, including:

  * Your size and weight
  * Your overall health
  * Whether you've eaten recently
  * Whether you're combining alcohol with other drugs
  * The percentage of alcohol in your drinks
  * The rate and amount of alcohol consumption
  * Your tolerance level

## Complications

Severe complications can result from alcohol poisoning, including:

  * **Choking.** Alcohol may cause vomiting. Because it depresses your gag reflex, this increases the risk of choking on vomit if you've passed out.
  * **Stopping breathing.** Accidentally inhaling vomit into your lungs can lead to a dangerous or fatal interruption of breathing (asphyxiation).
  * **Severe dehydration.** Vomiting can result in severe dehydration, leading to dangerously low blood pressure and fast heart rate.
  * **Seizures.** Your blood sugar level may drop low enough to cause seizures.
  * **Hypothermia.** Your body temperature may drop so low that it leads to cardiac arrest.
  * **Irregular heartbeat.** Alcohol poisoning can cause the heart to beat irregularly or even stop.
  * **Brain damage.** Heavy drinking may cause irreversible brain damage.
  * **Death.** Any of the issues above can lead to death.

## Prevention

To avoid alcohol poisoning:

  * **Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.** If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women of all ages and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger. When you do drink, enjoy your drink slowly.
  * **Don't drink on an empty stomach.** Having some food in your stomach may slow alcohol absorption somewhat, although it won't prevent alcohol poisoning if, for example, you're binge drinking.
  * **Communicate with your teens.** Talk to your teenagers about the dangers of alcohol, including binge drinking. Evidence suggests that children who are warned about alcohol by their parents and who report close relationships with their parents are less likely to start drinking.
  * **Store products safely.** If you have small children, store alcohol-containing products, including cosmetics, mouthwashes and medications, out of their reach. Use child-proof bathroom and kitchen cabinets to prevent access to household cleaners. Keep toxic items in your garage or storage area safely out of reach. Consider keeping alcoholic beverages under lock and key.
  * **Get follow-up care.** If you or your teen has been treated for alcohol poisoning, be sure to ask about follow-up care. Meeting with a health professional, particularly an experienced chemical dependency professional, can help you prevent future binge drinking.

##

By Mayo Clinic Staff

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

Diagnosis & treatment

Jan. 19, 2018

Print

Share on: FacebookTwitter

References

  1. Overview of alcohol consumption. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/overview-alcohol-consumption. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  2. Alcohol overdose: The dangers of drinking too much. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/AlcoholOverdoseFactsheet/Overdosefact.htm. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  3. A word about alcohol poisoning. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-poisoning. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  4. Alcohol poisoning deaths. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-deaths/. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  5. Drinking too much too fast can kill you. National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence. https://www.ncadd.org/images/stories/PDF/DrinkingTooMuchTooFastCanKillYou-NCADD.pdf. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  6. Alcohol. American Diabetes Association. http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/making-healthy-food-choices/alcohol.html. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  7. Cowan E, et al. Ethanol intoxication in adults. http://www.uptodate.com/home. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  8. Baum CR. Ethanol intoxication in children: Epidemiology, estimation of toxicity, and toxic effects. http://www.uptodate.com/home. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  9. Alcohol toxicity and withdrawal. Merck Manual Professional Version. http://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/recreational-drugs-and-intoxicants/alcohol-toxicity-and-withdrawal. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  10. Sivilotti MLA. Isopropyl alcohol poisoning. http://www.uptodate.com/home. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  11. Sivilotti MLA, et al. Methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. http://www.uptodate.com/home. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  12. Risk and protective factors. Youth.gov. http://youth.gov/youth-topics/substance-abuse/risk-and-protective-factors-substance-use-abuse-and-dependence. Accessed June 20, 2016.
  13. Alcohol use in older people. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/alcohol-use-older-people. Accessed June 21, 2016.

## Related

  * Nausea and vomiting

## Alcohol poisoning

  * Symptoms & causes
  * Diagnosis & treatment

## Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue
supports our not-for-profit mission.

**Advertising & Sponsorship**

  * Policy
  * Opportunities
  * Ad Choices

### Mayo Clinic Marketplace

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic.

  * Live stronger, longer and healthier
  * 4 simple steps to a joy-filled life
  * Mayo Clinic on Arthritis
  * Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
  * The Mayo Clinic Diet

CON-20199566

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Diseases & Conditions
  * Alcohol poisoning

![Mayo Clinic](/styles/img/logo-mayoclinic.png)

  * Request Appointment
  * Contact Us
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Employees
  * Find a Job
  * Site Map
  * About This Site

  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.

## Patient Care & Health Info

  * Healthy Lifestyle
  * Symptoms A-Z
  * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
  * Tests & Procedures A-Z
  * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
  * Appointments
  * Patient & Visitor Guide
  * Billing & Insurance
  * Patient Online Services

## Departments & Centers

  * Doctors & Medical Staff
  * Medical Departments & Centers
  * International Services
  * Research Centers & Programs
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Contact Us

## Research

  * Explore Research Labs
  * Find Clinical Trials
  * Research Faculty
  * Postdoctoral Fellowships
  * Discovery's Edge Magazine
  * Search Publications
  * Training Grant Programs

## Education

  * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
  * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
  * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
  * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
  * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
  * Alumni Center

## For Medical Professionals

  * Provider Relations
  * Referring Physician Portal
  * AskMayoExpert
  * Video Center
  * Publications
  * Continuing Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

## Products & Services

  * Health Books
  * Healthy Living Program
  * International Advisory Services
  * Sports Medicine
  * Licensable Content
  * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
  * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
  * Medical Products and Stores

Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions
and Privacy Policy linked below.

  * Terms and Conditions
  * **Privacy Policy**
  * **Notice of Privacy Practices**
  * Notice of Nondiscrimination
  * Manage Cookies

A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal
use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy
Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct636199_hr1.gif) This
site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All
rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

