

X

## Notice

Your privacy is important to us. We have updated our privacy policy to better
explain how we use data on this site. Read it here

Stay Connected:

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **California Edition**

  * The California Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Promises
  * Articles
  * People
  * 2018 Governor
  * Subjects

# Pot 101 update: Are there limits on smoking pot at home near kids? Where

else is it legal to smoke?

By Chris Nichols on Tuesday, July 17th, 2018 at 12:06 p.m.

![Consumers can purchase recreational marijuana at licensed dispensaries in

California, but can't consume it on public

property.](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/photos/pot_image_joint.jpg)

Consumers can purchase recreational marijuana at licensed dispensaries in
California, but can't consume it on public property.

![California's recreational pot law doesn't offer the complete freedom to buy,

smoke or transport weed anywhere you

please.](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/photos/Pot101_main_graphic.png)

California's recreational pot law doesn't offer the complete freedom to buy,
smoke or transport weed anywhere you please.

With the start of California's retail recreational marijuana sales in January
2018, PolitiFact California published Pot 101, a guide to what's legal and
what's not under the state's landmark cannabis law.

We've continued to update the article with answers to reader questions. In
February, we published a companion report on concerns over customer privacy at
marijuana dispensaries.

Since, we've received many more questions about the freedoms afforded by the
law, and its many restrictions.

Below are answers to two of the most common questions we've received in recent
months.

_Are there restrictions on smoking marijuana at a private residence in front
of children?_

A mother-of-three asked in June 2018 whether there are any rules on smoking
marijuana at home around kids.

She said her sister-in-law constantly smokes at the house they share.

"I don't like it at all but there are times she smokes in her room," she wrote
in an email. "It goes through vents and, of course, her door. â€¦ I was
wondering if there was something that should be done? Or something in the law
for it?"

"I don't need my three kids inhaling it," she added.

We found the rules differ depending on whether you are renting or own your
home. It wasn't clear from the reader's email whether she owns the home.

If you are renting an apartment or house, the landlord can restrict the use of
cannabis in or around the property, or completely prohibit it, under
Proposition 64.

If you own the house, you can lawfully smoke within the residence.

We did not find any limits on smoking marijuana in front of or near children
at one's own private home.

"I have not heard of any [restrictions] related to children but I can't say
for certain that there are not," said Tamar Todd, who helped write Proposition
64, and is legal affairs director with the Drug Policy Alliance.

"There are no limits I know of -- and no way to enforce if there were!" wrote
Kevin Sabet, president of Smart Approaches to Marijuana, a national group
opposed to cannabis legalization.

California's clean indoor air laws ban smoking tobacco and marijuana at a host
of indoor worksites, from private office buildings to schools to restaurants.

The restrictions, however, do not apply to private homes unless they are being
used as a daycare, transitional housing or as crisis nurseries, according to
the state Department of Public Health online brochure.

![](https://www.capradio.org/media/12056180/screen%20shot%20Pot%20101%20update.JPG)

There's been one change in recent months related to children and cannabis:
Retail shops are now required to have childproof packaging as part of the new
compliance regulations that went into effect on July 1.

They require all cannabis products be placed in "individually sealed and
child-resistant packaging before it hits the retail shelves," according to a
news article by EmeraldReport.com.

"After a customer purchases a product they must put those child resistant
containers into a second, larger child resistant envelope before they exit the
store," the website reads.

There's also a ban on marketing pot to children.

Cannabis product labeling, for example, "may not refer to the product as a
candy, be attractive to children, make health claims or include cartoons,"
according to the California Department of Public Health's website.

Critics of marijuana legalization have said it could lead to a spike in
emergency room visits for children who unwittingly consume marijuana edibles.
A report in June 2018 by The Orange County Register found there has been an
increase in visits at some hospitals. But it also found the severity of the
problem is difficult to judge as the data isn't widely tracked.

_Is there 'anywhere' else you can legally consume weed besides your home?_

In July 2018, a reader asked whether there's any "anywhere where you can
legally consume" marijuana, "besides in your own home, or maybe another
private residence?"

"You say that edible cannabis cannot be consumed in public," he wrote in an
email. "Does 'public' include restaurants, private parks, cemeteries, beaches,
shopping centers, doctors offices, banks, grocery stores, a friend's house,
libraries, coffee houses, trains, theme parks, movie theatres, car dealer lot,
etc.?"

As we reported in January, Californians are very limited in where they can
legally consume pot. Private residences are still the safest bet. But that's
not stopping the cannabis industry from pushing for more legal locales.

Cities across the state, from West Hollywood to Palm Springs to Sacramento,
are considering allowing permits for lounges and cafes, where smoking
marijuana would be legal.

The state's marijuana law, Prop. 64, allows local governments to permit
cannabis consumption at public places such as festivals and cafes.

San Francisco and Oakland have already opened cannabis lounges, where people
can legally smoke, vape and eat marijuana products. The lounges, however, are
prohibited from allowing people to consume alcohol or tobacco in the same
venue.

There are also marijuana-friendly hotels and inns popping up across the state.
At the Desert Hot Springs Inn north of Palm Springs, guests will find small
pot samples on their pillows in place of mints.

Under California law, it's legal to gift up to an ounce of pot to someone over
21 years old.

The first two recreational marijuana festivals in the state were recently held
in Sacramento and Santa Rosa. The state, however, has not seen an uptick of
applications for marijuana festivals, said Alex Traverso, spokesman for the
California Bureau of Cannabis Control.

Unlike hotels, festivals have to go through a three-step process which
includes local and state clearance, the spokesman said.

**More questions?**

We want to know your questions about what's allowed and what's not under the
law.

Email us at [email protected], or contact us on Twitter or Facebook.

We'll consider your question for a future article.

_PolitiFact California intern Sami Soto contributed research and writing for
this article._

### Related rulings:

![Half-True](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-halftrue.png)

Marijuana and THC "have caused emergency room visits to skyrocket."

\-- Patrick Kennedy, Tuesday, April 17th, 2018.

![Half-True](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-halftrue.png)

"Despite decades of marijuana being used for smoking in the United States,
there have been no reported medical cases of lung cancer" attributed to
marijuana.

\-- John Morgan, Thursday, July 6th, 2017.

![True](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-true.png)

During his campaign for president, Donald Trump "committed to honoring states'
rights when it comes to marijuana legalization."

\-- Gavin Newsom, Friday, February 24th, 2017.

See related rulings

Advertisement

### About this article

Researchers: Chris Nichols, Sami Soto

### Sources:

Proposition 64, text, accessed July 2018

Tamar Todd, director, Office of Legal Affairs, Drug Policy Alliance, email
exchange, July 13, 2018

Kevin Sabet, president, Smart Approaches to Marijuana, email exchange, July
13, 2018.

Alex Traverso, spokesman, California Bureau Cannabis Control, email exchange,
July 13, 2018

California Department of Public Health, clean indoor air laws brochure, 2016

Comstock Magazine, A New Market, May 21, 2018

PolitiFact California, Pot 101: Facts you should know about California's legal
marijuana, Jan. 5, 2018

PolitiFact California, How much privacy do you have when you buy marijuana in
California?, Feb. 13, 2018

_Los Angeles Times,_ Some California cities want Amsterdam-style pot lounges,
push limits of marijuana legalization, April 20, 2018

_Los Angeles Times_ , Full vending machines. Pot on the pillow. What some
California hotels are doing to attract marijuana smokers, June 22, 2018

Hightimes.com, High Times NorCal Cup Granted Recreational License, May 24,
2018

EmeraldReport.com, Will new pot packaging rules make California's weed less
green?, March 8, 2018

_The Orange County Register_ , Some California hospitals report uptick in ER
visits for marijuana, though data is hard to come by, June 1, 2018

### How to contact us

We want to hear your suggestions and comments. Email PolitiFact California
with feedback and with claims you'd like to see checked. Or tweet us at
@CAPolitiFact. To submit a fact-check suggestion, you can also fill out this
form. If you send us a comment, we'll assume you don't mind us publishing it
unless you tell us otherwise.

### Browse The California Truth-O-Meter

  * See all True rulings
  * See all Mostly True rulings
  * See all Half True rulings
  * See all Mostly False rulings
  * See all False rulings
  * See all Pants on Fire rulings

Advertisement

### Subscribe

#### Keep up to date with PolitiFact California

  * On Facebook
  * On Twitter
  * Via RSS
  * Put a PolitiFact California widget on your blog or website

Back to top

__

![](https://static.politifact.com/images/POLITIFACT_logo_rgb141x25.png)

# Offices

  * **District of Columbia**
  * 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW
  * Suite 1300B
  * Washington, DC 20036
  * **Florida**
  * 801 Third Street South
  * St. Petersburg, FL 33701
  * 727-821-9494

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Rhode Island
  * Pennsylvania
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# Stay Connected

# Fact-Check Suggestions

(C)All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2019, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **California Edition**

  * The California Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Promises
  * Articles
  * People
  * 2018 Governor
  * Subjects

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-23nLlPXNTk7P6.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

