

icon-circle-arrow-right

Menu

Verywell Mind

How Marijuana Can Affect Fertility

  * Share 
  * Flip 
  * Email 

Search

Search Clear GO

#### More in Addiction

  * Drug Use 
    * Marijuana 
    * Cocaine 
    * Heroin 
    * Meth 
    * Ecstasy/MDMA 
    * Hallucinogens 
    * Opioids 
    * Prescription Medications 
  * Alcohol Use 
  * Addictive Behaviors 
  * Nicotine Use 
  * Coping and Recovery 

View More

  * Gender Nonconformity 
  * Breathing Exercises 
  * Heteroflexibility 
  * Coping Skills 
  * AEDP 
  * Toxic Relationships 

  * #### Disorders

    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Depression
    * Generalized Anxiety Disorder
    * PTSD
    * View All 
    * #### Self-Improvement

    * Stress Management

    * Happiness
    * Meditation
    * Brain Health
    * Relationships
    * Inspiration and Creativity
    * View All 
    * #### Psychology

    * Theories

    * History and Biographies
    * Student Resources
    * Therapy
    * Emotions
    * Sleep and Dreaming
    * View All 

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Health Verywell Fit Verywell Family

Addiction

Drug Use

Marijuana

Print

# How Marijuana Can Affect Fertility

##

By Elizabeth Hartney, PhD | Medically reviewed by a board-certified physician
| Updated November 05, 2018

![Woman with Cigarette](//:0)

Dana Tezarr/The Image Bank/Getty Images

![Addiction](https://www.verywellmind.com/thmb/U8G_7dsALXrxQvlx3F3VEU5c6qg=/220x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/Anim_Addictions-5a7213471f4e13003783301c.gif)

#### More in Addiction

  * Drug Use 
    * Marijuana 
    * Cocaine 
    * Heroin 
    * Meth 
    * Ecstasy/MDMA 
    * Hallucinogens 
    * Opioids 
    * Prescription Medications 
  * Alcohol Use 
  * Addictive Behaviors 
  * Nicotine Use 
  * Coping and Recovery 

Although the link between marijuana and fertility is not
straightforward—plenty of marijuana smokers get pregnant and get their
partners pregnant—research demonstrates the negative impact that marijuana can
have on fertility which could be affecting you, your partner, or the fertility
of both of you.

### Female Fertility

Even before intercourse takes place, marijuana decreases libido. And if you
aren't feeling in the mood, it's that much more difficult to get started.

Because early drug use is associated with other risk behaviors, teenage girls
who smoke marijuana are more likely to get pregnant. However, the effects of
marijuana on fertility seem to accumulate over time. So, by your mid-twenties,
as a chronic marijuana smoking woman, you are more likely to experience a
delay in getting pregnant.

However, even occasional users of marijuana may have reduced fertility. Women
who smoke marijuana have an increased risk of infertility due to abnormal
ovulation, even for those women who have used low levels of marijuana within a
year of trying to get pregnant. Marijuana use also increases the risk of
miscarriage and is known to cross the placenta, although the effects of
marijuana exposure in the womb are not as well documented as the effects of
alcohol and some other drugs.

### Male Fertility

Despite the relaxation effects that many people associate with marijuana use,
research has shown marijuana has negative effects on the male sexual response.
Marijuana has been found to increase impotence. As well as interfering with
you and your partner being able to have sex, impotence can also have negative
effects on the male ego. If your husband has been impotent, he may be feeling
more pressure to have sex to get you pregnant, but be frustrated with his
inability to do so. This can lead to misunderstandings between you that make
it more difficult to have sex.

Marijuana can also interfere with a man's ability to ejaculate.

Marijuana also negatively affects sperm production, reducing sperm count. The
sperm produced by a marijuana smoking man show an abnormal pattern of
activity—instead of swimming slowly, allowing them to conserve energy for the
long journey to the egg, they are initially hyperactive, then run out of
energy often before they can penetrate the egg.

### Quit to Prepare for Parenthood

Obviously, if you are both smoking marijuana, you risk increasing the chances
of infertility as a couple, with the accumulated risks of lower sexual desire,
a greater chance of impotence, fewer and weaker sperm, and ovulatory problems.

Quitting marijuana can be harder than many long-term marijuana users expect,
so you and your husband would be wise to quit as soon as possible, while you
still have time to get help before getting pregnant. If either or both parents
still use marijuana when the baby arrives, you are increasing the risk that
your child will use drugs in the future, and parental drug use is implicated
in many difficulties for children and families.

Your family doctor can help you with a referral to a counselor or clinic that
can help you both quit. ​Couples counseling, which is offered by many
addiction clinics, would be particularly helpful at this time. If you are
already engaged in infertility treatment, coming clean about your marijuana
could save you a lot of time, money, and heartache, if marijuana is the
culprit for your difficulties with conception.

Was this page helpful?

Thanks for your feedback!

Learn the best ways to manage stress and negativity in your life.

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

What are your concerns?

Other Inaccurate Hard to Understand Submit

Article Sources

  * Bari M, Battista N, Pirazzi V, Maccarrone M. "The manifold actions of endocannabinoids on female and male reproductive events." _Front Biosci._ 16:498-516. 2011.
  * Mueller BA, Daling JR, Weiss NS, Moore DE. "Recreational drug use and the risk of primary infertility." _Epidemiology_ 1:195-200. 1990.
  * Smith CG, Asch RH. "Acute, short-term, and chronic effects of marijuana on the female primate reproductive function." _NIDA Res Monogr._ 44:82-96. 1984.
  * Waldron M, Heath AC, Lynskey MT, Nelson EC, Bucholz KK, Madden PA, Martin NG. "Smoking and illicit drug use associations with early versus delayed reproduction: findings in a young adult cohort of Australian twins." _J Stud Alcohol Drugs_ 70:786-96. 2009.
  * Whan LB, West MC, McClure N, Lewis SE. "Effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the primary psychoactive cannabinoid in marijuana, on human sperm function in vitro." _Fertil Steril._ 85(3):653-60. 2006.

Continue Reading

  * ![smoking marijuana](//:0)

Addiction

#### Why Marijuana Smokers Have Lower Total Sperm Counts

  * ![Mom breastfeeding on a bed](//:0)

Addiction

#### Here Is a Look at the Health Risks of Marijuana and Breastfeeding

  * ![man's hand holding marijuana joint](//:0)

Addiction

#### Why Even Casual Marijuana Can Cause Brain Abnormalities

  * ![man smoking](//:0)

Addiction

#### Marijuana Can Still Cause Numerous Negative Health Problems

  * ![Man smoking a joint](//:0)

Addiction

#### The Long-Term Health Effects of Marijuana

  * ![pregnant woman smoking marijuana](//:0)

Addiction

#### The Dangers of Smoking Pot or Spice Early in Pregnancy

  * ![Woman smoking electronic cigarette](//:0)

Addiction

#### The Health Problems of Women Who Smoke

  * ![young people smoking marijuana](//:0)

Addiction

#### How Marijuana Use Impairs Learning and Basic Life Skills

  * ![Medical marijuana](//:0)

Addiction

#### Marijuana: Basics Worth Knowing

  * ![Pregnant woman breaking cigarette](//:0)

Addiction

#### 10 Risks for Your Unborn Child If You Smoke While Pregnant

  * ![Dealing marijuana,marijuana](//:0)

Addiction

#### Harm Reduction Tips for Marijuana Users

  * ![Marijuana plant still life](//:0)

Addiction

#### Marijuana Comes in Different Typess Besides the Plant Form

  * ![Man Smoking Marijuana Joint](//:0)

Addiction

#### How Can You Get Help for Marijuana Addiction?

  * ![Man With Drink, Cigarette](//:0)

Addiction

#### How Smoking Can Increase Health Risks in Alcoholics

  * ![Close-Up Of Marijuana In Jar On Table](//:0)

Addiction

#### How Long Can Marijuana Stay in Your System?

  * ![Students Running Track](//:0)

Addiction

#### Does Marijuana Affect School, Sports, or Other Activities?

Verywell Mind

Daily Tips for a Healthy Mind to Your Inbox

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

Follow Us

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * Instagram
  * Flipboard

  * Disorders 

  * Self-Improvement 
  * Psychology 

  * Editorial Policy

  * About Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Advertise
  * Cookie Policy
  * Careers
  * Terms of Use
  * Contact

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Health Verywell Fit Verywell Family

Ⓒ 2019 About, Inc. (Dotdash) — All rights reserved

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information: **verify here**.

Verywell is part of the Dotdash publishing family:

  * The Balance
  * Lifewire
  * Trip Savvy
  * The Spruce
  * and more

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

