

  * Skip to page content

![RAND

Corporation](https://wwwassets.rand.org/etc/rand/designs/common/images/logo-

corp.svg)

Objective Analysis. Effective Solutions.

Toggle Menu

Toggle Search

Site-wide SearchSearch

Support RAND

## ![Gun Policy in America](/content/dam/rand/www/external/research/gun-

policy/gp-white-no-map-logo-sm.svg)

  * ### Key Findings

    * Gun Policy in America: An Overview
    * What Science Tells Us About the Effects of Gun Policies
    * In Search of Common Ground: Expert Judgments on Gun Policy Effects
    * U.S. Gun Policy in a Global Context
    * New Approaches to Understanding the Effects of Gun Policies
    * Improving Gun Policy Science
  * ### Research Review

#### Gun Use Outcomes

    
    
    * Defensive Gun Use
    * Gun Industry Outcomes
    * Hunting and Recreation
    * Mass Shootings
    * Officer-Involved Shootings
    * Suicide
    * Unintentional Injuries and Deaths
    * Violent Crime
    

#### Gun Policies

    
    
    * Background Checks
    * Bans on the Sale of Assault Weapons and High-Capacity Magazines
    * Child-Access Prevention Laws
    * Concealed-Carry Laws
    * Firearm Sales Reporting Requirements
    * Gun-Free Zones
    * Licensing and Permitting Requirements
    * Lost or Stolen Firerarm Reporting Requirements
    * Minimum Age Requirements
    * Prohibitions Associated with Mental Illness
    * Stand-Your-Ground Laws
    * Surrender of Firearms by Prohibited Possessors
    * Waiting Periods
    

#### Methodology and References

    
    
    * Research Review Methodology
    * References for the Gun Policy in America Initiative
    

Explore all gun policies and outcomes from our research review

  * ### Tools and Data

#### Tools

    
    
    * Policy Outcome Explorer
    * Policy Survey
    

#### Data

    
    
    * State Firearm Law Database
    

#### Methodology

    
    
    * Expert Opinion Survey Methodology
    

  * ### Essays

#### Effects of Widespread Gun Availability

    
    
    * The Effects of the 1996 National Firearms Agreement in Australia on Suicide, Violent Crime, and Mass Shootings
    * The Relationship Between Firearm Availability and Suicide
    * The Relationship Between Firearm Prevalence and Violent Crime
    

#### Gun Violence Reduction Strategies

    
    
    * Education Campaigns and Clinical Interventions for Promoting Safe Storage
    * Firearm and Ammunition Taxes
    * Mental Health Care Access and Suicide
    * Restricting Access to Firearms Among Individuals at Risk for or Convicted of Domestic Violence or Violent Crime
    

#### Trends in Mass Shootings

    
    
    * Mass Shootings: Definitions and Trends
    

#### Research Challenges

    
    
    * The Challenges of Defining and Measuring Defensive Gun Use
    * Methodological Challenges to Identifying the Effects of Gun Policies
    

  * ### Reports

  * ### About

  * RAND

  * Research
  * Gun Policy in America
  * Research Review
  * Background Checks
  * > Violent Crime

Previous AnalysisBackground Checks and SuicideNext AnalysisBans on the Sale of
Assault Weapons and High-Capacity Magazines and Gun Industry Outcomes

  * Share on Facebook
  * Share on Twitter
  * Share on LinkedIn

# Effects of Background Checks on Violent Crime

March 2, 2018

Summary: Evidence that background checks may reduce violent crime and total
homicides is limited, and studies provide moderate evidence that dealer
background checks reduce firearm homicides. Evidence of the effect of private-
seller background checks on firearm homicides is inconclusive.

## Key Findings

Background checks may decrease violent crime and _total_ homicides.

Evidence for this relationship is limited.

_Dealer_ background checks may decrease _firearm_ homicides.

Evidence for this relationship is moderate.

_Private-seller_ background checks have uncertain effects on _firearm_
homicides.

Evidence for this relationship is inconclusive.

We identified eight studies since 2003 that examined the relationship between
background checks and violent crime and met our inclusion criteria.[1] In
reviews of the literature before 2003, Hahn et al. (2005) and the National
Research Council (2004) reviewed Ludwig and Cook (2000), which found no
difference in homicide rates across states that had laws comparable to those
the Brady Act would impose (which initially included both background checks
and a waiting period) and states that experienced larger changes in the law
when the Brady Act was implemented.[2] The Ludwig and Cook study had an
unfavorable ratio of estimated parameters to observations (less than one to
six), meaning its parameter estimates and confidence intervals (CIs) may not
be accurate because of model overfitting.

Gius (2015a) examined the effect of the federal Brady Act, state-mandated
dealer background checks (either a check that was in place before the Brady
Act or checks for categories of state-prohibited possessors other than those
mandated by the Brady Act), and state-mandated private-seller background
__checks on gun-related homicides (the paper did not evaluate the effect of
these variables on total homicides). The analysis of the federal Brady Act
does not meet our criteria for inclusion because although the regression model
evaluated whether changes occurred after implementation of the Brady Act,
there was no comparison (control) group. State dealer background checks were
found to significantly reduce firearm homicides by 20 percent (see the figure
below), but the study’s design cannot distinguish whether this effect is
attributable to a state’s implementation of background checks prior to the
Brady Act, prohibition of more classes of people from owning guns after the
Brady Act was passed, or some combination of the two. Private-seller
background checks appeared to increase firearm homicides to levels 131 percent
of what would be expected without the policy. Gius (2015a) does not provide
information on the variation in state laws over the period evaluated, so the
quality of causal effect estimates is uncertain.

La Valle (2013) examined the effect of the existence of a pre–Brady Act state
background check law on gun homicides and total homicides (as well as other
state policies). Using data from 56 large U.S. cities over 1980–2010, the
author found in his preferred models (weighted models with a one-year lag and
using control variables that were interpolated over the period, but where the
dependent variable was not interpolated) that pre–Brady Act state background
check requirements had an uncertain effect on either gun homicides or total
homicides.

![](/content/dam/rand/www/external/research/gun-policy/gp-outcomes-icon.svg)

## The Experts Weigh In

Compare expert opinions on how background checks may affect violent crime
outcomes in your state and the U.S. as a whole. »

Sen and Panjamapirom (2012) examined the effects of the _types_ of background
checks conducted by states on homicides. They noted that the supply of state
and local records to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS) is voluntary and that substantial variation exists in state laws
regarding the categories of records included in background checks, such as
restraining orders, mental illness, fugitive status, and misdemeanors. The
authors characterized variation across states in background check requirements
using an index of the comprehensiveness of such checks, as well as individual
indicators for whether states check on restraining orders, mental illness,
fugitive status, misdemeanors, and other miscellaneous records. Using state-
level data from 1996 to 2005, the authors examined the effect of these types
of checks on both firearm and total homicides. They found that, compared with
background checks that examine only criminal history, background checks that
include restraining orders, mental illness, and fugitive status are associated
with significantly fewer total homicides and firearm homicides. Background
checks that include restraining orders were associated with 13-percent drops
in firearm homicide rates and 9-percent drops in overall homicide rates;
background checks for mental illness were associated with 7-percent drops in
both firearm and overall homicide rates; and background checks for fugitive
status were associated with 21-percent and 23-percent reductions in firearm
and total homicide rates, respectively (see the figure below). However, so few
states changed criminal history background check or fugitive check policies
during the study time frame that these effects cannot confidently be
attributed to the background check policies as opposed to other factors
affecting homicides in the states around the same time their laws changed.
Although the authors also included a control for whether a state had a
pre–Brady Act background check requirement, the variation in this policy
variable was only across states and not over time because the period of
analysis was post-Brady only. Thus, the analysis of the effect of pre-Brady
background check policy does not meet our criteria for inclusion.

Duggan, Hjalmarsson, and Jacob (2011) examined the localized, short-term
effect of gun shows on firearm homicides. Absent state legislation to the
contrary, gun-show vendors (and other private sellers) that are not federally
licensed dealers are not required to conduct background checks on purchasers,
which Duggan, Hjalmarsson, and Jacob (2011) referred to as the _gun-show
loophole_ and which we call the _gun-show exception_. Some states have
legislation requiring background checks for all buyers at gun shows. Duggan,
Hjalmarsson, and Jacob (2011) examined whether there is a differential effect
of gun shows on violent crime or homicide in a state that has a gun-show
_exception_ (Texas) compared with a state that has no such _exception_
(California). The authors found only uncertain effects of state background
check policies on homicides that occur near where gun shows were recently
held. However, the study focused only on background check requirements as they
relate to gun shows and not on a broader set of background check policies.
Moreover, as the authors acknowledged, their focus was on very short-term
(four-week) and localized effects. The study had low statistical power,
meaning that even if gun-show background check policies had meaningful effects
on violence or homicide, these might not have been detected using this paper’s
procedures (see Wintemute et al., 2010).

Lott (2010) examined how state-required background checks for private sales
affect violent crime. Detailed results that include coefficients and test
statistics were available for only one specification and for the outcome of
homicide (Lott, 2010, Table A6.3). This model indicated an uncertain effect of
background checks on homicide rates. This model had an unfavorable ratio of
estimated parameters to observations (less than one to ten), meaning the
estimated effects and significance values may be inaccurate because of model
overfitting.

Swanson et al. (2013) and Swanson et al. (2016) merged administrative records
from public health and criminal justice agencies to evaluate how changes in
state reporting of gun-disqualifying mental health records to the NICS
affected violent crime arrest rates for individuals with a disqualifying
mental health condition relative to individuals diagnosed with serious mental
health illness but not prohibited from purchasing a firearm. Swanson et al.
(2013) obtained data from 2002 to 2009 for individuals in Connecticut who had
been hospitalized for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or major depressive
disorder. The authors estimated changes in violent crime arrest rates for
individuals with at least one of the mental health adjudications reported to
the NICS before and after Connecticut began reporting mental health records in
2007\. The authors found a significant 31-percent decline in the probability
of violent crime arrest in their sample of individuals who had a mental health
adjudication but no disqualifying criminal record (see the figure below). The
authors also estimated the likelihood of violent crime arrest for individuals
with at least one voluntary psychiatric hospitalization but no mental health
adjudication. Relative to the legally disqualified population, the
nondisqualified group had a lower likelihood of violent crime arrest both
before and after the NICS reporting change, but the magnitude of the decrease
following NICS reporting was smaller than the reduction experienced by the
“treated” group with a disqualifying mental health condition. However, neither
test statistics nor CIs for this difference were reported.

Swanson et al. (2016) employed analogous methods to analyze the effects of
NICS reporting changes in 2007 for two Florida counties using data from 2002
to 2011. The authors similarly found a larger reduction in violent crime
arrest rates for individuals with a disqualifying mental health condition
compared with individuals with a serious mental health illness that did not
legally prohibit firearm acquisition. This difference, a decline of 38 percent
(see the figure below), was statistically significant. However, estimates
became insignificant when the outcome variable was restricted specifically to
violent crimes involving firearms, which could indicate the absence of a
causal connection or could be due to measurement error in classifying crimes
as involving firearms (Swanson et al., 2016).

Wright, Wintemute, and Rivara (1999) used a retrospective cohort design to
assess whether firearm purchase denial based on criminal record background
checks affects subsequent criminal activity among a sample of individuals with
a prior felony arrest in California. Specifically, the authors examined
subsequent arrest rates for a sample of individuals with a prior felony arrest
who attempted to purchase a handgun in California in 1997, comparing outcomes
for a group of individuals who were able to purchase a handgun successfully
because they had a prior felony arrest but no conviction (“purchaser cohort”)
with a group of individuals who should have been denied purchase because of a
felony conviction (“denied cohort”). In individual-level analyses, controlling
for number of prior weapons and violent arrest charges, the authors found that
the purchaser cohort was significantly more likely to be arrested for a
subsequent offense in the three-year follow-up period. Estimates showed that,
relative to the denied cohort, the purchaser cohort experienced an increase in
the risk of arrest of 5 percent for any offense, 21 percent for gun offenses,
and 24 percent for violent offenses (see the figure below). While this study
did not specifically examine the effects of background check laws, the
findings suggest that enforcing background checks for felony records may
reduce violent crime.

Finally, Vigdor and Mercy (2006) examined the effects of restraining order and
violent misdemeanor background checks on intimate partner homicides and
firearm intimate partner homicides, by comparing states with more-
comprehensive or less-comprehensive approaches to performing those checks. The
authors found small differences in rates of such homicides between states with
high and low capacities for performing such checks, but they did not provide a
test of the significance of these differences.

Hahn et al. (2005) found insufficient evidence for determining the
effectiveness of gun-acquisition restrictions, including background checks, on
violent crime. The National Research Council (NRC (2004) concluded, “There is
not much empirical evidence that assesses whether attempts to reduce criminal
access to firearms will reduce gun availability or gun crime.” NRC reviewed
Ludwig and Cook (2000), which found no difference in homicide rates across
states that had laws comparable to those the Brady Act would impose (which
initially included both background checks and a waiting period) and states
that experienced larger changes in the law when the Brady Act was
implemented.[1] The Ludwig and Cook study had an unfavorable ratio of
estimated parameters to observations (less than one to six), meaning its
parameter estimates and confidence intervals (CIs) may not be accurate because
of model overfitting.

The figure below displays the incidence rate ratios (IRRs) and CIs associated
with the background check policies examined in these studies. Duggan,
Hjalmarsson, and Jacob (2011); Swanson et al. (2013); and Vigdor and Mercy
(2006) did not provide sufficient data for us to calculate IRRs and CIs for
the effect size of interest, so these are not displayed in figure.
Furthermore, we exclude the estimate of the Brady Act from Gius (2015a)
because the estimate does not meet our criteria for inclusion. The Swanson et
al. (2016) estimate in the figure is the change from before and after the NICS
reporting requirements for legally disqualified individuals relative to the
change for nonlegally disqualified individuals.

## Incidence Rate Ratios Associated with the Effect of Background Checks on

Violent Crime

How to read this chart

This forest plot shows estimates of how this policy affects this outcome,
based on the evidence in the studies examined. In particular, the graphic
shows the standardized effect sizes (or incidence rate ratios [IRRs]) and
their 95-percent confidence intervals (CIs) for each outcome. An effect size
of 1.00 indicates that, after a state passes the law, we would expect the
outcome (e.g., suicide or firearm suicide) to be unaffected. An effect size of
less than 1.00 indicates that the law appears to reduce the outcome. For
example, if the effect size were 0.92, we would expect the rate of the outcome
to fall to 0.92 times the rate prior to passage of the law. Conversely, an
effect size of more than 1.00 indicates that the law appears to increase the
outcome by a factor equivalent to the effect size value. When the CIs do not
include the value of 1.00, the estimated effect is statistically significant
at _p_ < 0.05.

Study, by Policy | Outcome Measure | Effect Size (IRR) [95% CI] |  
\---|---|---|---

**NOTE:** IRR values marked with empty circles indicate that we identified
concerns with the study's methodology, and these concerns are described in the
text above. Filled circles indicate that we identified no significant
methodological concerns. An arrow indicates that a confidence interval extends
beyond the plotted area.

## Conclusions

_Homicides and violent crime_. We identified six qualifying studies providing
evidence on the effects of background checks, or some component of background
checks, on violent crime. Three of these studies provided an overall effect of
either dealer background checks or private-seller background checks on total
homicide rates, although two of these estimated effects were partially
confounded with the effect of waiting periods that were simultaneously
introduced in many states when the Brady Act was passed. All three studies
found those effects to be uncertain (the analyses of effects on those aged 21
and older in Ludwig and Cook, 2000; the Brady Act effect in La Valle, 2013;
and the private-seller background check effect in Lott, 2010). Three
background check component analyses identified significant effects indicating
that mental illness checks, restraining order checks, or fugitive status
checks reduced violent crime specific to homicides (Sen and Panjamapirom,
2012). A fourth component analysis found that mental illness checks
significantly reduce violent crime arrests (Swanson et al., 2016). A component
analysis of misdemeanor checks found that they had uncertain effects on
homicides, while “other miscellaneous checks” had a suggestive effect
consistent with increases in homicides (Sen and Panjamapirom, 2012). Finally,
a component analysis of background checks targeting firearm purchase by
individuals with prior felony convictions (Wright, Wintemute, and Rivara,
1999) found significant effects consistent with a reduction in arrests for
firearm and violent crime offenses.

The cumulative evidence is puzzling, as overall effects of background checks
appear to be uncertain, but some components of background checks appear to
significantly reduce homicides or violent crime. Because the studies examining
component effects of background checks generally suffer from fewer noted
weaknesses, we conclude that available studies provide _limited evidence that
background checks reduce violent crime and total homicide rates_.

_Firearm homicide rates_. We identified four qualifying studies that provided
estimates for the effects of background checks, or some component of
background checks, on firearm homicide rates. Four studies examined the
overall effect of dealer background checks on firearm homicide rates; two used
large independent data sets and found significant effects indicating that
dealer background checks reduce firearm homicides (Gius, 2015a; Sen and
Panjamapirom, 2012), and two found uncertain effects (La Valle, 2013; Ludwig
and Cook, 2000). One analysis found significant effects consistent with
private-seller checks increasing firearm homicides (Gius, 2015a). Component
analyses from a single study found significant effects indicating that
restraining order and fugitive checks reduce firearm homicides (Sen and
Panjamapirom, 2012). The analyses also found that mental illness checks have
suggestive effects consistent with a reduction in firearm homicides, uncertain
effects for misdemeanor checks, and a significant effect indicating that
“miscellaneous checks” increase firearm homicides.

Based on these findings and an assessment of the relative strengths of the
studies, we conclude that _available studies provide_ _moderate evidence that
dealer background checks may reduce firearm homicides_ and _inconclusive
evidence for the effect of private-seller background checks on firearm
homicides_.

Background Checks Violent Crime

## Notes

  1. We did not consider the findings from two studies because of methodological limitations. Although Ruddell and Mays (2005) had longitudinal data spanning 1999 through 2001 and compared states with various forms of background check systems, the authors created and analyzed a single average homicide rate for each state that spanned this time period. We excluded this study from further consideration because of the resulting cross-sectional nature of the analysis. Likewise, while Sumner, Layde, and Guse (2008) used data from 2002 through 2004, they aggregated the independent and dependent variables over this time period, resulting in a cross-sectional analysis. Return to content ⤴
  2. Ludwig and Cook (2000) also tested the effects of background checks specifically (separate from waiting periods, also imposed by the Brady Act) by comparing five of 32 states that were required to implement background checks but that did not experience a change in their waiting periods (either because they already had a waiting period of five days or more when the Brady Act required this nationally or they implemented an instantaneous background check). These analyses had a ratio of estimated parameters to observations of less than five to one, which did not meet our inclusion criteria. Cook and Ludwig (2003) presents results for a shorter time period but that are qualitatively similar. Return to content ⤴

## References

  * Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller, “Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 105, No. 490, 2010, pp. 493–505.
  * Adler, W. C., F. M. Bielke, D. J. Doi, and J. F. Kennedy, Cops Under Fire: Law Enforcement Officers Killed with Assault Weapons or Guns with High Capacity, Washington, D.C.: Handgun Control, Inc., 1995.
  * Alcorn, Ted, “Trends in Research Publications About Gun Violence in the United States, 1960 to 2014,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, 2016, pp. 124–126.
  * Alcorn, Ted, and Scott Burris, “Gun Violence Prevention,” Lancet, Vol. 388, No. 10041, 2016, p. 233.
  * American Law Institute, Model Penal Code, Section 2.02 cmt.at 238, 1985.
  * AmmoSpy, “Trending,” web page, undated. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.ammospy.net/trending
  * Andersen, Ronald, Martin R. Frankel, and Judith Kasper, Total Survey Error: Applications to Improve Health Surveys, San Francisco, Calif.: Jossey-Bass, 1979.
  * Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2011, pp. 565–631.
  * Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, The Impact of Right to Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Law School, Olin Working Paper No. 461, December 1, 2014. As of May 21, 2017: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2443681
  * Anestis, M. D., “Prior Suicide Attempts Are Less Common in Suicide Decedents Who Died by Firearms Relative to Those Who Died by Other Means,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 189, No. 1, 2016, pp. 106–109.
  * Appleby, Louis, John A. Dennehy, Christopher S. Thomas, E. Brian Faragher, and Glyn Lewis, “Aftercare and Clinical Characteristics of People with Mental Illness Who Commit Suicide: A Case-Control Study,” Lancet, Vol. 353, No. 9162, 1999, pp. 1397–1400.
  * Arria, Amelia M., Emily R. Winick, Laura M. Garnier-Dykstra, Kathryn B. Vincent, Kimberly M. Caldeira, Holly C. Wilcox, and Kevin E. O’Grady, “Help Seeking and Mental Health Service Utilization Among College Students with a History of Suicide Ideation,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 62, No. 12, 2011, pp. 1510–1513.
  * ATF— _See_ Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
  * Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003a, pp. 1193–1312.
  * Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “The Latest Misfires in Support of the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003b, pp. 1371–1398.
  * Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Yet Another Refutation of the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis—with Some Help from Moody and Marvell,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2009a, pp. 35–59.
  * Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “More Guns, Less Crime Fails Again: The Latest Evidence from 1977–2006,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, May 2009b, pp. 218–238.
  * Azrael, Deborah, Philip J. Cook, and Matthew Miller, “State and Local Prevalence of Firearms Ownership Measurement, Structure, and Trends,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 20, No. 1, March 2004, pp. 43–62.
  * Azrael, Deborah, Lisa Hepburn, David Hemenway, and Matthew Miller, "The Stock and Flow of U.S. Firearms: Results From the 2015 National Firearms Survey," Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 5, 2017, pp. 38–57.
  * Azrael, Deborah, and Matthew Miller, “Reducing Suicide Without Affecting Underlying Mental Health: Theoretical Underpinnings and a Review of the Evidence Base Lining the Availability of Lethal Means and Suicide,” in Rory C. O’Connor and Jane Pirkis, eds., The International Handbook of Suicide Prevention, 2nd ed., Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
  * Bailey, J. E., A. L. Kellermann, G. W. Somes, J. G. Banton, F. P. Rivara, and N. P. Rushforth, “Risk Factors for Violent Death of Women in the Home,” Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 157, No. 7, 1997, pp. 777–782.
  * Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Gun Laws and Sudden Death: Did the Australian Firearms Legislation of 1996 Make a Difference?” British Journal of Criminology, Vol. 47, No. 3, 2007, pp. 455–469.
  * Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Australian Firearm Related Deaths: New Findings and Implications for Crime Prevention and Health Policies Following Revisions to Official Death Count Data,” International Journal of Criminal Justice Sciences, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2015, pp. 1–9.
  * Barkin, Shari L., Stacia A. Finch, Edward H. Ip, Benjamin Scheindlin, Joseph A. Craig, Jennifer Steffes, Victoria Weiley, Eric Slora, David Altman, and Richard C. Wasserman, “Is Office-Based Counseling About Media Use, Timeouts, and Firearm Storage Effective? Results from a Cluster-Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 122, No. 1, 2008, pp. E15–E25.
  * BBC Research & Consulting, The Economic Impacts of Hunting, Fishing and Wildlife Watching in Colorado, Denver, Colo., September 26, 2008. As of October 13, 2017: https://cpw.state.co.us/Documents/About/Reports/08DOWEconomicImpactReport.pdf
  * Beekman, Daniel, “How Gun-Tax Legislation Would Affect Seattle Firearms Stores,” Seattle Times, July 29, 2015. As of February 20, 2017: http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/how-gun-tax-legislation-would-affect-seattle-firearms-stores/
  * Betz, M. E., C. Barber, and M. Miller, “Suicidal Behavior and Firearm Access: Results from the Second Injury Control and Risk Survey,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 41, No. 4, 2011, pp. 384–391.
  * Betz, M. E., M. Miller, C. Barber, B. Beaty, I. Miller, C. A. Camargo, Jr., and E. D. Boudreaux, “Lethal Means Access and Assessment Among Suicidal Emergency Department Patients,” Depression and Anxiety, Vol. 33, No. 6, 2016, pp. 502–511.
  * Bice, Douglas C., and David D. Hemley, “The Market for New Handguns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2002, pp. 251–265.
  * Birckmayer, J., and D. Hemenway, “Suicide and Firearm Prevalence: Are Youth Disproportionately Affected?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 31, No. 3, 2001, pp. 303–310.
  * Blair, J. Pete, and Katherine W. Schweit, A Study of Active Shooter Incidents, 2000–2013, Washington, D.C.: Texas State University and Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, 2014.
  * Blau, Benjamin M., Devon H. Gorry, and Chip Wade, “Guns, Laws, and Public Shootings in the United States,” Applied Economics, Vol. 48, No. 49, 2016, pp. 4732–4746.
  * Bohnert, A. S., J. F. McCarthy, R. V. Ignacio, M. A. Ilgen, A. Eisenberg, and F. C. Blow, “Misclassification of Suicide Deaths: Examining the Psychiatric History of Overdose Decedents,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 6, 2013, pp. 326–330.
  * Borowsky, I. W., M. D. Resnick, M. Ireland, and R. W. Blum, “Suicide Attempts Among American Indian and Alaska Native Youth: Risk and Protective Factors,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 153, No. 6, 1999, pp. 573–580.
  * Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, “About Brady,” web page, undated. As of January 10, 2016: http://www.bradycampaign.org/about-brady
  * Braga, Anthony A., “Guns and Crime,” in F. Parisi, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Law and Economics, Vol. 3: Public Law and Legal Institutions, New York: Oxford University Press, 2017, pp. 344–369.
  * Braga, Anthony A., Andrew V. Papachristos, and David M. Hureau, “The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 31, No. 4, 2014, pp. 633–663.
  * Braga, Anthony A., and David L. Weisburd, “The Effects of Focused Deterrence Strategies on Crime: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2012, pp. 323–358.
  * Braga, Anthony A., Garen J. Wintemute, Glenn L. Pierce, Philip J. Cook, and Greg Ridgeway, “Interpreting the Empirical Evidence on Illegal Gun Market Dynamics,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 89, No. 5, 2012, pp. 779–793.
  * Branas, C. C., T. S. Richmond, D. P. Culhane, T. R. Ten Have, and D. J. Wiebe, “Investigating the Link Between Gun Possession and Gun Assault,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 99, No. 11, 2009, pp. 2034–2040.
  * Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Suicide in Affectively Ill Adolescents: A Case-Control Study,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1994, pp. 193–202.
  * Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Age- and Sex-Related Risk Factors for Adolescent Suicide,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 38, No. 12, 1999, pp. 1497–1505.
  * Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, C. J. Allman, G. M. Moritz, M. E. Wartella, and J. P. Zelenak, “The Presence and Accessibility of Firearms in the Homes of Adolescent Suicides: A Case-Control Study,” JAMA, Vol. 266, No. 21, 1991, pp. 2989–2995.
  * Brent, D. A., J. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, and C. Allman, “Suicide in Adolescents with No Apparent Psychopathology,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1993a, pp. 494–500.
  * Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, and C. Roth, “Firearms and Adolescent Suicide—A Community Case-Control Study,” American Journal of Diseases of Children, Vol. 147, No. 10, 1993b, pp. 1066–1071.
  * Bridges, F. Stephen, Kimberly M. Tatum, and Julie C. Kunselman, “Domestic Violence Statutes and Rates of Intimate Partner and Family Homicide,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2008, pp. 117–130.
  * Briggs, J. T., and A. Tabarrok, “Firearms and Suicides in U.S. States,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 37, 2014, pp. 180–188.
  * Britt, Chester L., Gary Kleck, and David J. Bordua, “A Reassessment of the D.C. Gun Law: Some Cautionary Notes on the Use of Interrupted Time Series Designs for Policy Impact Assessment,” Law and Society Review, Vol. 30, No. 2, 1996, pp. 361–380.
  * Buchanan, Larry, Josh Keller, Richard A. Oppel, Jr., and Daniel Victor, “How They Got Their Guns,” New York Times, June 12, 2016. As of March 22, 2017: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/10/03/us/how-mass-shooters-got-their-guns.html?_r=0
  * Bukstein, O. G., D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, C. Roth, and L. Balach, “Risk Factors for Completed Suicide Among Adolescents with a Lifetime History of Substance Abuse: A Case-Control Study,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 88, No. 6, 1993, pp. 403–408.
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Analysis Reports: The Illegal Youth Firearms Market in Seventeen Communities, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1997.
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Reports (2000): Memphis, Tennessee, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 2002.
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 2012 Summary: Firearms Reported Lost and Stolen, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2013. As of May 9, 2017: https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/docs/2012-firearms-reported-lost-and-stolenpdf-1/download
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, FFL Thefts/Losses: January 1, 2015–December 31, 2015, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016a. As of May 9, 2017: https://www.atf.gov/firearms/docs/report/2015-summary-firearms-reported-lost-and-stolen/download
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2016, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016b.
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Annual Firearms Manufacturing and Export Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, January 27, 2017. As of March 8, 2017: https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/docs/undefined/afmer-2015-final/download
  * Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Data Collection: National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS),” web page, 2017a. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=301
  * Bureau of Justice Statistics, “NCVS Redesign: Subnational,” web page, 2017b. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=911
  * Butkus, Renee, and Arlene Weissman, “Internists’ Attitudes Toward Prevention of Firearm Injury,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 160, No. 12, 2014, pp. 821–827.
  * Cagle, M. Christine, and J. Michael Martinez, “Have Gun, Will Travel: The Dispute Between the CDC and the NRA on Firearm Violence as a Public Health Problem,” Politics & Policy, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2004, pp. 278–310.
  * California Department of Justice, “General Notice of Firearm Prohibition and Power of Attorney for Firearms Relinquishment, Sale, or Transfer for Storage,” BOF 110, October 2015. As of June 29, 2017: https://www.oag.ca.gov/sites/all/files/agweb/pdfs/firearms/forms/poafirearmsdecl.pdf
  * Campbell Collaboration, Guidelines for Preparation of Review Protocols, Version 1.0, Oslo, Norway, January 1, 2001. As of October 13, 2017: https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/images/pdf/plain-language/C2_Protocols_guidelines_v1.pdf
  * Campbell, J. C., D. Webster, J. Kozio-McLain, C. Block, D. Campbell, M. A. Curry, F. Gary, N. Glass, J. McFarlane, C. Sachs, P. Sharps, Y. Ulrich, S. A. Wilt, J. Manganello, X. Xu, J. Schollenberger, V. Frye, and K. Laughon, “Risk Factors for Femicide in Abusive Relationships: Results from a Multisite Case Control Study,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 93, No. 7, 2003, pp. 1089–1097.
  * Cantor, D., “Substantive Implications of Longitudinal Design Features: The National Crime Survey as a Case Study,” in D. Kasprzyk, G. Duncan, G. Kalton, and M. P. Singh, eds., Panel Surveys, New York: John Wiley, 1989, pp. 25–51.
  * Carbone, Paul S., Conrad J. Clemens, and Thomas M. Ball, “Effectiveness of Gun-Safety Counseling and a Gun Lock Giveaway in a Hispanic Community,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 159, No. 11, 2005, pp. 1049–1054.
  * Cavanagh, J. T., A. J. Carson, M. Sharpe, and S. M. Lawrie, “Psychological Autopsy Studies of Suicide: A Systematic Review,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 33, 2003, pp. 395–405.
  * Cavanaugh, Joseph E., “Unifying the Derivations for the Akaike and Corrected Akaike Information Criteria,” Statistics and Probability Letters, Vol. 33, No. 2, April 1997, pp. 201–208.
  * CDC— _See_ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, WONDER data system, undated. As of March 8, 2017: https://wonder.cdc.gov
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Source of Firearms Used by Students in School-Associated Violent Deaths—United States, 1992–1999,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 50, No. 31, 2001, pp. 657–660.
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports, 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., March 28, 2013. As of March 9, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., June 24, 2015. As of March 23, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate10_us.html
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National, Regional, and State 1981–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017a. As of May 8, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Leading Causes of Death Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017b. As of May 10, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/leadcaus10_us.html
  * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports: 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017c. As of January 15, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
  * Chang, Ailsa, “Why the AR-15 Is More Than Just a Gun,” NPR, June 24, 2013. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.npr.org/2013/06/24/194228925/why-the-ar-15-is-more-than-just-a-gun
  * Chapman, S., P. Alpers, K. Agho, and M. Jones, “Australia’s 1996 Gun Law Reforms: Faster Falls in Firearm Deaths, Firearm Suicides, and a Decade Without Mass Shootings,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 6, 2006, pp. 365–372.
  * Chapman, Simon, Philip Alpers, and Michael Jones, “Association Between Gun Law Reforms and Intentional Firearm Deaths in Australia, 1979–2013,” JAMA, Vol. 316, No. 3, 2016, pp. 291–299.
  * Chaudri, V., and J. Geanakoplos, “A Note on the Economic Rationalization of Gun Control,” Economics Letters, Vol. 58, 1998, pp. 51–53.
  * Chauhan, P., M. Cerda, S. F. Messner, M. Tracy, K. Tardiff, and S. Galea, “Race/Ethnic-Specific Homicide Rates in New York City: Evaluating the Impact of Broken Windows Policing and Crack Cocaine Markets,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2011, pp. 268–290.
  * Cheng, Cheng, and Mark Hoekstra, “Does Strengthening Self-Defense Law Deter Crime or Escalate Violence? Evidence from Expansions to Castle Doctrine,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 48, No. 3, 2013, pp. 821–853.
  * Cherney, Samantha, Andrew R. Morral, and Terry L. Schell, RAND State Firearm Law Database, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-283-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL283.html
  * Choe, J. Y., L. A. Teplin, and K. M. Abram, “Perpetration of Violence, Violent Victimization, and Severe Mental Illness: Balancing Public Health Outcomes,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 153–164.
  * Coben, J. H., C. A. Steiner, M. Barrett, C. T. Merrill, and D. Adamson, “Completeness of Cause of Injury Coding in Healthcare Administrative Databases in the United States,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2001, pp. 199–201.
  * Code of Federal Regulations, Title 27, Section 478.11, Meaning of Terms.
  * Code of Federal Regulations, Title 38, Section 1.218, Security and Law Enforcement at VA Facilities.
  * Code of Federal Regulations, Title 39, Section 232.1, Conduct on Postal Property.
  * Cohen, Amy P., Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Rate of Mass Shootings Has Tripled Since 2011, Harvard Research Shows,” Mother Jones, October 15, 2014.
  * Colquhoun, D., “An Investigation of the False Discovery Rate and the Misinterpretation of p-Values,” Royal Society Open Science, Vol. 1, No. 3, 2014.
  * Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber, “Inference with ‘Difference in Differences’ with a Small Number of Policy Changes,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 1, 2011, pp. 113–125.
  * Conwell, Y., P. R. Duberstein, K. Connor, S. Eberly, C. Cox, and E. D. Caine, “Access to Firearms and Risk for Suicide in Middle-Aged and Older Adults,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2002, pp. 407–416.
  * Cook, Philip J., “The Case of the Missing Victims: Gunshot Woundings in the National Crime Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 91–102.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Anthony A. Braga, “Comprehensive Firearms Tracing: Strategic and Investigative Uses of New Data on Firearms Markets,” Arizona Law Review, Vol. 43, No. 2, 2001, pp. 277–309.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Kristin A. Goss, The Gun Debate: What Everyone Needs to Know, New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
  * Cook, P. J., and J. A. Leitzel, “‘Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy’: An Economic Analysis of the Attack on Gun Control,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 91–118.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive National Survey on Firearms Ownership and Use, Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation, 1996.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: National Survey on Private Ownership and Use of Firearms: Research in Brief, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, 1997.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “Defensive Gun Uses: New Evidence from a National Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1998, pp. 111–131.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Effect of the Brady Act on Gun Violence,” in B. Harcourt, ed., Guns, Crime, and Punishment in America, New York: New York University Press, 2003, pp. 283–298.
  * Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Social Costs of Gun Ownership,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90, No. 1–2, 2006, pp. 379–391.
  * Cook, Philip J., J. Ludwig, and A. A. Braga, “Criminal Records of Homicide Offenders,” JAMA, Vol. 294, No. 5, 2005, pp. 598–601.
  * Cook, Philip J., Jens Ludwig, and David Hemenway, “The Gun Debate’s New Mythical Number: How Many Defensive Uses Per Year?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 16, No. 3, 1997, pp. 463–469.
  * Cook, P. J., J. Ludwig, S. Venkatesh, and A. A. Braga, “Underground Gun Markets,” Economic Journal, Vol. 117, 2007, pp. F558–F888.
  * Cook, Philip J., Stephanie Molliconi, and Thomas B. Cole, “Regulating Gun Markets,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 59–92.
  * Cook, Philip J., Susan T. Parker, and Harold A. Pollack, “Sources of Guns to Dangerous People: What We Learn by Asking Them,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 28–36.
  * Cook, P. J., and H. A. Pollack, “Reducing Access to Guns by Violent Offenders,” presented at RSF Journal Conference: The Underground Gun Market, April 2016.
  * Cooper, Alexia, and Erica L. Smith, Homicide Trends in the United States 1980–2008, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, November 2011.
  * Corrigan, P. W., and A. C. Watson, “Findings from the National Comorbidity Survey on the Frequency of Violent Behavior in Individuals with Psychiatric Disorders,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 136, 2005, pp. 153–162.
  * Cramer, Clayton E., and David B. Kopel, “‘Shall Issue’: The New Wave of Concealed Handgun Permit Laws,” Tennessee Law Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, 2005, pp. 679–757.
  * Crifasi, C. K., J. S. Meyers, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Changes in Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Laws in Connecticut and Missouri on Suicide Rates,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 43–49.
  * Crime Prevention Research Center, “Updated: More Misleading Information from Bloomberg’s Everytown for Gun Safety on Guns: ‘Analysis of Recent Mass Shootings,’ Showing How Mass Public Shootings Keep Occurring in Gun-Free Zones,” September 1, 2014. As of March 13, 2017: http://crimeresearch.org/2014/09/more-misleading-information-from-bloombergs-everytown-for-gun-safety-on-guns-analysis-of-recent-mass-shootings/
  * Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2013, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2014. As of June 29, 2017: https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/about-us/cjis/nics/reports/2013-operations-report
  * Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2014, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2015. As of March 16, 2017: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/2014-nics-ops-report-050115.pdf
  * Criminal Justice Information Services Division, “National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section Active Records in the NICS Indices,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, December 31, 2016. As of March 31, 2017: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/active-records-in-the-nics-index-by-state.pdf/view
  * Csere, M., State Comparison of Gun Permit Fees, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-R-0048, 2013. As of May 24, 2017: https://www.cga.ct.gov/2013/rpt/2013-R-0048.htm
  * Cummings, P., D. C. Grossman, F. P. Rivara, and T. D. Koepsell, “State Gun Safe Storage Laws and Child Mortality Due to Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 278, No. 13, 1997a, pp. 1084–1086.
  * Cummings, P., T. D. Koepsell, D. C. Grossman, J. Savarino, and R. S. Thompson, “The Association Between the Purchase of a Handgun and Homicide or Suicide,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 87, No. 6, 1997b, pp. 974–978.
  * Curtin, Sally C., Margaret Warner, and Holly Hedegaard, Suicide Rates for Females and Males by Race and Ethnicity: United States, 1999 and 2014, Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016.
  * Czyz, Ewa K., Adam G. Horwitz, Daniel Eisenberg, Anne Kramer, and Cheryl A. King, “Self-Reported Barriers to Professional Help Seeking Among College Students at Elevated Risk for Suicide,” Journal of American College Health, Vol. 61, No. 7, 2013, pp. 398–406.
  * Dahlberg, L. L., R. M. Ikeda, and M. J. Kresnow, “Guns in the Home and Risk of a Violent Death in the Home: Findings from a National Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 160, No. 10, 2004, pp. 929–936.
  * Daigle, M. S., “Suicide Prevention Through Means Restriction: Assessing the Risk of Substitution—A Critical Review,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, 2005, pp. 625–632.
  * Desai, R. A., D. Dausey, and R. A. Rosenheck, “Suicide Among Discharged Psychiatric Inpatients in the Department of Veterans Affairs,” Military Medicine, Vol. 173, No. 8, 2008, pp. 721–728.
  * DeSimone, J., S. Markowitz, and J. Xu, “Child Access Prevention Laws and Nonfatal Gun Injuries,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 80, No. 1, 2013, pp. 5–25.
  * Desmarais, S. L., R. A. Van Dorn, K. L. Johnson, K. J. Grimm, K. S. Douglas, and M. S. Swartz, “Community Violence Perpetration and Victimization Among Adults with Mental Illness,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, 2014, pp. 2342–2349.
  * Dickey, Jay, and Mark Rosenberg, “How to Protect Gun Rights While Reducing the Toll of Gun Violence,” Washington Post, December 25, 2015.
  * Donohue, John J., “The Impact of Concealed Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Phillip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 287–341.
  * Donohue, John J., “Guns, Crime, and the Impact of State Right-to-Carry Laws,” Fordham Law Review, Vol. 73, No. 2, 2004, pp. 623–652.
  * Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data, the LASSO, and a State-Level Synthetic Controls Analysis, forthcoming.
  * Draper, Norman R., and Harry Smith, Applied Regression Analysis, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
  * Duda, M. D., and K. C. Young, Factors Related to Hunting and Fishing Participation in the United States, Harrisonburg, Va.: Responsive Management, report for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Grant # 14–48-0009–92-1252, 1993.
  * Duggan, Mark, “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 5, 2001, pp. 1086–1114.
  * Duggan, Mark, “Guns and Suicide,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 41–73.
  * Duggan, Mark, Randi Hjalmarsson, and Brian A. Jacob, “The Short-Term and Localized Effect of Gun Shows: Evidence from California and Texas,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 3, 2011, pp. 786–799.
  * Duncan, O. D., As Compared to What? Offensive and Defensive Gun Use Surveys, 1973–1994, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, working paper 185056, 2000a.
  * Duncan, O. D., “Gun Use Surveys: In Numbers We Trust?” Criminologist, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2000b, pp. 1–6.
  * Durlauf, Steven, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers, “Model Uncertainty and the Effect of Shall-Issue Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime,” European Economic Review, Vol. 81, 2016, pp. 32–67.
  * Duwe, Grant, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Carlisle E. Moody, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Concealed Firearm Laws on Mass Public Shootings,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2002, pp. 271–296.
  * Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Shoot First: "Stand Your Ground" Laws and Their Effect on Violent Crime and the Criminal Justice System, New York, 2013.
  * Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Innocents Lost: A Year of Unintentional Child Gun Deaths, June 2014. As of May 12, 2017: https://everytownresearch.org/documents/2015/04/innocents-lost.pdf
  * Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Strategies for Reducing Gun Violence in American Cities, June 2016. As of May 3, 2017: https://everytownresearch.org/documents/2016/06/strategies-reducing-gun-violence-american-cities.pdf
  * Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Be SMART,” web page, 2017a. As of May 7, 2017: http://besmartforkids.org/
  * Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Mass Shootings in the United States: 2009–2016,” April 11, 2017b. As of May 3, 2017: http://everytownresearch.org/reports/mass-shootings-analysis/
  * Families Afield, An Initiative for the Future of Hunting, 2010. As of March 23, 2017: http://www.familiesafield.org/pdf/FamiliesAfield_Report.pdf
  * Fay, Robert E., and Mamadou S. Diallo, Developmental Estimates of Subnational Crime Rates Based on the National Crime Victimization Survey, Washington, D.C.: Westat, 2015. As of May 12, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5499
  * FBI— _See_ Federal Bureau of Investigation.
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States: 2015, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, 2016a. As of March 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 8,” web page, 2016b. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_8_murder_victims_by_weapon_2011–2015.xls
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 15,” web page, 2016c. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_15_justifiable_homicide_by_weapon_private_citizen_2011–2015.xls
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 28,” web page, 2016d. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/leoka/2015/tables/table_28_leos_fk_type_of_weapon_2006–2015.xls
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Violent Crime,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016e. As of May 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/violent-crime/violentcrimemain_final.pdf
  * Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Active Records in the NICS Index,” April 30, 2017. As of May 8, 2017: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/active_records_in_the_nics-index.pdf/view
  * Fjestad, S. P., Blue Book of Gun Values, 38th ed., Minneapolis, Minn.: Blue Book Publications, 2017.
  * Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “U.S. Mass Shootings, 1982–2017: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, June 14, 2017. As of August 25, 2017: http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/12/mass-shootings-mother-jones-full-data/
  * Fortunato, David, “Can Easing Concealed Carry Deter Crime?” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 96, No. 4, December 2015, pp. 1071–1085.
  * Fox, James A., and Emma E. Fridel, “The Tenuous Connections Involving Mass Shootings, Mental Illness, and Gun Laws,” Violence and Gender, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2016, pp. 14–19.
  * Fox, James A., and Jack Levin, Extreme Killing: Understanding Serial and Mass Murder, 3rd ed., Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 2015.
  * Freed, L. H., D. W. Webster, J. J. Longwell, J. Carrese, and M. H. Wilson, “Factors Preventing Gun Acquisition and Carrying Among Incarcerated Adolescent Males,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 155, 2001, pp. 335–341.
  * Freedman, David A., “On the So-Called ‘Huber Sandwich Estimator’ and ‘Robust Standard Errors,’” American Statistician, Vol. 60, No. 4, 2006, pp. 299–302.
  * French, B., and P. J. Heagerty, “Analysis of Longitudinal Data to Evaluate a Policy Change,” Statistics in Medicine, Vol. 27, No. 24, 2008, pp. 5005–5025.
  * Gelman, Andrew, and John Carlin, “Power Calculations: Assessing Type S (Sign) and Type M (Magnitude) Errors,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, Vol. 9, No. 6, 2014, pp. 641–651.
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Assault Weapons,” web page, undated-a. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/hardware-ammunition/assault-weapons/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Browse Gun Laws by State,” web page, undated-b. As of November 10, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/search-gun-law-by-state/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Categories of Prohibited People,” web page, undated-c. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/who-can-have-a-gun/categories-of-prohibited-people/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Guns in Schools,” web page, undated-d. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/guns-in-schools/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Maintaining Records of Gun Sales,” web page, undated-e. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/maintaining-records-of-gun-sales/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “‘Stand Your Ground’ Laws,” web page, undated-f. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/stand-your-ground-laws/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Universal Background Checks,” web page, undated-g. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/background-checks/universal-background-checks/
  * Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Waiting Periods,” web page, undated-h. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/waiting-periods/
  * Gill, J. R., and M. Pasquale-Styles, “Firearm Deaths by Law Enforcement,” Journal of Forensic Science, Vol. 54, No. 1, 2009, pp. 185–188.
  * Gius, Mark, “An Examination of the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws and Assault Weapons Bans on State-Level Murder Rates,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2014, pp. 265–267.
  * Gius, Mark, “The Effects of State and Federal Background Checks on State-Level Gun-Related Murder Rates,” Applied Economics, Vol. 47, No. 38, 2015a, pp. 4090–4101.
  * Gius, Mark, “The Impact of Minimum Age and Child Access Prevention Laws on Firearm-Related Youth Suicides and Unintentional Deaths,” Social Science Journal, Vol. 52, No. 2, 2015b, pp. 168–175.
  * Gius, Mark, “The Impact of State and Federal Assault Weapons Bans on Public Mass Shootings,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2015c, pp. 281–284.
  * Glatt, K. M., “Helpline: Suicide Prevention at a Suicide Site,” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior, Vol. 17, 1987, pp. 299–309.
  * Good, Phillip I., and James W. Hardin, Common Errors in Statistics (And How to Avoid Them), 4th ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
  * Grambsch, P., “Regression to the Mean, Murder Rates, and Shall-Issue Laws,” American Statistician, Vol. 62, No. 4, 2008, pp. 289–295.
  * Grassel, K. M., G. J. Wintemute, M. A. Wright, and M. P. Romero, “Association Between Handgun Purchase and Mortality from Firearm Injury,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2003, pp. 48–52.
  * Grinshteyn, Erin, and David Hemenway, “Violent Death Rates: The US Compared with Other High-Income OECD Countries, 2010,” American Journal of Medicine, Vol. 129, No. 3, March 2016, pp. 266–273.
  * Grossman, David C., Peter Cummings, Thomas D. Koepsell, Jean Marshall, Luann D’Ambrosio, Robert S. Thompson, and Chris Mack, “Firearm Safety Counseling in Primary Care Pediatrics: A Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 1, 2000, pp. 22–26.
  * Grossman, D. C., B. A. Mueller, C. Riedy, M. D. Dowd, A. Villaveces, J. Prodzinski, J. Nakagawara, J. Howard, N. Thiersch, and R. Harruff, “Gun Storage Practices and Risk of Youth Suicide and Unintentional Firearm Injuries,” JAMA, Vol. 293, No. 6, 2005, pp. 707–714.
  * Grossman, D. C., D. T. Reay, and S. A. Baker, “Self-Inflicted and Unintentional Firearm Injuries Among Children and Adolescents,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 153, No. 8, 1999, pp. 875–878.
  * Grossman, David C., Helen A. Stafford, Thomas D. Koepsell, Ryan Hill, Kyla D. Retzer, and Ward Jones, “Improving Firearm Storage in Alaska Native Villages: A Randomized Trial of Household Gun Cabinets,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S2, 2012, pp. S291–S297.
  * Grossman, Richard S., and Stephen A. Lee, “May Issue Versus Shall Issue: Explaining the Pattern of Concealed-Carry Handgun Laws, 1960–2001,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–206.
  * Gun Violence Archive, homepage, undated-a. As of October 20, 2016: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/
  * Gun Violence Archive, “Mass Shootings,” website, undated-b. As of October 25, 2017: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting
  * Hahn, Robert A., Oleg Bilukha, Alex Crosby, Mindy T. Fullilove, Akiva Liberman, Eve Moscicki, Susan Snyder, Farris Tuma, and Peter A. Briss, “Firearms Laws and the Reduction of Violence: A Systematic Review,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 28, No. 2, 2005, pp. 40–71.
  * Harlow, Caroline Wolf, Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities: Firearm Use by Offenders, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 189369, November 2001.
  * Harrell, Erika, Crime Against Persons with Disabilities, 2009–2015—Statistical Tables, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 250632, 2017.
  * Helland, E., and A. Tabarrok, “Using Placebo Laws to Test ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2004.
  * Hemenway, David, “Survey Research and Self-Defense Gun Use: An Explanation of Extreme Overestimates,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 87, No. 4, 1997, pp. 1430–1445.
  * Hemenway, David, and Deborah Azrael, “The Relative Frequency of Offensive and Defensive Gun Uses: Results from a National Survey,” Violence and Victims, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2000, pp. 257–272.
  * Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Gun Use in the United States: Results from Two National Surveys,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2000, pp. 263–267.
  * Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Whose Guns Are Stolen? The Epidemiology of Gun Theft Victims,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2017, p. 11.
  * Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “Children and Unintentional Firearm Death,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 2, No. 26, 2015a.
  * Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “The Epidemiology of Self-Defense Gun Use: Evidence from the National Crime Victimization Surveys 2007–2011,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015b, pp. 22–27.
  * Hemenway, David, Sara J. Solnick, and Deborah R. Azrael, “Firearm Training and Storage,” JAMA, Vol. 273, No. 1, 1995, pp. 46–50.
  * Hepburn, L., D. Azrael, M. Miller, and D. Hemenway, “The Effect of Child Access Prevention Laws on Unintentional Child Firearm Fatalities, 1979–2000,” Journal of Trauma-Injury Infection and Critical Care, Vol. 61, No. 2, 2006, pp. 423–428.
  * Higgins, Julian P. T., and Sally Green, eds., Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, Version 5.1.0, London: Cochrane Collaboration, March 2011. As of October 13, 2017: http://handbook.cochrane.org
  * Hodur, Nancy M., F. Larry Leistritz, and Kara L. Wolfe, “Developing the Nature-Based Tourism Sector in Southwestern North Dakota,” Great Plains Research: A Journal of Natural and Social Sciences, Vol. 18, Spring 2008, pp. 81–92.
  * Hoskin, Anthony, “Household Gun Prevalence and Rates of Violent Crime: A Test of Competing Gun Theories,” Criminal Justice Studies, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2011, pp. 125–136.
  * Hughes, Karen, Mark A. Bellis, Lisa Jones, Sara Wood, Geoff Bates, Lindsay Eckley, Ellie McCoy, Christopher Mikton, Tom Shakespeare, and Alana Officer, “Prevalence and Risk of Violence Against Adults with Disabilities: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies,” Lancet, Vol. 379, 2012, pp. 1621–1629.
  * Humphreys, David K., Antonio Gasparrini, and Douglas J. Wiebe, “Evaluating the Impact of Florida’s ‘Stand Your Ground’ Self-Defense Law on Homicide and Suicide by Firearm: An Interrupted Time Series Study,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, 2017, pp. 44–50.
  * IBISWorld, Guns and Ammunition Manufacturing in the U.S.: Market Research Report, Los Angeles, Calif., August 2016.
  * Ilgen, M. A., K. Zivin, R. J. McCammon, and M. Valenstein, “Mental Illness, Previous Suicidality, and Access to Guns in the United States,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–200.
  * Institute of Medicine, Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2011.
  * Jagodič, Helena Korošec, Tatjana Rokavec, Mark Agius, and Peter Pregelj, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Slovenia: A Nationwide Ecological Study,” Croatian Medical Journal, Vol. 54, No. 5, 2013, pp. 444–452.
  * Joe, S., S. C. Marcus, and M. S. Kaplan, “Racial Differences in the Characteristics of Firearm Suicide Decedents in the United States,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, Vol. 77, No. 1, 2007, pp. 124–130.
  * Johnson, R. M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. E. Clark, and D. Hemenway, “Who Are the Owners of Firearms Used in Adolescent Suicides?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 6, 2010, pp. 609–611.
  * Jones, Edward D. III, “The District of Columbia’s ‘Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975’: The Toughest Handgun Control Law in the United States—or Is It?” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 455, 1981, pp. 138–149.
  * Joshi, M., and S. B. Sorenson, “Intimate Partner Violence at the Scene: Incident Characteristics and Implications for Public Health Surveillance,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 34, No. 2, 2010, pp. 116–136.
  * Juodis, Marcus, Andrew Starzomski, Stephen Porter, and Michael Woodworth, “A Comparison of Domestic and Non-Domestic Homicides: Further Evidence for Distinct Dynamics and Heterogeneity of Domestic Homicide Perpetrators,” Journal of Family Violence, Vol. 29, No. 3, 2014, pp. 299–313.
  * Kahan, Dan M., “The Politically Motivated Reasoning Paradigm, Part 2: Unanswered Questions,” in Robert Scott and Stephen Kosslyn, eds., Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2016.
  * Kahan, Dan M., “On the Sources of Ordinary Science Knowledge and Extraordinary Science Ignorance,” in Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Dan Kahan, and Dietram A. Scheufele, eds., Oxford Handbook of the Science of Science Communication, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2017.
  * Kahan, Dan M., E. Peters, E. Dawson, and P. Slovic, “Motivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self-Government,” Behavioural Public Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017, pp. 54–86.
  * Kalesan, Bindu, Matthew E. Mobily, Olivia Keiser, Jeffrey A. Fagan, and Sandro Galea, “Firearm Legislation and Firearm Mortality in the USA: A Cross-Sectional, State-Level Study,” Lancet, Vol. 387, No. 10030, April 30, 2016, pp. 1847–1855. 
  * Kann, L., T. McManus, W. A. Harris, S. L. Shanklin, K. H. Flint, J. Hawkins, B. Queen, R. Lowry, E. O. Olsen, D. Chyen, L. Whittle, J. Thornton, C. Lim, Y. Yamakawa, N. Brener, and S. Zaza, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2015,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 65, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1–174.
  * Kapusta, Nestor D., Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Elmar Etzersdorfer, Martin Voracek, Kanita Dervic, Elisabeth Jandl-Jager, and Gernot Sonneck, “Influence of Psychotherapist Density and Antidepressant Sales on Suicide Rates,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 119, No. 3, 2009, pp. 236–242.
  * Kapusta, Nestor D., Martin Posch, Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Melitta Fischer-Kern, Elmar Etzersdorfer, and Gernot Sonneck, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Austria: A Nationwide Study,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 61, No. 12, 2010, pp. 1198–1203.
  * Kapusta, N. D., U. S. Tran, I. R. Rockett, D. DeLeo, C. P. Naylor, T. Niederkrotenthaler, M. Voracek, E. Etzersdorfer, and G. Sonneck, “Declining Autopsy Rates and Suicide Misclassification: A Cross-National Analysis of 35 Countries,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 68, No. 10, 2011, pp. 1050–1057.
  * Kawaguchi, Hideaki, and Soichi Koike, “Association Between the Density of Physicians and Suicide Rates in Japan: Nationwide Ecological Study Using a Spatial Bayesian Model,” PLoS ONE, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2016.
  * Kellermann, Arthur L., and Frederick P. Rivara, “Silencing the Science on Gun Policy,” JAMA, Vol. 309, No. 6, 2013, pp. 549–550.
  * Kellermann, A. L., F. P. Rivara, G. Somes, D. T. Reay, J. Francisco, J. G. Banton, J. Prodzinski, C. Fligner, and B. B. Hackman, “Suicide in the Home in Relation to Gun Ownership,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 327, No. 7, 1992, pp. 467–472.
  * Kendall, Todd D., and Robert Tamura, “Unmarried Fertility, Crime, and Social Stigma,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2010, pp. 185–221.
  * Kennedy, D. M., A. M. Piehl, and A. A. Braga, “Youth Violence in Boston: Gun Markets, Serious Youth Offenders, and a Use-Reduction Strategy,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 147–196.
  * Khan, Khalid S., Regina Kunz, Jos Kleijnen, and Gerd Antes, “Five Steps to Conducting a Systematic Review,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, Vol. 96, No. 3, 2003, pp. 118–121.
  * Kindy, Kimberly, “FBI to Sharply Expand System for Tracking Fatal Police Shootings,” Washington Post, December 8, 2015.
  * Kleck, Gary, Targeting Guns: Firearms and Their Control, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1997.
  * Kleck, Gary, “Degrading Scientific Standards to Get the Defensive Gun Use Estimate Down,” Journal on Firearms and Public Policy, Vol. 11, 1999, pp. 77–138.
  * Kleck, Gary, “The Nature and Effectiveness of Owning, Carrying and Using Guns for Self-Protection,” in G. Kleck and D. B. Kates, eds., Armed: New Perspectives on Gun Control, New York: Prometheus Books, 2001.
  * Kleck, Gary, “Measures of Gun Ownership Levels for Macro-Level Crime and Violence Research,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2004, pp. 3–36.
  * Kleck, Gary, “Large-Capacity Magazines and the Casualty Counts in Mass Shootings: The Plausibility of Linkages,” Justice Research and Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2016, pp. 28–47.
  * Kleck, G., and D. J. Bordua, “The Factual Foundation for Certain Key Assumptions of Gun Control,” Law and Policy, Vol. 5, No. 3, 1983, pp. 271–298.
  * Kleck, G., and M. A. DeLone, “Victim Resistance and Offender Weapon Effects in Robbery,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1993, pp. 55–81.
  * Kleck, Gary, and Marc G. Gertz, “Armed Resistance to Crime: The Prevalence and Nature of Self-Defense with a Gun,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 150–187.
  * Kleck, Gary, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Mark E. Schaffer, Gun Prevalence, Homicide Rates and Causality: A GMM Approach to Endogeneity Bias, London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper No. 5357, 2005.
  * Kleck, G., and E. B. Patterson, “The Impact of Gun Control and Gun Ownership Levels on Violence Rates,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1993, pp. 249–287.
  * Klieve, H., J. Sveticic, and D. De Leo, “Who Uses Firearms as a Means of Suicide? A Population Study Exploring Firearm Accessibility and Method Choice,” BMC Medicine, Vol. 7, 2009.
  * Klinger, D., R. Rosenfeld, D. Isom, and M. Deckard, “Race, Crime, and the Micro-Ecology of Deadly Force,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 15, No. 1, February 2016, pp. 193–222.
  * Koehler, J. J., “The Influence of Prior Beliefs on Scientific Judgments of Evidence Quality,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 56, 1993, pp. 28–55.
  * Kolla, B. P., S. S. O’Connor, and T. W. Lineberry, “The Base Rates and Factors Associated with Reported Access to Firearms in Psychiatric Inpatients,” General Hospital Psychiatry, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2011, pp. 191–196.
  * Kopel, D. B., “Background Checks for Firearms Sales and Loans: Law, History, and Policy,” Harvard Journal on Legislation, Vol. 53, 2016, pp. 303–367.
  * Koper, Christopher S., Updated Assessment of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Impacts on Gun Markets and Gun Violence 1994–2003, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, 2004.
  * Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Ban on Gun Violence Outcomes: An Assessment of Multiple Outcome Measures and Some Lessons for Policy Evaluation,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2001, pp. 33–74.
  * Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban on Gun Markets: An Assessment of Short-Term Primary and Secondary Market Effects,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2002, pp. 239–266.
  * Kovandzic, Tomislav V., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns and Violent Crime: Crime Control Through Gun Control?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 2, No. 3, 2003, pp. 363–396.
  * Kovandzic, T. V., T. B. Marvell, and L. M. Vieraitis, “The Impact of ‘Shall-Issue’ Concealed Handgun Laws on Violent Crime Rates—Evidence from Panel Data for Large Urban Cities,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 9, No. 4, 2005, pp. 292–323.
  * Kovandzic, Tomislav, Mark E. Schaffer, and Gary Kleck, “Estimating the Causal Effect of Gun Prevalence on Homicide Rates: A Local Average Treatment Effect Approach,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2013, pp. 477–541.
  * Kposowa, A. J., “Association of Suicide Rates, Gun Ownership, Conservatism and Individual Suicide Risk,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 48, No. 9, 2013, pp. 1467–1479.
  * Kposowa, A., D. Hamilton, and K. Wang, “Impact of Firearm Availability and Gun Regulation on State Suicide Rates,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 46, No. 6, 2016, pp. 678–696.
  * Krouse, W. J., Gun Control: Statutory Disclosure Limitations on ATF Firearms Trace Data and Multiple Handgun Sales Reports, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 7–5700, 2009.
  * Krouse, William J., and Daniel J. Richardson, Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and Victims, 1999–2013, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R44126, 2015.
  * Kubrin, Charis E., and Tim Wadsworth, “Explaining Suicide Among Blacks and Whites: How Socioeconomic Factors and Gun Availability Affect Race-Specific Suicide Rates,” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 90, No. 5, 2009, pp. 1203–1227.
  * Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and X. Liu, “Risk Factors for Male and Female Suicide Decedents Ages 15–64 in the United States—Results from the 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2003, pp. 419–426.
  * Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and R. Wei, “Substance Use, Firearm Availability, Depressive Symptoms, and Mental Health Service Utilization Among White and African American Suicide Decedents Aged 15 to 64 Years,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 15, No. 8, 2005, pp. 614–621.
  * La Valle, James M., “Rebuilding at Gunpoint: A City-Level Re-Estimation of the Brady Law and RTC Laws in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 18, No. 4, 2007, pp. 451–465.
  * La Valle, James M., “Re-Estimating Gun-Policy Effects According to a National Science Academy Report: Were Previous Reports of Failure Premature?” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 33, No. 1, 2010, pp. 71–95.
  * La Valle, James M., “‘Gun Control’ vs. ‘Self-Protection’: A Case Against the Ideological Divide,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2013, pp. 1–26.
  * La Valle, James M., and Thomas C. Glover, “Revisiting Licensed Handgun Carrying: Personal Protection or Interpersonal Liability?” American Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2012, pp. 580–601.
  * LaFree, G., and C. Birbeck, Controlling New Mexico Juveniles’ Possession of Firearms, Albuquerque, N.M.: New Mexico Criminal Justice Statistical Analysis Center, Working Paper 27, 1998. As of May 10, 2017: http://nmsc.unm.edu/reports/1998/JuvFirearmPossession.pdf
  * Lang, Matthew, “The Impact of Mental Health Insurance Laws on State Suicide Rates,” Health Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, 2013, pp. 73–88.
  * Langton, L., Firearms Stolen During Household Burglaries and Other Property Crimes, 2005–2010, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 239436, 2012.
  * Leask, Anna, “Raurimu 20 Years On: The Madman, the Massacre and the Memories,” New Zealand Herald, February 4, 2017.
  * Lee, Wang-Sheng, and Sandy Suardi, “The Australian Firearms Buyback and Its Effect on Gun Deaths,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2010, pp. 65–79.
  * Lehnen, R., and W. Skogan, The National Crime Survey: Working Papers, Vol. 2: Methodological Studies, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1984. 
  * Leigh, Andrew, and Christine Neill, “Do Gun Buybacks Save Lives? Evidence from Panel Data,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2010, pp. 462–508.
  * Lewiecki, E. M., and S. A. Miller, “Suicide, Guns, and Public Policy,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 27–31.
  * Lexington, “Why the NRA Keeps Talking About Mental Illness, Rather Than Guns,” Economist, March 13, 2013. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.economist.com/blogs/lexington/2013/03/guns-and-mentally-ill
  * Li, Z., A. Page, G. Martin, and R. Taylor, “Attributable Risk of Psychiatric and Socio-Economic Factors for Suicide from Individual-Level, Population-Based Studies: A Systematic Review,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 72, No. 4, 2011, pp. 608–616.
  * Liu, E. C., E. Bagalman, V. S. Chu, and C. S. Redhead, Submission of Mental Health Records to the NICS and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, Washington, D.C., Congressional Research Service, R43040, 2013.
  * Loeber, R., and R. Stallings, “Modeling the Impact of Interventions on Local Indicators of Offending, Victimization, and Incarceration,” in R. Loeber and D. P. Farrington, eds., Young Homicide Offenders and Victims: Risk Factors, Prediction, and Prevention from Childhood, New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 137–152.
  * Loftin, Colin, and Ellen J. MacKenzie, “Building National Estimates of Violent Victimization,” paper presented at the National Research Council Symposium on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior, Destin, Fla., April 1–6, 1990.
  * Loftin, C., D. McDowall, B. Wiersema, and T. J. Cottey, “Effects of Restrictive Licensing of Handguns on Homicide and Suicide in the District of Columbia,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 325, No. 23, 1991, pp. 1615–1620.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., The Bias Against Guns: Why Almost Everything You’ve Heard About Gun Control Is Wrong, Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, Inc., 2003.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 3rd ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., “The FBI’s Misinterpretation of the Change in Mass Public Shootings,” ACJS Today, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2015, pp. 18–29.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., and William Landes, “Multiple Victim Public Shootings,” 2000 (unpublished). As of June 29, 2017: http://www.shack.co.nz/pistoltaupo/SSRN_ID272929_code010610560.pdf
  * Lott, John R., Jr., Carlisle E. Moody, and John E. Whitley, “Re: ‘What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?’” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 184, No. 1, 2016, pp. 81–82.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., and D. B. Mustard, “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1, 1997, pp. 1–68.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Safe-Storage Gun Laws: Accidental Deaths, Suicides, and Crime,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. 2, 2001, pp. 659–689.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Measurement Error in County-Level UCR Data,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 19, No. 2, June 2003, pp. 185–198.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Abortion and Crime: Unwanted Children and Out-of-Wedlock Births,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 45, No. 2, 2007, pp. 304–324.
  * Lott, John R., Jr., John E. Whitley, and Rebekah C. Riley, Concealed Carry Permit Holders Across the United States, Crime Prevention Research Center, 2016.
  * Lubin, G., N. Werbeloff, D. Halperin, M. Shmushkevitch, M. Weiser, and H. Y. Knobler, “Decrease in Suicide Rates After a Change of Policy Reducing Access to Firearms in Adolescents: A Naturalistic Epidemiological Study,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 5, 2010, pp. 421–424.
  * Luca, Michael, Lahotra Deepak, and Christopher Poliquin, The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy, working paper, Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School, 2016.
  * Ludwig, Jens, “Gun Self-Defense and Deterrence,” Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, Vol. 27, 2000, pp. 363–417.
  * Ludwig, J., and P. J. Cook, “Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with Implementation of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act,” JAMA, Vol. 284, No. 5, 2000, pp. 585–591.
  * Luoma, Jason B., Catherine E. Martin, and Jane L. Pearson, “Contact with Mental Health and Primary Care Providers Before Suicide: A Review of the Evidence,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 159, No. 6, 2002, pp. 909–916.
  * MacKinnon, James G., and Matthew D. Webb, “Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly Different Cluster Sizes,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2017, pp. 233–254.
  * Maltz, M. D., and J. Targonski, “A Note on the Use of County-Level UCR Data," Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2002, pp. 297–318.
  * Manning, Willard, “Comment: The Impact of Concealed-Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 331–341.
  * Manski, Charles F., and John V. Pepper, How Do Right-to-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping with Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation Assumptions, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau for Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 21701, November 2015.
  * Martin, Robert A., and Richard L. Legault, “Systematic Measurement Error with State-Level Crime Data: Evidence from the ‘More Guns, Less Crime’ Debate,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 42, No. 2, May 2005, pp. 187–210.
  * Marvell, T. B., “The Impact of Banning Juvenile Gun Possession,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, 2001, pp. 691–713.
  * Mass Shooting Tracker, homepage, undated. As of October 20, 2016: https://www.massshootingtracker.org
  * Masters, Kate, “Fear of Other People Is Now the Primary Motivation for American Gun Ownership, a Landmark Survey Finds,” The Trace, September 19, 2016. As of October 13, 2017: https://www.thetrace.org/2016/09/harvard-gun-ownership-study-self-defense/
  * Matejkowski, J., J. Fairfax-Columbo, S. W. Cullen, S. C. Marcus, and P. L. Solomon, “Exploring the Potential of Stricter Gun Restrictions for People with Serious Mental Illness to Reduce Homicide in the United States,” Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, Vol. 25, No. 3, 2014, pp. 362–369.
  * Mayors Against Illegal Guns, “Access Denied: How the Gun Lobby Is Depriving Police, Policy Makers, and the Public of the Data We Need to Prevent Gun Violence,” Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, 2013. As of May 12, 2017: http://everytownresearch.org/reports/access-denied/
  * McCarthy, John F., Frederic C. Blow, Rosalinda V. Ignacio, Mark A. Ilgen, Karen L. Austin, and Marcia Valenstein, “Suicide Among Patients in the Veterans Affairs Health System: Rural-Urban Differences in Rates, Risks, and Methods,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S1, March 2012, pp. S111–S117.
  * McDonald, J. F., “An Economic Analysis of Guns, Crime, and Gun Control,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1999, pp. 11–20.
  * McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and S. Presser, “Measuring Civilian Defensive Firearm Use: A Methodological Experiment,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 16, No. 1, 2000, pp. 1–19.
  * McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and B. Wiersema, “Estimates of the Frequency of Firearm Self Defense from the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York, School of Criminal Justice, Violence Research Group Discussion Paper 20, 1998 (unpublished).
  * McDowall, D., and B. Wiersema, “The Incidence of Defensive Firearm Use by U.S. Crime Victims, 1987 Through 1990,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 84, No. 12, 1994, pp. 1982–1984.
  * McFarlane, J., J. C. Campbell, S. Wilt, C. Sachs, Y. Ulrich, and X. Xu, “Stalking and Intimate Partner Femicide,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 3, 1999, pp. 300–316.
  * McGee, K. S., T. Coyne-Beasley, and R. M. Johnson, “Review of Evaluations of Educational Approaches to Promote Safe Storage of Firearms,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2003, pp. 108–111.
  * McGinty, E. E., D. W. Webster, M. Jarlenski, and C. L. Barry, “News Media Framing of Serious Mental Illness and Gun Violence in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 3, 2014, pp. 406–413.
  * McPhedran, Samara, “A Systematic Review of Quantitative Evidence About the Impacts of Australian Legislative Reform on Firearm Homicide,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 28, 2016, pp. 64–72.
  * McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Mass Shootings in Australia and New Zealand: A Descriptive Study of Incidence,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2011.
  * McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Lethal and Non-Lethal Violence Against Women in Australia: Measurement Challenges, Conceptual Frameworks, and Limitations in Knowledge,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 18, No. 8, 2012, pp. 958–972.
  * Metzl, J. M., and K. T. MacLeish, “Mental Illness, Mass Shootings, and the Politics of American Firearms,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 2, 2015, pp. 240–249.
  * Mill, John Stuart, A System of Logic, London: Parker, 1843.
  * Miller, M., D. Azrael, and C. Barber, “Suicide Mortality in the United States: The Importance of Attending to Method in Understanding Population-Level Disparities in the Burden of Suicide,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 33, 2012, pp. 393–408.
  * Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “Household Firearm Ownership and Suicide Rates in the United States,” Epidemiology, Vol. 13, No. 5, 2002, pp. 517–524.
  * Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “The Epidemiology of Case Fatality Rates for Suicide in the Northeast,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2004, pp. 723–730.
  * Miller, M., D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and M. Vriniotis, “Firearm Storage Practices and Rates of Unintentional Firearm Deaths in the United States,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2005, pp. 661–667.
  * Miller, M., D. Azrael, L. Hepburn, D. Hemenway, and S. J. Lippmann, “The Association Between Changes in Household Firearm Ownership and Rates of Suicide in the United States, 1981–2002,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2006, pp. 178–182.
  * Miller, M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and B. E. Molnar, “Recent Psychopathology, Suicidal Thoughts and Suicide Attempts in Households With and Without Firearms: Findings from the National Comorbidity Study Replication,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2009, pp. 183–187.
  * Miller, M., C. Barber, R. A. White, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in the United States: Is Risk Independent of Underlying Suicidal Behavior?” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 178, No. 6, 2013, pp. 946–955.
  * Miller, M., and D. Hemenway, “The Relationship Between Firearms and Suicide: A Review of the Literature,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1999, pp. 59–75.
  * Miller, M., L. Hepburn, and D. Azrael, “Firearm Acquisition Without Background Checks: Results of a National Survey,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, 2017, pp. 233–239.
  * Miller, M., S. A. Swanson, and D. Azrael, “Are We Missing Something Pertinent? A Bias Analysis of Unmeasured Confounding in the Firearm-Suicide Literature,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 62–69.
  * Miller, M., M. Warren, D. Hemenway, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 21, No. E1, 2015, pp. E116–E119.
  * Molina, J. A., and R. Duarte, “Risk Determinants of Suicide Attempts Among Adolescents,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 65, No. 2, 2006, pp. 407–434.
  * Monuteaux, M. C., L. K. Lee, D. Hemenway, R. Mannix, and E. W. Fleegler, “Firearm Ownership and Violent Crime in the U.S.: An Ecologic Study,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 49, No. 2, 2015, pp. 207–214.
  * Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 5, No. 3, 2008, pp. 269–293.
  * Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws, Continued,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2009.
  * Moody, Carlisle E., Thomas B. Marvell, Paul R. Zimmerman, and Fasil Alemante, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime: An Exercise in Replication,” Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 4, 2014, pp. 33–43.
  * Morral, Andrew R., Terry Schell, Margaret Tankard, Magnitude and Sources of Disagreement Among Gun Policy Experts, Santa Monica Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2088/1-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088z1.html
  * Moskos, Michelle A., Lenora Olson, Sarah R. Halbern, and Doug Gray, “Utah Youth Suicide Study: Barriers to Mental Health Treatment for Adolescents,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2007, pp. 179–186.
  * National Cancer Institute, The Role of the Media in Promoting and Reducing Tobacco Use, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, No. 07–6242, 2008.
  * National Research Council, Understanding and Preventing Violence, A. J. Reiss and J. Roth, eds., Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 1993.
  * National Research Council, Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2004.
  * National Research Council, Estimating the Incidence of Rape and Sexual Assault, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2014.
  * National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “State Gun Laws,” web page, undated. As of January 11, 2018: https://www.nraila.org/gun-laws/state-gun-laws
  * National Shooting Sports Foundation, “Project ChildSafe,” web page, 2016. As of January 10, 2017: http://www.projectchildsafe.org/
  * National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms and Ammunition Industry Economic Impact Report, Newtown, Conn., 2017. As of October 18, 2017: https://d3aya7xwz8momx.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/EconomicImpactofIndustry2017.pdf
  * Nelson, Charles M., Economic Implications of Land Use Patterns for Natural Resource Recreation and Tourism, Lansing, Mich.: Michigan Land Resource Project, Public Sector Consultants, 2001.
  * Niederkrotenthaler, Thomas, Joseph E. Logan, Debra L. Karch, and Alex Crosby, “Characteristics of U.S. Suicide Decedents in 2005–2010 Who Had Received Mental Health Treatment,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 65, No. 3, 2014, pp. 387–390.
  * Noar, Seth M., Christina N. Benac, and Melissa S. Harris, “Does Tailoring Matter? Meta-Analytic Review of Tailored Print Health Behavior Change Interventions,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 133, No. 4, 2007, pp. 673–693.
  * NRC— _See_ National Research Council.
  * NSSF— _See_ National Shooting Sports Foundation.
  * Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice, Audit of the Handling of Firearms Purchase Denials Through the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, Washington, D.C., September 2016. As of May 11, 2017: https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/a1632.pdf
  * Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, OJJDP Statistical Briefing Book, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, May 25, 2016. As of May 10, 2017: https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/
  * Office of the Surgeon General and National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, National Strategy for Suicide Prevention: Goals and Objectives for Action: A Report of the U.S. Surgeon General and of the National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012.
  * Oslin, D. W., C. Zubritsky, G. Brown, M. Mullahy, A. Puliafico, and T. Ten Have, “Managing Suicide Risk in Late Life: Access to Firearms as a Public Health Risk,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2004, pp. 30–36.
  * Ozanne-Smith, J., K. Ashby, S. Newstead, V. Z. Stathakis, and A. Clapperton, “Firearm Related Deaths: The Impact of Regulatory Reform,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 10, No. 5, 2004, pp. 280–286.
  * Parker, Kim, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Ruth Igielnik, Baxter Oliphant, and Anna Brown, America’s Complex Relationship with Guns, Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center, June 22, 2017. As of August 14, 2017: http://assets.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/06/06151541/Guns-Report-FOR-WEBSITE-PDF-6–21.pdf
  * Parker, R. N., K. R. Williams, K. J. McCaffree, E. K. Acensio, A. Browne, K. J. Strom, and K. Barrick, “Alcohol Availability and Youth Homicide in the 91 Largest U.S. Cities, 1984–2006,” Drug and Alcohol Review, Vol. 30, No. 5, 2011, pp. 505–514.
  * Petrosky, E., J. M. Blair, C. J. Betz, K. A. Fowler, S. P. Jack, and B. H. Lyons, “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Homicides of Adult Women and the Role of Intimate Partner Violence—United States, 2003–2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 66, No. 28, 2017, pp. 741–746.
  * Phillips, C. D., O. Nwaiwu, D. K. McMaughan Moudouni, R. Edwards, and S. Lin, “When Concealed Handgun Licensees Break Bad: Criminal Convictions of Concealed Handgun Licensees in Texas, 2001–2009,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 86–91.
  * Phillips, J. A., and C. N. Nugent, “Antidepressant Use and Method of Suicide in the United States: Variation by Age and Sex, 1998–2007,” Archives of Suicide Research, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2013, pp. 360–372.
  * Pierce, Glenn L., Anthony A. Braga, Christopher Koper, Jack McDevitt, David Carlson, Jeffrey Roth, Alan Saiz, Raymond Hyatt, and Roberta E. Griffith, The Characteristics and Dynamics of Crime Gun Markets: Implications for Supply-Side Focused Enforcement Strategies, Boston, Mass.: National Institute of Justice, 2003.
  * Pinho, R., and J. Rappa, Special Taxes on Guns, Ammunition, and Gun Shows, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-r-0034, January 10, 2013.
  * Pirkola, Sami, Reijo Sund, Eila Sailas, and Kristian Wahlbeck, “Community Mental-Health Services and Suicide Rate in Finland: A Nationwide Small-Area Analysis,” Lancet, Vol. 373, No. 9658, 2009, pp. 147–153.
  * Piscopo, Kathryn, Rachel N. Lipari, Jennifer Cooney, and Christie Galsheen, Suicidal Thoughts and Behavior Among Adults: Results from the 2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, NSDUH Data Review, September 2016. As of March 24, 2017: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/
  * Plassmann, F., and J. E. Whitley, “Comments: Confirming ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003, pp. 1313–1369.
  * Plumer, Brad, “Everything You Need to Know About the Assault Weapons Ban, in One Post,” Washington Post, December 17, 2012. As of May 30, 2017: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2012/12/17/everything-you-need-to-know-about-banning-assault-weapons-in-one-post/
  * Poudyal, N., S. H. Cho, and J. M. Bowker, “Demand for Resident Hunting in the Southeastern United States,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 13, No. 3, 2008, pp. 158–174.
  * Price, James H., Adam J. Mrdjenovich, and Joseph A. Dake, “Prevalence of State Firearm Mortality and Mental Health Care Resources,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 34, No. 5, 2009, pp. 383–391.
  * Price, James H., Amy J. Thompson, and Joseph A. Dake, “Factors Associated with State Variations in Homicide, Suicide, and Unintentional Firearm Deaths,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2004, pp. 271–283.
  * Public Law 90–618, Gun Control Act of 1968, October 22, 1968.
  * Public Law 103–322, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 1994.
  * Public Law 104–208, Gun Ban for Individuals Convicted of a Misdemeanor Crime of Domestic Violence, 1996.
  * Public Law 112–74, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012, December 23, 2011.
  * Public Law 112–265, Investigative Assistance for Violent Crimes Act of 2012, January 14, 2013.
  * Puzzanchera, C., G. Chamberlin, and W. Kang, “Easy Access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980–2014,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2017. As of March 22, 2017: https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/ezashr/
  * Raissian, Kerri M., “Hold Your Fire: Did the 1996 Federal Gun Control Act Expansion Reduce Domestic Homicides?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 35, No. 1, Winter 2016, pp. 67–93.
  * Rajkumar, A. P., E. M. Brinda, A. S. Duba, P. Thangadurai, and K. S. Jacob, “National Suicide Rates and Mental Health System Indicators: An Ecological Study of 191 Countries,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, Vol. 36, No. 5, 2013, pp. 339–342.
  * RAND Corporation, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States, Santa Monica, Calif., RR-2088-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088.html
  * Reisch, T., T. Steffen, A. Habenstein, and W. Tschacher, “Change in Suicide Rates in Switzerland Before and After Firearm Restriction Resulting from the 2003 ‘Army XXI’ Reform,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 170, No. 9, 2013, pp. 977–984.
  * Ressler, Robert K., Ann W. Burgess, and John E. Douglas, Sexual Homicide: Patterns and Motives, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988.
  * Reuter, Peter, and Jenny Mouzos, “Australia: A Massive Buyback of Low-Risk Guns,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 121–156.
  * Ribeiro, J. D., J. C. Franklin, K. R. Fox, K. H. Bentley, E. M. Kleiman, B. P. Chang, and M. K. Nock, “Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors as Risk Factors for Future Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Death: A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 46, No. 2, January 2016, pp. 225–236.
  * Robbins, Mel, “The Real Gun Problem Is Mental Health, Not the NRA,” CNN, 2014. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.cnn.com/2014/06/24/opinion/robbins-mental-health
  * Roberts, Darryl W., “Intimate Partner Homicide: Relationships to Alcohol and Firearms,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2009, pp. 67–88.
  * Rodriguez Andrés, Antonio, and Katherine Hempstead, “Gun Control and Suicide: The Impact of State Firearm Regulations in the United States, 1995–2004,” Health Policy, Vol. 101, No. 1, 2011, pp. 95–103.
  * Roeder, Oliver, “The Phrase ‘Mass Shooting’ Belongs to the 21st Century,” FiveThirtyEight, January 21, 2016. As of January 12, 2017: http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/we-didnt-call-them-mass-shootings-until-the-21st-century/
  * Rosengart, M., P. Cummings, A. Nathens, P. Heagerty, R. Maier, and F. Rivara, “An Evaluation of State Firearm Regulations and Homicide and Suicide Death Rates,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2005, pp. 77–83.
  * Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Joseph A. Simonetti, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Safe Firearm Storage,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 111–124.
  * Ruback, R. B., J. N. Shaffer, and V. A. Clark, “Easy Access to Firearms: Juveniles’ Risks for Violent Offender and Violent Victimization,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 26, No. 10, 2011, pp. 2111–2138.
  * Ruddell, R., and G. L. Mays, “State Background Checks and Firearms Homicides,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2005, pp. 127–136.
  * Rudolph, K. E., E. A. Stuart, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Association Between Connecticut’s Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Law and Homicides,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 8, 2015, pp. E49–E54.
  * Ruggles, K. V., and S. Rajan, “Gun Possession Among American Youth: A Discovery-Based Approach to Understand Gun Violence,” PLoS ONE, Vol. 9, No. 11, 2014.
  * Santaella-Tenorio, J., M. Cerdá, A. Villaveces, and S. Galea, “What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 140–157.
  * Schell, Terry L., and Andrew R. Morral, Evaluating Methods and Findings from a Study of State Gun Policies, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1642-RC, 2016. As of January 13, 2017: http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1642.html
  * Schnebly, Stephen M., “An Examination of the Impact of Victim, Offender, and Situational Attributes on the Deterrent Effect of Defensive Gun Use: A Research Note,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2002, pp. 377–398.
  * Sen, B., and A. Panjamapirom, “State Background Checks for Gun Purchase and Firearm Deaths: An Exploratory Study,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2012, pp. 346–350.
  * Shaffer, J. P., “Multiple Hypothesis Testing,” Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 46, 1995, pp. 561–584.
  * Shah, S., R. E. Hoffman, L. Wake, and W. M. Marine, “Adolescent Suicide and Household Access to Firearms in Colorado: Results of a Case-Control Study,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2000, pp. 157–163.
  * Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, Gun Acquisition and Possession in Selected Juvenile Samples, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1993.
  * Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, High School Youths, Weapons, and Violence: A National Survey, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1998.
  * Shenassa, E. D., C. Daskalakis, and S. L. Buka, “Utility of Indices of Gun Availability in the Community,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 60, No. 1, 2006, pp. 44–49.
  * Shenassa, E. D., M. L. Rogers, K. L. Spalding, and M. B. Roberts, “Safer Storage of Firearms at Home and Risk of Suicide: A Study of Protective Factors in a Nationally Representative Sample,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 58, No. 10, 2004, pp. 841–848.
  * Shumway, Martha, Jennifer Alvidrez, Mark Leary, Deborah Sherwood, Eric Woodard, Emily K. Lee, Heather Hall, Ralph A. Catalano, and James W. Dilley, “Impact of Capacity Reductions in Acute Public-Sector Inpatient Psychiatric Services,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 63, No. 2, 2012, pp. 135–141.
  * Sidman, Elanor A., David C. Grossman, Thomas D. Koepsell, Luann D’Ambrosio, John Britt, Evan S. Simpson, Frederick P. Rivara, and Abraham B. Bergman, “Evaluation of a Community-Based Handgun Safe-Storage Campaign,” Pediatrics, Vol. 115, No. 6, 2005, pp. E654–E661.
  * Siegel, M., C. S. Ross, and C. King, “Examining the Relationship Between the Prevalence of Guns and Homicide Rates in the USA Using a New and Improved State-Level Gun Ownership Proxy,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 20, No. 6, 2014, pp. 424–426.
  * Simon, Robert I., and Liza H. Gold, “Decreasing Suicide Mortality: Clinical Risk Assessment and Firearm Management,” in Liza H. Gold and Robert I. Simon, eds., Gun Violence and Mental Illness, Arlington, Va.: American Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2016, pp. 249–289.
  * Simon, T. R., A. C. Swann, K. E. Powell, L. B. Potter, M. Kresnow, and P. W. O’Carroll, “Characteristics of Impulsive Suicide Attempts and Attempters,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2002, pp. 49–59.
  * Simonetti, Joseph A., Jessica L. Mackelprang, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, Douglas Zatzick, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Psychiatric Comorbidity, Suicidality, and in-Home Firearm Access Among a Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescents,” JAMA Psychiatry, Vol. 72, No. 2, 2015, pp. 152–159.
  * Small Arms Survey, “Annexe 4. The Largest Civilian Firearms Arsenals for 178 Countries,” in Small Arms Survey 2007: Guns and the City, Geneva: Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, August 2007. As of January 8, 2018: http://www.smallarmssurvey.org/fileadmin/docs/A-Yearbook/2007/en/Small-Arms-Survey-2007-Chapter-02-annexe-4-EN.pdf
  * Smith, N. D., and I. Kawachi, “State-Level Social Capital and Suicide Mortality in the 50 U.S. States,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 120, 2014, pp. 269–277.
  * Smith, P. N., J. Currier, and K. Drescher, “Firearm Ownership in Veterans Entering Residential PTSD Treatment: Associations with Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Combat Exposure,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 229, No. 1–2, 2015, pp. 220–224.
  * Smith, T. W., and J. Son, Trends in Gun Ownership in the United States, 1972–2014, Chicago, Ill.: NORC at the University of Chicago, March 2015. As of March 9, 2017: http://www.norc.org/PDFs/GSS%20Reports/GSS_Trends%20in%20Gun%20Ownership_US_1972–2014.pdf
  * Snyder, L. B., and M. A. Hamilton, “A Meta-Analysis of U.S. Health Campaign Effects on Behavior: Emphasize Enforcement, Exposure, and New Information, and Beware the Secular Trend,” in R. C. Hornik, ed., Public Health Communication: Evidence for Behavior Change, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2002, pp. 357–383.
  * Southwick Associates, Target Shooting in America, Newtown, Conn.: National Shooting Sports Foundation, 2013.
  * Spicer, R. S., and T. R. Miller, “Suicide Acts in 8 States: Incidence and Case Fatality Rates by Demographics and Method,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 90, No. 12, 2000, pp. 1885–1891.
  * Stander, V. A., S. M. Hilton, A. P. Doran, A. D. Werbel, and C. J. Thomsen, Department of the Navy Suicide Incident Report (DONSIR): Summary of 1999–2004 Findings, San Diego, Calif.: Naval Health Research Center, 2006.
  * Stanford Geospatial Center, “Mass Shootings in America,” Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Libraries, undated. As of October 20, 2016: https://library.stanford.edu/projects/mass-shootings-america
  * Stark, David E., "Methods and Annotated Code Pertaining to Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death," GitHub, January 4, 2017. As of February 1, 2018: https://github.com/davidestark/gun-violence-research
  * Stark, David E., and Nigam H. Shah, “Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death,” JAMA, Vol. 317, No. 1, January 3, 2017, pp. 84–86.
  * Steidley, Trent Taylor, Movements, Malefactions, and Munitions: Determinants and Effects of Concealed Carry Laws in the United States, dissertation, Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University, 2016. As of May 12, 2017: http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/view?acc_num=osu1466007307
  * Stevens, Marguerite M., Ardis L. Olson, Cecelia A. Gaffney, Tor D. Tosteson, Leila A. Mott, and Pamela Starr, “A Pediatric, Practice-Based, Randomized Trial of Drinking and Smoking Prevention and Bicycle Helmet, Gun, and Seatbelt Safety Promotion,” Pediatrics, Vol. 109, No. 3, 2002, pp. 409–407.
  * Strnad, Jeff, “Should Legal Empiricists Go Bayesian?” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 9, No. 1, Spring 2007, pp. 195–303.
  * Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Mental Health: Mental Health Detailed Tables, Rockville, Md., 2016. As of May 9, 2017: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/2013MHDetTabs/NSDUH-MHDetTabs2013.pdf
  * Sumner, S. A., P. M. Layde, and C. E. Guse, “Firearm Death Rates and Association with Level of Firearm Purchase Background Check,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 35, No. 1, 2008, pp. 1–6.
  * Sun, L. G., C. Van Kooten, and G. M. Voss, “Demand for Wildlife Hunting in British Columbia,” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 53, 2005, pp. 25–46.
  * Swahn, M. H., B. Ali, R. M. Bossarte, M. van Dulmen, A. Crosby, A. C. Jones, and K. C. Schinka, “Self-Harm and Suicide Attempts Among High-Risk, Urban Youth in the U.S.: Shared and Unique Risk and Protective Factors,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2012, pp. 178–191.
  * Swanson, Jeffrey W., “Mental Disorder, Substance Abuse, and Community Violence: An Epidemiological Approach,” in J. Monahan and H. Steadman, eds., Violence and Mental Disorder, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 101–136.
  * Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michele M. Easter, Allison G. Robertson, Marvin S. Swartz, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Daniel Moseley, Charles Dion, and John Petrila, “Gun Violence, Mental Illness, and Laws That Prohibit Gun Possession: Evidence from Two Florida Counties,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1067–1075.
  * Swanson, J. W., E. E. McGinty, S. Fazel, and V. M. Mays, “Mental Illness and Reduction of Gun Violence and Suicide: Bringing Epidemiologic Research to Policy,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 25, No. 5, 2015, pp. 366–376.
  * Swanson, J. W., A. G. Robertson, L. K. Frisman, M. A. Norko, H. Lin, M. S. Swartz, and P. J. Cook, “Preventing Gun Violence Involving People with Serious Mental Illness,” in D. W. Webster and J. S. Vernick, eds., Reducing Gun Violence in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013, pp. 33–51.
  * Swedler, D. I., M. M. Simmons, F. Dominici, and D. Hemenway, “Firearm Prevalence and Homicides of Law Enforcement Officers in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 10, 2015, pp. 2042–2048.
  * Tark, Jongyeon, and Gary Kleck, “Resisting Crime: The Effects of Victim Action on the Outcomes of Crimes,” Criminology, Vol. 42, No. 4, 2004, pp. 861–909.
  * Teisl, M. F., K. J. Boyle, and R. E. Record, Jr., “License-Sales Revenues: Understanding Angler and Hunter Reaction to Changes in License Prices,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1999, pp. 1–17.
  * Teplin, L. A., G. M. McClelland, K. M. Abram, and D. A. Weiner, “Crime Victimization in Adults with Severe Mental Illness: Comparison with the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 62, No. 8, 2005, pp. 911–921.
  * Thompson, R., V. Kane, J. M. Cook, R. Greenstein, P. Walker, and G. Woody, “Suicidal Ideation in Veterans Receiving Treatment for Opiate Dependence,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol. 38, No. 2, 2006, pp. 149–156.
  * Thomson Healthcare, Ranking America’s Mental Health: An Analysis of Depression Across the States, Washington, D.C.: Mental Health America, 2007.
  * Tita, G. E., A. A. Braga, G. Ridgeway, and G. L. Pierce, “The Criminal Purchase of Firearm Ammunition,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 5, 2006, pp. 308–311.
  * Tondo, Leonardo, Matthew J. Albert, and Ross J. Baldessarini, “Suicide Rates in Relation to Health Care Access in the United States: An Ecological Study,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, Vol. 67, No. 4, 2006, pp. 517–523.
  * Tritch, Teresa, “Keep Handguns Away from Teenagers,” New York Times, May 30, 2014. As of June 29, 2017: http://takingnote.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/keep-handguns-away-from-teenagers/
  * United States Code, Title 18, Section 922, Unlawful Acts.
  * United States Code, Title 18, Section 923, Licensing.
  * United States Code, Title 18, Section 926, Rules and Regulations.
  * United States Code, Title 18, Section 930, Possession of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons in Federal Facilities.
  * United States Code, Title 20, Section 7961, Gun-Free Schools Act.
  * United States Code, Title 26, Section 5801, Imposition of Tax.
  * United States Concealed Carry Association, “Traveling? Know Concealed Carry Permit Info by State,” West Bend, Wisc., August 7, 2013. As of June 29, 2017: https://www.usconcealedcarry.com/traveling-ccw-permit/
  * U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Current Employment Statistics (National),” 2017. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1a.htm
  * U.S. Census Bureau, Number of Firms, Number of Establishments, Employment, and Annual Payroll by Enterprise Employment Size for the United States, All Industries: 2014, Washington, D.C., December 2016. As of January 15, 2017: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2014/econ/susb/2014-susb-annual.html
  * U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. and World Population Clock,” 2017. As of March 22, 2017: https://www.census.gov/popclock/
  * U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Active Shooter: How to Respond, Washington, D.C., October 2008.
  * U.S. Department of Justice, “Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 Fact Sheet,” Washington, D.C., October 24, 1994. As of May 30, 2017: https://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/billfs.txt
  * U.S. Department of Justice, “Department of Justice Awards $1 Million to the National Crime Prevention Council to Support Gun Safety Campaign,” press release, March 7, 2013. As of January 10, 2016: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/department-justice-awards-1-million-national-crime-prevention-council-support-gun-safety
  * U.S. Department of Labor, Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA), Washington, D.C., January 29, 2010. As of October 18, 2017: https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets/mhpaea.pdf
  * U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Hunting License Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, May 5, 2015. As of April 15, 2017: https://wsfrprograms.fws.gov/Subpages/LicenseInfo/HuntingLicCertHistory20042015.pdf
  * U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, and U.S. Department of Commerce, 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation, Washington, D.C., FH2/11-NAT, 2012.
  * U.S. General Accounting Office, Firearms Purchased from Federal Firearm Licensees Using Bogus Identification, Washington, D.C., GAO-01–427NI, 2001.
  * USA Carry, “Concealed Carry Permit Reciprocity Maps,” web page, April 20, 2017. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.usacarry.com/concealed_carry_permit_reciprocity_maps.html
  * Vernick, J. S., and L. M. Hepburn, “State and Federal Gun Laws: Trends for 1970–1999,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 345–402.
  * Vespa, Jonathan, Jamie M. Lewis, and Rose M. Kreider, America’s Families and Living Arrangements: 2012, Current Population Reports, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, P20–570, 2013.
  * Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Disarming Batterers: The Impact of Domestic Violence Firearms Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Phillip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 157–200.
  * Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Do Laws Restricting Access to Firearms by Domestic Violence Offenders Prevent Intimate Partner Homicide?” Evaluation Review, Vol. 30, No. 3, 2006, pp. 313–346.
  * Violence Policy Center, “Concealed Carry Killers,” web page, 2017. As of March 23, 2017: http://concealedcarrykillers.org/
  * Vittes, K. A., and S. B. Sorenson, “Recreational Gun Use by California Adolescents,” Health Education and Behavior, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2005, pp. 751–766.
  * Vittes, K. A., J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Legal Status and Source of Offenders’ Firearms for States with the Least Stringent Criteria for Gun Ownership,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 1, June 23, 2012, pp. 26–31.
  * Vyrostek, S. B., J. L. Annest, and G. W. Ryan, “Surveillance for Fatal and Nonfatal Injuries—United States, 2001,” MMWR Surveillance Summary, Vol. 53, 2004, pp. 1–57.
  * Wadsworth, T., C. E. Kubrin, and J. R. Herting, “Investigating the Rise (and Fall) of Young Black Male Suicide in the United States, 1982–2001,” Journal of African American Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 72–91.
  * Wallace, Lacey N., “Castle Doctrine Legislation: Unintended Effects for Gun Ownership?” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 11, No. 2, Fall 2014.
  * Watkins, Adam M., and Alan J. Lizotte, “Does Household Gun Access Increase the Risk of Attempted Suicide? Evidence from a National Sample of Adolescents,” Youth and Society, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2013, pp. 324–346.
  * Webster, D., C. K. Crifasi, and J. S. Vernick, “Effects of the Repeal of Missouri’s Handgun Purchaser Licensing Law on Homicides,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 91, No. 2, 2014, pp. 293–302.
  * Webster, D. W., L. H. Freed, S. Frattaroli, and M. H. Wilson, “How Delinquent Youths Acquire Guns: Initial Versus Most Recent Gun Acquisitions,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 79, No. 1, 2002, pp. 60–69.
  * Webster, Daniel W., and Marc Starnes, “Reexamining the Association Between Child Access Prevention Gun Laws and Unintentional Shooting Deaths of Children,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 6, 2000, pp. 1466–1469.
  * Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Maria T. Bulzacchelli, “Effects of State-Level Firearm Seller Accountability Policies on Firearm Trafficking,” Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, Vol. 86, No. 4, 2009, pp. 525–537.
  * Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Relationship Between Licensing, Registration, and Other Gun Sales Laws and the Source State of Crime Guns,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 7, 2001, pp. 184–189.
  * Webster, D. W., J. S. Vernick, A. M. Zeoli, and J. A. Manganello, “Association Between Youth-Focused Firearm Laws and Youth Suicides,” JAMA, Vol. 292, No. 5, 2004, pp. 594–601.
  * Webster, D. W., and G. J. Wintemute, “Effects of Policies Designed to Keep Firearms from High-Risk Individuals,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 36, 2015, pp. 21–37.
  * Weil, Douglas S., and Rebecca C. Knox, “Effects of Limiting Handgun Purchase on Interstate Transfer of Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 275, No. 22, 1996, pp. 1759–1761.
  * Wiebe, Douglas J., “Homicide and Suicide Risks Associated with Firearms in the Home: A National Case-Control Study,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2003, pp. 771–782.
  * Wintemute, G. J., D. Hemenway, D. Webster, G. Pierce, and A. A. Braga, “Gun Shows and Gun Violence: Fatally Flawed Study Yields Misleading Results,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 100, No. 10, 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
  * Wintemute, G. J., C. A. Parham, J. J. Beaumont, M. Wright, and C. Drake, “Mortality Among Recent Purchasers of Handguns,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 341, No. 21, 1999, pp. 1583–1589.
  * Wintemute, Garen J., Marian E. Betz, and Megan L. Ranney, “Yes, You Can: Physicians, Patients, and Firearms,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 165, No. 3, 2016, pp. 205–213.
  * Wooldridge, J. M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
  * World Health Organization, Preventing Suicide: A Global Imperative, Geneva, 2014. As of May 8, 2017: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/131056/1/9789241564779_eng.pdf
  * World Health Organization, World Health Organization Mortality Database, Geneva, 2017. As of October 13, 2017: http://apps.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality/causeofdeath_query/start.php
  * Wright, M. A., and G. J. Wintemute, “Felonious of Violent Criminal Activity that Prohibits Gun Ownership Among Prior Purchasers of Handguns: Incidence and Risk Factors,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 69, No. 4, 2010, pp. 948–955.
  * Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and B. E. Claire, “Gun Suicide by Young People in California: Descriptive Epidemiology and Gun Ownership,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2008, pp. 619–622.
  * Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and F. P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Denial of Handgun Purchase to Persons Believed to Be at High Risk for Firearm Violence,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 89, No. 1, 1999, pp. 88–90.
  * Zeoli, A. M., and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Domestic Violence Policies, Alcohol Taxes and Police Staffing Levels on Intimate Partner Homicide in Large U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2010, pp. 90–95.

View the full project bibliography

## Featured Researcher

  * ### Carole Roan Gresenz

#### Adjunct Economist

![Photo of Carole

Gresenz](https://wwwassets.rand.org/content/rand/about/people/g/gresenz_carole_roan/jcr:content/par/bio.aspectcrop.130x130.cm.jpg/x1495300900870.jpg.pagespeed.ic.XoTtomJCDV.jpg)

Carole Roan Gresenz is an adjunct economist at the RAND Corporation. Her
research interests and expertise include health care organization and finance,
health disparities in medical care, and access to and quality of care among
vulnerable populations. Her ongoing work includes estimation of the…

## Explore Related Content

  * ![](/content/dam/rand/www/external/research/gun-policy/gp-outcomes-icon.svg)

Gun Policy Outcome Explorer

  * ![](https://wwwassets.rand.org/content/dam/rand/www/external/research/gun-policy/gp-analysis-icon.svg)

Gun Policy Research Review

  * ![](/content/dam/rand/www/external/research/gun-policy/gp-methodology-icon.svg)

Research Review Methodology

RAND® is a registered trademark. Copyright (C) 1994-2019 RAND Corporation.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

