

![](/images/close-icon.svg) Hit enter to search or ESC to close

Related Sites ![](/images/arrow-right-white.svg)

    
    
    * SCIENTOLOGY.TV
    * L Ron Hubbard.org
    * Scientology News.org
    * Scientology Religion.org
    * FREEDOMMAG.ORG
    

en LANGUAGE ![](/images/arrow-right-white.svg)

    
    
    * 繁體中文 | Chinese
    * Dansk | Danish
    * Deutsch | German
    * English | English
    * Ελληνικά | Greek
    * Español (Latino) | Spanish
    * Español (Castellano) | Castilian
    * Français | French
    * עברית | Hebrew
    * Italiano | Italian
    * 日本語 | Japanese
    * Magyar | Hungarian
    * Nederlands | Dutch
    * Norsk | Norwegian
    * Português | Portuguese
    * Русский | Russian
    * Svenska | Swedish
    

![](/images/scientology-gray-logo.svg)

![](/images/scientology-logo-white.svg) ![](/images/scientology-

logos/scientology-logo-dark_en.svg)

LIVE

![](/images/live-tv-icon.svg) ![](/images/live-tv-icon-grey.svg)
![](/images/live-tv-icon-white.svg)

arrow drop search cross

  * Home 

  * L. Ron Hubbard 

  * What is Scientology? 

    * Beliefs & Practices 
    * Scientology Creeds & Codes 
    * What Scientologists Say About Scientology 
    * Meet A Scientologist 
    * Inside a Church 
    * The Basic Principles of Scientology 
    * An Introduction to Dianetics 
    * Love and Hate—  
What is Greatness?

  * Churches 

    * Locate a Church 
    * Ideal Churches of Scientology 
    * Advanced Organizations 
    * Flag Land Base 
    * Freewinds 
    * Bringing Scientology to the World 
    * David Miscavige—Scientology's Ecclesiastical Leader 
  * Scientology Today 

    * Expansion 
    * International Events 
    * Religious Freedom 
    * Scientology TV 
    * How We Help News 
  * How We Help 

    * Voice for Humanity 
    * The Way to Happiness 
    * Applied Scholastics 
    * Criminon 
    * Narconon 
    * The Truth About Drugs 
    * United for Human Rights 
    * Citizens Commission on Human Rights 
    * Scientology Volunteer Ministers 
  * FAQ 

    * Background and Basic Principles 
    * Inside a Church 
    * The Organization of Scientology 
  * Books 

    * Beginning Books 
    * Audiobooks 
    * Introductory Lectures 
    * Films 
  * Online Courses 

    * How to Resolve Conflicts 
    * The Dynamics of Existence 
    * The Components of Understanding 
    * Solutions for a Dangerous Environment 
    * Assists for Illnesses and Injuries 
    * Integrity and Honesty 
    * Marriage 
    * The Emotional Tone Scale 
    * Answers to Drugs 
    * Children 
    * Tools for the Workplace 
    * Ethics and Conditions 
    * The Cause of Suppression 
    * Investigations 
    * Basics of Organizing 
    * Fundamentals of Public Relations 
    * Targets and Goals 
    * The Technology of Study 
    * Communication 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) HOME 

  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) L. RON HUBBARD 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) WHAT IS SCIENTOLOGY? 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) CHURCHES 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) SCIENTOLOGY TODAY 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) HOW WE HELP 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) FAQ 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) BOOKS 
  * ![](/org-logo/arrow-right.svg?color=336699) ONLINE COURSES 

![](/images/close-icon.svg)

![](/images/play-button.svg)

Play Video

Drug Rehabilitation  
and Prevention

HOW WE HELP

Global Social Betterment & Humanitarian Programs Supported by the Church

![](/images/how-we-help/the-way-to-happiness.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/the-

way-to-happiness-grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/the-way-to-happiness-

shadow.svg)

The Way to Happiness

![](/images/how-we-help/applied-scholastics.svg) ![](/images/how-we-

help/applied-scholastics-grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/applied-

scholastics-shadow.svg)

Applied Scholastics

![](/images/how-we-help/criminon.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/criminon-

grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/criminon-shadow.svg)

Criminal Reform

![](/images/how-we-help/narconon.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/narconon-

grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/narconon-shadow.svg)

Narconon Drug Rehab

![](/images/how-we-help/drug-free-world.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/drug-

free-world-grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/drug-free-world-shadow.svg)

Drug-Free World

![](/images/how-we-help/human-rights.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/human-

rights-grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/human-rights-shadow.svg)

Human Rights

![](/images/how-we-help/citizens-commission-on-human-rights.svg)
![](/images/how-we-help/citizens-commission-on-human-rights-grey.svg)
![](/images/how-we-help/citizens-commission-on-human-rights-shadow.svg)

Mental Health Reform

![](/images/how-we-help/volunteer-ministers.svg) ![](/images/how-we-

help/volunteer-ministers-grey.svg) ![](/images/how-we-help/volunteer-

ministers-shadow.svg)

Volunteer Ministers

![](https://files.ondemandhosting.info/imagecache/cropfit@h=63@qa=85/data/www.scientology.org/files/fdm-

bar-icon4_en.jpg)

Freedom Magazine

A Voice for Human Rights

# NARCONON

## SAVING LIVES FROM ADDICTION

Narconon was founded in 1966 based on the discoveries and writings of author,
humanitarian and Scientology Founder L. Ron Hubbard. Today, Narconon
constitutes a worldwide network that daily helps people recover from the
devastation of drug addiction.

Narconon drug rehabilitation methods, all drug-free, combine a precise regimen
that eliminates drug residues from the body with procedures to alleviate the
mental and physical anguish connected with drugs.

Narconon not only addresses the debilitating effects of drug abuse on both
mind and body, but also resolves the reasons why a person turned to drugs in
the first place. To date, the program has helped tens of thousands start a new
life free from drugs.

But Narconon doesn't stop there; it reaches out to inform young people and
adults about drugs and drug abuse through its education and prevention
program. To date Narconon drug education specialists have directly reached
more than 16 million individuals.

True freedom for the individual cannot be attained in a world awash with
substance abuse and drug addiction. That is why the Church of Scientology is
fully committed to programs that effectively address this social issue.

###### NARCONON

  * Saving Lives Through Drug Rehabilitation & Prevention 
  * Effective Solutions to the Pandemic Drug Crisis 
  * Narconon International Drug Rehabilitation Program 
  * The Narconon New Life Detoxification Method 
  * Eradicating the Problem with Drug Prevention Actions 
  * Narconon Program: Creating a Drug-Free Society 
  * Narconon Actvities Around the World 
  * Results of Implementing the Program 
  * Nepal Inaugurates National Narconon Drug Rehabilitation Center atop Hubbard’s Peak 
  * New Continental Narconon for Europe Brings Drug Addiction Solution to Denmark—and Beyond 
  * Unveiling of Continental Narconon Centre in UK Ushers in Bold New Era of Drug Rehab 
  * Narconon Latin America Takes on Urgent Drug Rehabilitation Needs of 21 Nations 
  * Narconon Center Opens on Awe-inspiring Mountain Peak Atop Majestic Ojai, California 
  * 

SAVING

LIVES

from

addiction

FOR

MORE THAN

50

YEARS

### SAVING LIVES THROUGH DRUG

REHABILITATION & PREVENTION

Effective Solutions to the Pandemic Drug Crisis

Narconon International Drug Rehabilitation Program

The Narconon New Life Detoxification Method

Eradicating the Problem with Drug Prevention Actions

Narconon Program: Creating a Drug-Free Society

Narconon Actvities Around the World

Results of Implementing the Program

Nepal Inaugurates National Narconon Drug Rehabilitation Center atop Hubbard’s
Peak

New Continental Narconon for Europe Brings Drug Addiction Solution to
Denmark—and Beyond

Unveiling of Continental Narconon Centre in UK Ushers in Bold New Era of Drug
Rehab

Narconon Latin America Takes on Urgent Drug Rehabilitation Needs of 21 Nations

Narconon Center Opens on Awe-inspiring Mountain Peak Atop Majestic Ojai,
California

Narconon Suncoast Dedication Heralds Dynamic New Age for Drug Rehab in Florida

![Scientology](/images/scientology-logos/scientology-logo-dark_en.svg)

FOLLOW US

![](/images/social/facebook_circle_color.svg)
![](/images/social/twitter_circle.svg) ![](/images/social/youtube.svg)
![](/images/social/instagram-circle.svg)

What is Scientology? What is Scientology?

  * Founder L. Ron Hubbard 
  * Scientology Beliefs 
  * What is Dianetics? 
  * Backgrounds & Origins 
  * Codes & Creeds 
  * Inside a Church 

Spiritual Technology

Spiritual Technology

  * Tools for Life Online Courses 
  * Problems of Work 
  * Fundamentals of Thought 
  * A New Slant on Life 

Bookstore

Bookstore

  * Beginning Books 
  * Audiobooks 
  * Introductory Lectures 
  * Introductory Films 

Scientology Today Scientology Today

  * Expansion 
  * International Events 
  * Religious Freedom 
  * Scientology TV 
  * How We Help News 

Scientology Around the World Scientology Around the World

  * Church Locator 
  * Ideal Churches of Scientology 
  * Advanced Organizations 
  * Flag Land Base 
  * Freewinds 
  * Bringing Scientology to the World 
  * Scientology Ecclesiastical Leader 

How We Help How We Help

  * The Way to Happiness 
  * Study Technology 
  * Criminal Reform 
  * Drug Rehabilitation 
  * The Truth About Drugs 
  * Human Rights 
  * Mental Health Watchdog 
  * Volunteer Ministers 

CONTACT US

  * Questions? Contact Us 
  * Website Feedback 
  * Locate a Church 

SUBSCRIBE

  * Get the Newsletter 

Language ![](/images/arrow-bottom-white.svg)

ENGLISH (US/International) ENGLISH (Australia) ENGLISH (Canada) ENGLISH
(United Kingdom) ENGLISH (Ireland) ENGLISH (Nepal) ENGLISH (Philippines)
ENGLISH (Rwanda) ENGLISH (South Africa) DANSK FRANÇAIS עברית 日本語 РУССКИЙ 繁體中文
NEDERLANDS DEUTSCH MAGYAR NORSK SVENSKA ESPAÑOL (LATINO) ESPAÑOL (CASTELLANO)
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚA ITALIANO PORTUGUÊS

© 2019 Church of Scientology International. All Rights Reserved. Privacy
Notice • Cookie Policy • Terms of Use • Legal Notice

![RealTime](/sdata/img/blank.gif)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=577740089228160&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

![](https://panalytics.standardadmin.org/matomo.php?idsite=2&rec=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

