

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4181515/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
    * All Resources
    * Chemicals & Bioassays
    * BioSystems
    * PubChem BioAssay
    * PubChem Compound
    * PubChem Structure Search
    * PubChem Substance
    * All Chemicals & Bioassays Resources...
    * DNA & RNA
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * E-Utilities
    * GenBank
    * GenBank: BankIt
    * GenBank: Sequin
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Nucleotide Database
    * PopSet
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
    * RefSeqGene
    * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
    * Splign
    * Trace Archive
    * UniGene
    * All DNA & RNA Resources...
    * Data & Software
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * Cn3D
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * E-Utilities
    * GenBank: BankIt
    * GenBank: Sequin
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * PubChem Structure Search
    * SNP Submission Tool
    * Splign
    * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
    * All Data & Software Resources...
    * Domains & Structures
    * BioSystems
    * Cn3D
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Structure (Molecular Modeling Database)
    * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
    * All Domains & Structures Resources...
    * Genes & Expression
    * BioSystems
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * E-Utilities
    * Gene
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Database 
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Datasets
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Profiles
    * Genome Workbench
    * HomoloGene
    * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
    * RefSeqGene
    * UniGene
    * All Genes & Expression Resources...
    * Genetics & Medicine
    * Bookshelf
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * Genetic Testing Registry
    * Influenza Virus
    * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
    * PubMed
    * PubMed Central (PMC)
    * PubMed Clinical Queries
    * RefSeqGene
    * All Genetics & Medicine Resources...
    * Genomes & Maps
    * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome
    * Genome Project
    * Genome Data Viewer (GDV)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Nucleotide Database
    * PopSet
    * ProSplign
    * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
    * Splign
    * Trace Archive
    * All Genomes & Maps Resources...
    * Homology
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * HomoloGene
    * Protein Clusters
    * All Homology Resources...
    * Literature
    * Bookshelf
    * E-Utilities
    * Journals in NCBI Databases
    * MeSH Database
    * NCBI Handbook
    * NCBI Help Manual
    * NCBI News & Blog
    * PubMed
    * PubMed Central (PMC)
    * PubMed Clinical Queries
    * All Literature Resources...
    * Proteins
    * BioSystems
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * E-Utilities
    * ProSplign
    * Protein Clusters
    * Protein Database
    * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
    * All Proteins Resources...
    * Sequence Analysis
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * Splign
    * All Sequence Analysis Resources...
    * Taxonomy
    * Taxonomy
    * Taxonomy Browser
    * Taxonomy Common Tree
    * All Taxonomy Resources...
    * Training & Tutorials
    * NCBI Education Page
    * NCBI Handbook
    * NCBI Help Manual
    * NCBI News & Blog
    * All Training & Tutorials Resources...
    * Variation
    * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP)
    * SNP Submission Tool
    * All Variation Resources...
  * How To
    * All How To
    * Chemicals & Bioassays
    * DNA & RNA
    * Data & Software
    * Domains & Structures
    * Genes & Expression
    * Genetics & Medicine
    * Genomes & Maps
    * Homology
    * Literature
    * Proteins
    * Sequence Analysis
    * Taxonomy
    * Training & Tutorials
    * Variation
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PubMed

US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health

Search databaseAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Help

## Result Filters

  * Format: Abstract

Format

  * Summary
  * Summary (text)
  * Abstract
  * Abstract (text)
  * MEDLINE
  * XML
  * PMID List

Apply

#### Send to

Choose Destination

  * File
  * Clipboard
  * Collections
  * E-mail
  * Order
  * My Bibliography
  * Citation manager

  * FormatSummary (text)Abstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListCSV

Create File

  * 1 selected item: 30060862
  * FormatSummarySummary (text)AbstractAbstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListMeSH and Other Data
  * E-mail
  * Subject
  * Additional text
  * E-mail

Didn't get the message? Find out why...

Add to Clipboard

Add to Collections

Order articles

Add to My Bibliography

Generate a file for use with external citation management software.

Create File

J Adolesc Health. 2018 Jul;63(1):88-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.01.008.

# Medical Marijuana Availability, Price, and Product Variety, and Adolescents'

Marijuana Use.

Shi Y1, Cummins SE2, Zhu SH2.

### Author information

1

    
    
    Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, University of California, San Diego, California. Electronic address: yus001@ucsd.edu.
    

2

    
    
    Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, University of California, San Diego, California.
    

### Abstract

#### PURPOSE:

We aimed to examine the availability of medical marijuana dispensaries, price
of medical marijuana products, and variety of medical marijuana products in
school neighborhoods and their associations with adolescents' use of marijuana
and susceptibility to use marijuana in the future.

#### METHODS:

A representative sample of 8th, 10th, and 12th graders (N = 46,646) from 117
randomly selected schools in California participated in the cross-sectional
2015-2016 California Student Tobacco Survey (CSTS). Characteristics of medical
marijuana dispensaries in California were collected and combined with school
locations to compute availability, price, and product variety of medical
marijuana in school neighborhoods. Multilevel logistic regressions with random
intercepts at school level were conducted to test the associations, accounting
for individual and school socioeconomic characteristics.

#### RESULTS:

The distance from school to the nearest medical marijuana dispensary (within
0- to 1-mi and 1- to 3-mi bands) was not associated with adolescents' use of
marijuana in the past month or susceptibility to use marijuana in the future,
nor was the weighted count of medical marijuana dispensaries within the 3-mi
band of school. Neither the product price nor the product variety in the
dispensary nearest to school was associated with marijuana use or
susceptibility to use. The results were robust to different specifications of
medical marijuana measures.

#### CONCLUSIONS:

There was no evidence supporting the associations of medical marijuana
availability, price, or product variety around school with adolescents'
marijuana use and susceptibility to use.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

#### KEYWORDS:

Adolescent health; Drug abuse; Medical marijuana dispensary; School
neighborhood

PMID:

    
    
    30060862
    

PMCID:

    
    
    PMC6070346
     [Available on 2019-07-01]
    

DOI:

    
    
    10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.01.008
    

Share

### Grant support

#### Grant support

  * R01 DA042290/DA/NIDA NIH HHS/United States

### LinkOut - more resources

#### Full Text Sources

  * Elsevier Science
  * ClinicalKey

#### Miscellaneous

  * NCI CPTAC Assay Portal

  * 

## Supplemental Content

### Full text links

![Icon for Elsevier

Science](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/corehtml/query/egifs/https:--linkinghub.elsevier.com-

ihub-images-PubMedLink.gif)

![Loading ... ](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3631476)

You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMed

Support Center
![](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_app=entrez&ncbi_db=pubmed&ncbi_pdid=abstract&ncbi_phid=CE8A7431D004687100000000072703AB)

## Simple NCBI Directory

  * ### Getting Started

  * NCBI Education

  * NCBI Help Manual
  * NCBI Handbook
  * Training & Tutorials
  * Submit Data

  * ### Resources

  * Chemicals & Bioassays

  * Data & Software
  * DNA & RNA
  * Domains & Structures
  * Genes & Expression
  * Genetics & Medicine
  * Genomes & Maps
  * Homology
  * Literature
  * Proteins
  * Sequence Analysis
  * Taxonomy
  * Variation

  * ### Popular

  * PubMed

  * Bookshelf
  * PubMed Central
  * BLAST
  * Nucleotide
  * Genome
  * SNP
  * Gene
  * Protein
  * PubChem

  * ### Featured

  * Genetic Testing Registry

  * GenBank
  * Reference Sequences
  * Gene Expression Omnibus
  * Genome Data Viewer
  * Human Genome
  * Mouse Genome
  * Influenza Virus
  * Primer-BLAST
  * Sequence Read Archive

  * ### NCBI Information

  * About NCBI

  * Research at NCBI
  * NCBI News & Blog
  * NCBI FTP Site
  * NCBI on Facebook
  * NCBI on Twitter
  * NCBI on YouTube
  * Privacy Policy

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

