

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

  *     *       *         * 

Log In or Sign Up

  * Log In
  * Sign Up

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * More 

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts ✕

# Marijuana is legal for medical purposes in 33 states

By German Lopez@germanrlopez Updated May 10, 2019, 6:18pm EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Marijuana is legal for medical purposes in 33 states

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

Part of Marijuana legalization, explained

Thirty-three states and Washington, DC, allow marijuana for medical purposes,
although their approaches can significantly differ.

Some allow medical marijuana dispensaries and home cultivation. Others only
allow home cultivation. And some allow dispensaries but not home cultivation.

There’s a growing body of research supporting marijuana’s use for medical
purposes. Some studies and anecdotal evidence suggest marijuana can be used
for various medical problems, including pain, nausea and loss of appetite,
Parkinson’s disease, inflammatory bowel disease, PTSD (post-traumatic stress
disorder), epilepsy, and multiple sclerosis.

But a review of the evidence from the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine found little evidence for marijuana’s ability to
treat health conditions outside chronic pain, chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting, and patient-reported multiple sclerosis spasticity symptoms.

Several studies show legalizing medical marijuana dispensaries can lead to
fewer opioid painkiller deaths, making medical marijuana one potential way to
help fight the opioid epidemic. The rationale for this is simple: Studies show
medical marijuana can effectively treat chronic pain, which opioids are
commonly used for. But unlike opioids, medical marijuana cannot cause deadly
overdoses. So medical marijuana could supplant _some_ opioid use and save
_some_ lives.

Medical marijuana legalization also has a lot of popular support: A 2010 Pew
Research Center survey found that 73 percent of American voters back medical
marijuana, including 80 percent of Democrats, 76 percent of independents, and
61 percent of Republicans.

But the federal government doesn’t recognize marijuana’s medical potential,
largely because the studies have been small so far, and there have been no
large-scale clinical trials proving pot’s medicinal value.

Behind that judgment, though, lies a bit of a catch-22: It’s long been
difficult to conduct thorough studies on the medical uses of marijuana because
of the drug’s prohibition and the need for approval from a federal government
that hasn’t been very interested in studying marijuana’s potential benefits.
So the federal government is demanding scientific research proving marijuana
has medical value, but the federal government’s restrictions make it difficult
to conduct that research.

For legalization advocates, getting the federal government to acknowledge
marijuana’s medical value could be a significant step forward. For one, it
would push the Drug Enforcement Administration to reclassify marijuana from a
schedule 1 to a schedule 2 substance, which could relax some of the
restrictions on the drug. That alone would amount to a huge symbolic shift:
After decades of scheduling marijuana in the strictest possible category, a
downgrade could be taken as an acknowledgment by the federal government that
its old policies have failed.

## Marijuana legalization, explained

  * Marijuana has been legalized in 10 states and Washington, DC 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879063/marijuana_plant.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana legalization is a response to the failures of the war on drugs 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879069/shutterstock_226135945.0.0.jpg)

  * A majority of Americans now support legal marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879081/1539738.jpg.0.jpg)

  * 15 states have decriminalized — but not legalized — marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879129/73244614.jpg.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is illegal under federal law even in states that legalize it 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879191/GettyImages-171549255.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is a relatively safe drug — with some risks 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879205/175231438.0.0.jpg)

  * The research suggests marijuana legalization could lead to more use 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879223/459780027.0.0.jpg)

  * The case for marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879233/451907616.jpg.0.jpg)

  * The case against marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879265/73245308.0.jpg)

  * Uruguay was the first country to fully legalize marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879247/GettyImages_949178554.0.jpg)

### Most Read

  1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
  2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 7. The sidebar size is short.

Chorus

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * GDPR Commitment
  * Communications Preferences

  * Contact

  * Send Us a Tip
  * Masthead
  * About Us
  * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

