

  * Shows

  * This Day In History

  * Schedule

  * Topics

  * Stories

  * _Ad Choices_

  * _Advertise_
  * _Closed Captioning_
  * _Copyright Policy_
  * _Corporate Information_
  * _Employment Opportunities_
  * _FAQ/Contact Us_
  * _Privacy Notice_
  * _Terms of Use_
  * _TV Parental Guidelines_
  * _RSS Feeds_
  * _Privacy Settings_

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)

  * Shows
  * This Day In History
  * Schedule
  * Topics
  * Stories

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)

  * Shows
  * This Day In History
  * Schedule
  * Topics
  * Stories

![Heroin, Morphine and

Opiates](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_768/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjQ1NTY3MzA1/police-

displays-600-kilo-smuggled-heroin.jpg)

Publish date:

    
    
    Jun 12, 2017
    

Updated on

    
    
    Jun 10, 2019
    

# Heroin, Morphine and Opiates

Author:

    
    
    History.com Editors
    

  *     *       *         * 

## Contents

  1. What Is Opium? 
  2. The First Opium War 
  3. The Second Opium War 
  4. Opium Dens 
  5. Types of Opiates 
  6. Medical Uses of Heroin 
  7. Black Tar Heroin 
  8. Harrison Narcotics Tax Act 
  9. Opiate Addiction and Withdrawal 

Heroin, morphine, and other opiates trace their origins to a single plant--the
opium poppy. Cultivation of the plant dates back to the earliest years of
human civilization, and opium use was well known in ancient Mesopotamia. The
narcotic drug has been used both recreationally and as a medicine for
centuries. Opium derivatives, including morphine, became widely used pain
relievers, particularly in the 1800s. Heroin, too, was first synthesized for
medical use before physicians realized its potent addictive properties.

## What Is Opium?

Opium comes from the milky sap of a flower called the opium poppy. The
earliest reference to opium use and the cultivation of opium poppies comes
from Mesopotamia around 3,400 B.C.

The ancient Sumerians--who inhabited the southernmost region of Mesopotamia in
modern-day Iraq and Kuwait--referred to the bright red poppy flowers as _hul
gil_ , "the joy plant."

Opium cultivation spread to the ancient Greeks, Persians and Egyptians. Opium
use in ancient Egypt flourished under the reign of King Tutankhamen, around
1333-1324 B.C., and the Greek author Homer referred to opium's healing powers
in the _Odyssey_.

These ancient societies used opium to help people sleep, to relieve pain and
even to calm crying children. There is also some evidence that opium-based
medicines were used as anesthesia during surgery. They may also have used the
drug recreationally, though they probably weren't aware of its addictive
effects.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

Opium was likely introduced to China and East Asia in the sixth or seventh
century A.D. through trade along the Silk Road, which connected the
Mediterranean cultures of Europe to central Asia, India and China. The region
stretching from Afghanistan and Pakistan eastward into India, Myanmar (Burma)
and Thailand still produces much of the world's opium poppies.

## The First Opium War

In the 1700s, the British empire conquered a major poppy-growing region of
India and, rather than quash the production of opium, began to smuggle opium
from India into China through the East India Company.

Great Britain used the profits from the lucrative opium trade to buy and
export tea, silk, porcelain and other Chinese luxury goods back to Europe. As
a result of this trade, opium addiction in China rose steeply. The Qing
Dynasty, attempting to curb the havoc caused by widespread opium addiction,
outlawed opium importation and cultivation.

Two armed conflicts, called the Opium Wars, followed China's attempts to
suppress opium use within its borders, and British efforts to keep opium
trafficking routes open. In each case, the Chinese lost, and European powers
gained commercial privileges and land concessions from China.

During the First Opium War (1839-1842), the British government resorted to
"gunboat diplomacy" to force the Chinese government to keep the ports in
Shanghai, Canton and elsewhere open to trade. China ceded Hong Kong to the
British in the Treaty of Nanking following the First Opium War.

## The Second Opium War

During the Second Opium War (1856-1860), the British and French joined forces
against China to make the opium trade legal in China, and to extract further
concessions (including the right to own property) from the Chinese emperor's
family.

Despite the European success in opening China to trade, many in Europe, China
and elsewhere considered the Opium Wars--and the resulting spread of opium
addiction--a villainous and immoral use of military power.

In the British Parliament, William Ewart Gladstone denounced the First Opium
War as "a war more unjust in its origin, a war more calculated in its progress
to cover this country with permanent disgrace." Gladstone's younger sister
Helen, it should be noted, suffered from opium addiction.

China's losses in the Opium Wars ushered in what was known in China as the
"Century of Humiliation," which ended with the Japanese defeat in World War II
and the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949.

## Opium Dens

Thousands of Chinese came to America to work on railroads and in the
California gold fields during the 1849 Gold Rush. They brought with them the
habit of opium smoking.

Chinese immigrants soon established opium dens--places to buy, sell and smoke
opium--in so-called Chinatowns throughout the West. By the 1870s, opium
smoking had become a popular habit for many Americans, and in 1875, San
Francisco became the first city to pass legislation trying to limit opium use.
The ordinance made it a misdemeanor to maintain or frequent an opium den.

Some people believed that opium smoking would encourage prostitution and other
crimes. These concerns, and fears of unemployment among white Americans, fed
into an anti-Chinese campaign that led to the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882--a
10-year moratorium on Chinese immigration.

## Types of Opiates

German scientist Friedrich Serturner first isolated morphine from opium in
1803\. Morphine, a very powerful painkiller, is the active narcotic ingredient
in opium.

In its pure form, morphine is ten times stronger than opium. The drug was
widely used as a painkiller during the U.S. Civil War. As a result, an
estimated 400,000 soldiers became addicted.

By the second half of the nineteenth century, scientists had begun to look for
a less addictive form of morphine, and in 1874, an English chemist named Alder
Wright first refined heroin from a morphine base. The drug was intended to be
a safer replacement for morphine.

Morphine is still the precursor to all other opioids, including prescription
narcotic painkillers such as codeine, fentanyl, methadone, hydrocodone
(Vicodin), hydromorphone (Dilaudid), meperidine (Demerol) and oxycodone
(Percocet or Oxycontin).

## Medical Uses of Heroin

Before it became a popular recreational drug, heroin was used in medicine
until its addictive properties became known.

In the 1890s, German pharmaceutical company Bayer marketed heroin as a
morphine substitute and cough suppressant. Bayer promoted heroin for use in
children suffering from coughs and colds.

Partly as a result of these medical treatments, by the early 1900s, heroin
addiction in the United States and western Europe had skyrocketed.

## Black Tar Heroin

Black tar heroin is a form of heroin that is dark orange or brown. It can be
sticky and tar-like or hard like coal.

Since the mid-1990s, black tar heroin has been the main type of heroin
available west of the Mississippi River. The traditional white powder form
dominates the eastern half of the United States.

Black tar heroin typically comes from Mexico, while powder heroin is often
imported into the United States from Colombia.

## Harrison Narcotics Tax Act

The use of opium had reached such levels in the United States that in 1908,
President Theodore Roosevelt appointed Dr. Hamilton Wright as Opium
Commissioner of the United States.

In _The New York Times_ in 1911, Wright was quoted as saying, "Of all the
nations of the world, the United States consumes most habit-forming drugs per
capita. Opium, the most pernicious drug known to humanity, is surrounded, in
this country, with far fewer safeguards than any other nation in Europe fences
it with. China now guards it with much greater care than we do; Japan
preserves her people from it far more intelligently than we do ours, who can
buy it, in almost any form, in every tenth one of our drug stores."

In response, the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914--the first major piece of
U.S. legislation to control the sale and use of opiates--was passed. The act
passed restrictions on the distribution and sale of heroin and opium, as well
as cocaine.

Ten years later, Congress made it illegal to make, import or sell heroin when
it passed the Anti-Heroin Act of 1924.

## Opiate Addiction and Withdrawal

All opiates, including heroin, morphine and narcotic pain relievers, can cause
physical dependence, forcing users to rely on bigger and bigger hits of the
drug to prevent withdrawal symptoms. Addiction can have devastating
consequences for addicts, their communities and society as a whole.

An estimated 26 million to 36 million people worldwide abuse opiates,
according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse. In the United States, an
estimated 2.1 million people abuse prescription opiate pain relievers, and
about 467,000 Americans are addicted to heroin.

In recent years, the rates of opiate addiction and opiate-related deaths have
risen sharply: In just one year--from 2014 to 2015--the death rate from
synthetic opioids increased by 72 percent, and heroin death rates increased by
almost 21 percent, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.

This upsurge in opiate abuse has caused many officials to view the problem as
an epidemic in need of a broad range of solutions to curb abuse and overturn
the profound effects of opiate addiction.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

Heroin, Morphine and Opiates

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/topics/crime/history-of-heroin-morphine-and-opiates

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

June 10, 2019

### Original Published Date

June 12, 2017

Tags

terms:

    
    
    Drugs
    

By

History.com Editors

  *     *       *         * 

#

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

VIDEOS

![Judith: Hanukkah

Heroine](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYwMzkyODEyNDA2MjUzNTI4/judith-

hanukkah-heroine.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Judith: Hanukkah Heroine

![Experts discuss the events leading up to the capture of Panamanian leader

Manuel Noriega in this clip from "America's War on

Drugs."](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2NzQyMjc0Mzc3/the-

capture-of-manuel-noriega.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## The Capture of Manuel Noriega

![Learn more about how a secret government mind control program inadvertently

fueled the use of psychoactive drugs in 1960s counterculture

circles.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2NzQxNjE5MDE3/mk-

ultra.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## MK-Ultra

![Check out 9 things to know about drug use and trafficking in

America.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2MjA5NjYzMzA1/fast-

facts-about-the-war-on-drugs.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Fast Facts About the War on Drugs

# ![SIGN UP FOR MORE

HISTORY!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Subscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTY1NzE4MzM0MjE5OTg5/section_header_art_medium_street.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![dominican-rep-drugs-

seizure](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTEwMjAxNjcz/dominican-

rep-drugs-seizure.jpg)

## Cocaine

Cocaine is a stimulant drug that’s made from the leaves of the South American
coca plant. For thousands of years, indigenous people in the Amazon Rainforest
and Andes Mountains have chewed coca leaves to get an energetic high. European
scientists first isolated cocaine from coca _...read more_

![plastic-bags-of-crank-

methamphetamine](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTAzMzg1OTI5/plastic-

bags-of-crank-methamphetamine.jpg)

## History of Meth

A Japanese chemist first synthesized methamphetamine—also called meth, crank,
crystal meth or speed—from another stimulant in 1893. Methamphetamine was used
early on as a medical treatment for narcolepsy, asthma and as a weight-loss
drug. During World War II, the Allies and Axis _...read more_

![medical-

marijuana](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM0OTUwNDcz/medical-

marijuana.jpg)

## Marijuana

Marijuana, also known as cannabis or pot, has a long history of human use.
Most ancient cultures didn’t grow the plant to get high, but as herbal
medicine, likely starting in Asia around 500 BC. The history of cannabis
cultivation in America dates back to the early colonists, _...read more_

![panama-drugs-

incineration](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjQyNDIxNTc3/panama-

drugs-incineration.jpg)

## History of Drug Trafficking

Drug trafficking in the United States dates back to the 19th century. From
opium to marijuana to cocaine, a variety of substances have been illegally
imported, sold and distributed throughout U.S. history, often with devastating
consequences. Early Opium Trade in the United _...read more_

![dancing-in-psychedelic-

light](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTczMDY4NjE3/dancing-

in-psychedelic-light.jpg)

## LSD

LSD, or lysergic acid diethylamide, is a hallucinogenic drug that was first
synthesized a Swiss scientist in the 1930s. During the Cold War, the CIA
conducted clandestine experiments with LSD (and other drugs) for mind control,
information gathering and other purposes. Over _...read more_

![crowd-with-lights-megatripolis-london-

uk-1990s](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjQwODQ4NzEz/crowd-

with-lights-megatripolis-london-uk-1990s.jpg)

## MDMA

German chemists originally synthesized MDMA, or ecstasy, for pharmaceutical
purposes in 1912. During the Cold War, the CIA experimented with MDMA as a
psychological weapon. Ecstasy had become a popular party drug by the late
1980s, and it’s recreational use is often associated _...read more_

![william-j-bennettgeorge-h-w-

bush-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTExNTEyMzkz/william-

j-bennettgeorge-h-w-bush-2.jpg)

## War on Drugs

The War on Drugs is a phrase used to refer to a government-led initiative that
aims to stop illegal drug use, distribution and trade by increasing and
enforcing penalties for offenders. The movement started in the 1970s and is
still evolving today. Over the years, people have _...read more_

![drug-

research](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTc1MDM0Njk3/drug-

research.jpg)

## MK-Ultra

MK-Ultra was a top-secret CIA project in which the agency conducted hundreds
of clandestine experiments—sometimes on unwitting U.S. citizens—to assess the
potential use of LSD and other drugs for mind control, information gathering
and psychological torture. Though Project _...read more_

![first-lady-nancy-reagan-accepts-check-from-proctor-gamble-for-the-just-say-

no-

club](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTA2ODU5MzM3/first-

lady-nancy-reagan-accepts-check-from-proctor-gamble-for-the-just-say-no-

club.jpg)

## Just Say No

The “Just Say No” movement was one part of the U.S. government’s effort to
revisit and expand the War on Drugs. As with most anti-drug initiatives, Just
Say No—which became an American catch phrase in the 1980s—evoked both support
and criticism from the public. The 80s Crack _...read more_

Loading…

See More

  * Ad Choices
  * Advertise
  * Closed Captioning
  * Copyright Policy
  * Corporate Information
  * Employment Opportunities
  * FAQ/Contact Us
  * Privacy Notice
  * Terms of Use
  * TV Parental Guidelines
  * RSS Feeds

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

