

Jump to navigation Skip navigation

American Civil Liberties Union

Email Address *

ZIP Code *

Search form

Enter your keywords

  * Get Updates
  * Become a Member
  * Renew
  * Take Action
  * Donate

    * Make a Gift
    * Join/Become a Member
    * Renew Your Membership
    * Monthly Giving
    * Fundraise for the ACLU
    * Other Ways to Give
  * Know your rights

  * Defending our rights

    * Defending Our Rights
    * Court Battles
    * Supreme Court Cases
    * Federal Advocacy
    * Find Your Local Affiliate Go to Defending Our Rights

The ACLU works tirelessly in courts, legislatures, and communities to defend
and preserve the Constitutionâ€™s promise of liberty for everyone in our
country.

  * Blogs

### Blogs

    
    
    * Speak Freely 
    * Free Future 
    * The Campaign
    

### Feeds

    
    
    * Editor's Picks 
    * People Power 
    * Breaking News
    

See all blogs and feeds

  * About

    * About
    * Leadership
    * History
    * Press Releases
    * Local Affiliates
    * Careers
    * Ambassadors
    * Officers and Board
    * Financial Info and Reports
    * How You Can Help
    * FAQ
    * Centers
    * Contact Us Go to About the ACLU

For almost 100 years, the ACLU has worked to defend and preserve the
individual rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the
United States.

  * Shop

# Against Drug Prohibition

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Reddit
  * Email
  * Print

# More and more ordinary people, elected officials, newspaper columnists,

economists, doctors, judges and even the Surgeon General of the United States
are concluding that the effects of our drug control policy are at least as
harmful as the effects of drugs themselves.

After decades of criminal prohibition and intensive law enforcement efforts to
rid the country of illegal drugs, violent traffickers still endanger life in
our cities, a steady stream of drug offenders still pours into our jails and
prisons, and tons of cocaine, heroin and marijuana still cross our borders
unimpeded.

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) opposes criminal prohibition of
drugs. Not only is prohibition a proven failure as a drug control strategy,
but it subjects otherwise law-abiding citizens to arrest, prosecution and
imprisonment for what they do in private. In trying to enforce the drug laws,
the government violates the fundamental rights of privacy and personal
autonomy that are guaranteed by our Constitution. The ACLU believes that
unless they do harm to others, people should not be punished -- even if they
do harm to themselves. There are better ways to control drug use, ways that
will ultimately lead to a healthier, freer and less crime-ridden society.

### Currently Illegal Drugs Have Not Always Been Illegal

During the Civil War, morphine (an opium derivative and cousin of heroin) was
found to have pain-killing properties and soon became the main ingredient in
several patent medicines. In the late 19th century, marijuana and cocaine were
put to various medicinal uses -- marijuana to treat migraines, rheumatism and
insomnia, and cocaine to treat sinusitis, hay fever and chronic fatigue. All
of these drugs were also used recreationally, and cocaine, in particular, was
a common incredient in wines and soda pop -- including the popular Coca Cola.

At the turn of the century, many drugs were made illegal when a mood of
temperance swept the nation. In 1914, Congress passed the Harrison Act,
banning opiates and cocaine. Alcohol prohibition quickly followed, and by 1918
the U.S. was officially a "dry" nation. That did not mean, however, an end to
drug use. It meant that, suddenly, people were arrested and jailed for doing
what they had previously done without government interference. Prohibition
also meant the emergence of a black market, operated by criminals and marked
by violence.

In 1933, because of concern over widespread organized crime, police corruption
and violence, the public demanded repeal of alcohol prohibition and the return
of regulatory power to the states. Most states immediately replaced criminal
bans with laws regulating the quality, potency and commercial sale of alcohol;
as a result, the harms associated with alcohol prohibition disappeared.
Meanwhile, federal prohibition of heroin and cocaine remained, and with
passage of the Marijuana Stamp Act in 1937 marijuana was prohibited as well.
Federal drug policy has remained strictly prohibitionist to this day.

### Decades of Drug Prohibition: A History of Failure

Criminal prohibition, the centerpiece of U.S. drug policy, has failed
miserably. Since 1981, tax dollars to the tune of $150 billion have been spent
trying to prevent Columbian cocaine, Burmese heroin and Jamaican marijuana
from penetrating our borders. Yet the evidence is that for every ton seized,
hundreds more get through. Hundreds of thousands of otherwise law abiding
people have been arrested and jailed for drug possession. Between 1968 and
1992, the annual number of drug-related arrests increased from 200,000 to over
1.2 million. One-third of those were marijuana arrests, most for mere
possession.

The best evidence of prohibition's failure is the government's current war on
drugs. This war, instead of employing a strategy of prevention, research,
education and social programs designed to address problems such as permanent
poverty, long term unemployment and deteriorating living conditions in our
inner cities, has employed a strategy of law enforcement. While this military
approach continues to devour billions of tax dollars and sends tens of
thousands of people to prison, illegal drug trafficking thrives, violence
escalates and drug abuse continues to debilitate lives. Compounding these
problems is the largely unchecked spread of the AIDS virus among drug-users,
their sexual partners and their offspring.

Those who benefit the most from prohibition are organized crime barons, who
derive an estimated $10 to $50 billion a year from the illegal drug trade.
Indeed, the criminal drug laws protect drug traffickers from taxation,
regulation and quality control. Those laws also support artificially high
prices and assure that commercial disputes among drug dealers and their
customers will be settled not in courts of law, but with automatic weapons in
the streets.

### Drug Prohibition is a Public Health Menace

Drug prohibition promises a healthier society by denying people the
opportunity to become drug users and, possibly, addicts. The reality of
prohibition belies that promise.

**No quality control. When drugs are illegal, the government cannot enact
standards of quality, purity or potency. Consequently, street drugs are often
contaminated or extremely potent, causing disease and sometimes death to those
who use them.**

**Dirty needles. Unsterilized needles are known to transmit HIV among
intravenous drug users. Yet drug users share needles because laws prohibiting
possession of drug paraphernalia have made needles a scarce commodity. These
laws, then, actually promote epidemic disease and death. In New York City,
more than 60 percent of intravenous drug users are HIV positive. By contrast,
the figure is less than one percent in Liverpool, England, where clean needles
are easily available.**

**Scarce treatment resources. The allocation of vast sums of money to law
enforcement diminishes the funds available for drug education, preventive
social programs and treatment. As crack use rose during the late 1980s,
millions of dollars were spent on street-level drug enforcement and on jailing
tens of thousands of low level offenders, while only a handful of public drug
treatment slots were created. An especially needy group -- low-income pregnant
women who abused crack -- often had no place to go at all because Medicaid
would not reimburse providers. Instead, the government prosecuted and jailed
such women without regard to the negative consequences for their children.**

### Drug Prohibition Creates More Problems Than It Solves

Drug prohibition has not only failed to curb or reduce the harmful effects of
drug use, it has created other serious social problems.

**Caught in the crossfire. In the same way that alcohol prohibition fueled
violent gangsterism in the 1920s, today's drug prohibition has spawned a
culture of drive-by shootings and other gun-related crimes. And just as most
of the 1920s violence was not committed by people who were drunk, most of the
drug-related violence today is not committed by people who are high on drugs.
The killings, then and now, are based on rivalries: Al Capone ordered the
executions of rival bootleggers, and drug dealers kill their rivals today. A
1989 government study of all 193 "cocaine-related" homicides in New York City
found that 87 percent grew out of rivalries and disagreements related to doing
business in an illegal market. In only one case was the perpetrator actually
under the influence of cocaine.**

**A Nation of Jailers. The "lock 'em up" mentality of the war on drugs has
burdened our criminal justice system to the breaking point. Today, drug-law
enforcement consumes more than half of all police resources nationwide,
resources that could be better spent fighting violent crimes like rape,
assault and robbery.**

The recent steep climb in our incarceration rate has made the U.S. the world's
leading jailer, with a prison population that now exceeds one million people,
compared to approximately 200,000 in 1970. Nonviolent drug offenders make up
58 percent of the federal prison population, a population that is extremely
costly to maintain. In 1990, the states alone paid $12 billion, or $16,000 per
prisoner. While drug imprisonments are a leading cause of rising local tax
burdens, they have neither stopped the sale and use of drugs nor enhanced
public safety.

**Not Drug Free -- Just Less Free. We now have what some constitutional
scholars call "the drug exception to the Bill of Rights." Random drug testing
without probable cause, the militarization of drug law enforcement, heightened
wiretapping and other surveillance, the enactment of vaguely worded loitering
laws and curfews, forfeiture of people's homes and assets, excessive and
mandatory prison terms -- these practices and more have eroded the
constitutional rights of all Americans.**

### Prohibition Is A Destructive Force In Inner City Communities

Inner city communities suffer most from both the problem of drug abuse and the
consequences of drug prohibition.

Although the rates of drug use among white and non-white Americans are
similar, African Americans and other racial minorities are arrested and
imprisoned at higher rates. For example, according to government estimates
only 12 percent of drug users are black, but nearly 40 percent of those
arrested for drug offenses are black. Nationwide, one-quarter of all young
African American men are under some form of criminal justice supervision,
mostly for drug offenses. This phenomenon has had a devastating social impact
in minority communities. Moreover, the abuse of drugs, including alcohol, has
more dire consequences in impoverished communities where good treatment
programs are least available.

Finally, turf battles and commercial disputes among competing drug
enterprises, as well as police responses to those conflicts, occur
disproportionately in poor communities, making our inner cities war zones and
their residents the war's primary casualties.

### Drugs Are Here to Stay -- Let's Reduce Their Harm

The universality of drug use throughout human history has led some experts to
conclude that the desire to alter consciousness, for whatever reasons, is a
basic human drive. People in almost all cultures, in every era, have used
psychoactive drugs. Native South Americans take coca-breaks the way we, in
this country, take coffee-breaks. Native North Americans use peyote and
tobacco in their religious ceremonies the way Europeans use wine. Alcohol is
the drug of choice in Europe, the U.S. and Canada, while many Muslim countries
tolerate the use of opium and marijuana.

A "drug free America" is not a realistic goal, and by criminally banning
psychoactive drugs the government has ceded all control of potentially
dangerous substances to criminals. Instead of trying to stamp out all drug
use, our government should focus on reducing drug abuse and prohibition-
generated crime. This requires a fundamental change in public policy: repeal
of criminal prohibition and the creation of a reasonable regulatory system.

### Ending Prohibition Would Not Necessarily Increase Drug Abuse

While it is impossible to predict exactly how drug use patterns would change
under a system of regulated manufacture and distribution, the iron rules of
prohibition are that 1) illegal markets are controlled by producers, not
consumers, and 2) prohibition fosters the sale and consumption of more potent
and dangerous forms of drugs.

During alcohol prohibition in the 1920s, bootleggers marketed small bottles of
100-plus proof liquor because they were easier to conceal than were large,
unwieldy kegs of beer. The result: Consumption of beer and wine went down
while consumption of hard hard liquor went up. Similarly, contemporary drug
smugglers' preference for powdered cocaine over bulky, pungent coca leaves
encourages use of the most potent and dangerous cocaine products. In contrast,
under legal conditions, consumers -- most of whom do not wish to harm
themselves -- play a role in determining the potency of marketed products, as
indicated by the popularity of today's light beers, wine coolers and
decaffeinated coffees.Once alcohol prohibition was repealed, consumption
increased somewhat, but the rate of liver cirrhosis went down because people
tended to choose beer and wine over the more potent, distilled spirits
previously promoted by bootleggers. So, even though the number of drinkers
went up, the health risks of drinking went down. The same dynamic would most
likely occur with drug legalization: some increase in drug use, but a decrease
in drug abuse.

Another factor to consider is the lure of forbidden fruit. For young people,
who are often attracted to taboos, legal drugs might be less tempting than
they are now. That has been the experience of The Netherlands: After the Dutch
government decriminalized marijuana in 1976, allowing it to be sold and
consumed openly in small amounts, usage steadily declined -- particularly
among teenagers and young adults. Prior to decriminalization, 10 percent of
Dutch 17- and 18-year-olds used marijuana. By 1985, that figure had dropped to
6.5 percent.

Would drugs be more available once prohibition is repealed? It is hard to
imagine drugs being more available than they are today. Despite efforts to
stem their flow, drugs are accessible to anyone who wants them. In a recent
government-sponsored survey of high school seniors, 55 percent said it would
be "easy" for them to obtain cocaine, and 85 percent said it would be "easy"
for them to obtain marijuana. In our inner-cities, access to drugs is
especially easy, and the risk of arrest has proven to have a negligible
deterrent effect. What would change under decriminalization is not so much
drug availability as the conditions under which drugs would be available.
Without prohibition, providing help to drug abusers who wanted to kick their
habits would be easier because the money now being squandered on law
enforcement could be used for preventive social programs and treatment.

### What The United States Would Look Like After Repeal

Some people, hearing the words "drug legalization," imagine pushers on street
corners passing out cocaine to anyone -- even children. But that is what
exists today under prohibition. Consider the legal drugs, alcohol and tobacco:
Their potency, time and place of sale and purchasing age limits are set by
law. Similarly, warning labels are required on medicinal drugs, and some of
these are available by prescription only.

After federal alcohol prohibition was repealed, each state developed its own
system for regulating the distribution and sale of alcoholic beverages. The
same could occur with currently illegal drugs. For example, states could
create different regulations for marijuana, heroin and cocaine.

Ending prohibition is not a panacea. It will not by itself end drug abuse or
eliminate violence. Nor will it bring about the social and economic
revitalization of our inner cities. However, ending prohibition would bring
one very significant benefit: It would sever the connection between drugs and
crime that today blights so many lives and communities. In the long run,
ending prohibition could foster the redirection of public resources toward
social development, legitimate economic opportunities and effective treatment,
thus enhancing the safety, health and well-being of the entire society.

## What You Can Do

You can help bring about drug policy reform:

  * Demand candid discussion of alternatives to prohibition by public officials. 

  * Break the silence -- write letters to your elected representatives and letters-to-the-editor of your local newspaper. 

  * Support incremental harm-reduction measures like needle exchange programs and medical marijuana legislation. 

  * Use this briefing paper to raise the consciousness of your friends and co-workers. 

## Real criminal justice reform now

Take Action Now

Related Issues

  * Mass Incarceration
  * Smart Justice
  * Criminal Law Reform

## Stay Informed

Email Address *

ZIP Code *

  * Publications
  * Multimedia
  * Press Releases
  * Contact
  * Donate

  * ACLU on Facebook

  * ACLU on Twitter
  * ACLU on YouTube
  * The ACLU RSS Feed

Charity Navigator

BBB Accredited Charity

  * User agreement
  * Privacy statement
  * Accessibility

This is the website of the American Civil Liberties Union.

Learn more about the American Civil Liberties Union and its affiliated
organization, the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation.

Â© 2019 ACLU

We the People Dare to Create a More Perfect Union

![](https://smetrics.aclu.org/b/ss/aclumain/1/H.27.5/6479863)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

