

Skip to content

MarijuanaBreak

Keywords

  * Medical Cards
  * Health
  * Reviews
    * Medical Clinics
    * CBD
    * Vape
    * Detox
    * Dispensaries
    * Weed Boxes
  * Strains
  * Growing
  * More

    * Recipes
    * Blog
    * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Disclaimer
  * Home

  * /
  * Blog
  * /
  * Is Amsterdam Weed Better Than Colorado Weed? [The Ultimate Test]

# Is Amsterdam Weed Better Than Colorado Weed? [The Ultimate Test]

Comparing the two weed capitals of the world

![Nicole Richter](https://www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/Screen-Shot-2018-08-11-at-12.53.08-150x150.png) Nicole
Richter / Updated on March 13, 2018

![Is Amsterdam Weed Better Than Colorado Weed?](//www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-

content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)

__Share

_We’re here to weigh the pros and cons…_

Both considered staples of the world of marijuana, Amsterdam and Colorado have
made names for themselves as frontrunners in the cannabis scene. Amsterdam
became notorious long before Colorado, because weed has been tolerated (yet
not completely legal) since the opening of its first coffee shop in 1967, but
Colorado has quickly caught up to this European 420 hotspot, gaining massive
popularity throughout North America and for some Europeans who would like to
get a more American cannabis experience.

In this article, we’ve compiled a list of pros and cons for both Amsterdam and
Colorado, so you can decide for yourself which place you think is better for
their marijuana scene.

_Keep reading to discover if Amsterdam weed is better than Colorado weed, or
is it the other way round …_

## Cannabis in Amsterdam:

The first coffee shop opened its doors in 1967 in Amsterdam, and ever since a
multitude of locals and tourists have gone mad for cannabis in this old Dutch
city. The coffee shop movement has come a long way since the late ‘60s, but
what still remains is the historical scenery of old Amsterdam and the ability
to find tasty pot, which is always just a short journey away.

### Pros:

**The locals hardly care about cannabis, so you can smoke just about
everywhere.**

Funny enough, they actually joke about the cannabis tourists in Amsterdam. The
locals find the whole ordeal relatively silly, and some of them even indulge
in marijuana themselves. This 420 positive environment is a beautiful type of
condition to experience weed in.

**They’ve got stoner food all over, so you won’t need to worry about your
munchies problem.**

They are clearly tailoring their delights towards their market. If your city
is full of stoned tourists, why not supply them with dank burgers, pizzas,
chocolate, treats, pastries, ice cream and other satisfying treats.

**The experience of smoking is relaxing and public, a.k.a. coffee shops.**

You won’t need to worry about staying ultra discreet in Amsterdam. The locals
accept pot consumption and some even partake in it themselves.

**18 years old is the legal age for purchasing marijuana in Amsterdam, meaning
that any legal adult can buy some green.**

Enough said…

**Amsterdam has a ton of culture and attractions to offer, rich in history and
plenty of interesting activities, even if you’re high.**

With a multitude of museums, attractions and historical monuments, not only is
Amsterdam a gorgeous city with tons of history, but it also has plenty of
interesting activities to offer, some of which are a lot of fun - especially
when you are stoned. If you’re looking for something to do, check out the Anne
Frank House, Van Gogh Museum, Rijksmuseum, the Jordaan, Vondelpark,
Museumplein, Westergasfabriek and the Eye Film Institute, or if this does not
seem exciting consider taking a city bike tour, going on a beer tour, or
riding a boat down one of the gorgeous canals.

**Coffee shops stay open all night, so no matter the hour you’re bound to find
a place to hang.**

Many of the coffee shops close around midnight-4am, which is pretty late in
itself. However if you're in a central area, there's a highly likely chance
that a cafe in your proximity will be operating past 4 in the morning.

**Smoking weed in Amsterdam is much more of a social experience, and less
alienated or personal.**

Coffee shops are a social experience. They’re filled with talkative, fun-
loving adults that are enjoying good weed, good laughs and plenty of social
time, if that’s what they desire. At the same time, a marijuana cafe can also
be a place to people watch, relax, unwind and maybe even open up a nice book,
so long as you don’t mind a little noise.

### Cons:

**The quality is not always great -- but there’s a clear explanation.**

Because cannabis is not technically legal in Amsterdam, most cannabis is grown
indoors in sometimes questionable setups and environments, including maybe
sketchy basements. For this reason, the quality is not very well regulated.
Additionally, people are not usually cultivating outdoors for various reasons
(including weather conditions, privacy, etc).

**You might be paying a hefty price, especially with exchange rates.**

It seems the euro is becoming much stronger against many other currencies,
including the dollar which has been dropping in value. This circumstance - in
addition to the already high price of weed in Amsterdam - can result in an
expensive tab at the end of the day.

**You might not get the same kind of variety, including various edibles and
consumable goods.**

Edibles are actually illegal in Amsterdam; although you might be able to
allocate some of them at certain coffee shops, it is not always possible.

**Sharing is not caring; in Amsterdam, you cannot legally gift your friends
weed, which is not the case in Colorado where it is totally okay.**

In Amsterdam, gifting marijuana to others is illegal, while in Colorado you
can gift up to 1 ounce of weed (at least in Denver).

**You cannot legally grow your own weed in Amsterdam, which means if you
reside here, you’ll always have to seek it out, or face possibly getting
caught by authorities.**

Amsterdam is certainly not a friendly place for those who don’t want to pay
for weed and would rather grow their medicine themselves. This could result in
heavy expenses for those who need cannabis for serious medical purposes.

## Cannabis in Colorado:

Cannabis became medically recognized in Colorado in 2000 and recreationally
legal in 2014. Since this point in time, the marijuana scene in CO has
expanded quickly in all directions, with thousands of dispensaries now
existing throughout this scenic and mountainous state.

### Pros:

**You’ve got beautiful nature at your disposal.**

Ahhhhhh, fresh air and mountains everywhere. Sounds like paradise, especially
when you’re lighting up a fresh joint.

**Prices can be reasonable, especially when considering quality.**

Considering the value of the US dollar is not as strong these days, in
addition to the fact that dispensary prices tend to be quite reasonable in
Colorado to begin with, you can get a gram of cannabis for anywhere between
$5-$20, but even the cheaper and low priced ganja is still quite good.

**The variety is literally AMAZING.**

Most dispensaries offer dozens of different strains, some of which are quite
avant garde or rare batches, in addition to offering an immense variety of
edibles, consumables and other marijuana goods.

**Depending upon the dispensary, many budtenders in Colorado are quite
knowledgeable and act professionally, taking their jobs seriously.**

The best dispensaries in Colorado have some knowledgeable and professional
staff members, including brilliant budtenders who can recommend the right
medicine for you.

**It is possible to regularly find some of the more obscure strains at
dispensaries, which is not always the case in Amsterdam.**

With this increased variety, there’s always something new, exciting and
delicious to try.

**You can purchase way more weed in one day legally.**

In Colorado, you can legally purchase 1 ounce of weed in a day if you are a
resident of CO, and ¼ ounce in a day if you are from out-of-state. This
differs greatly from Amsterdam, where they only allow 5 grams to be purchased
at a time.

**If you choose to settle down in Colorado, it is legal to grow your own
cannabis.**

In Colorado you can legally grow up to 6 marijuana plants for personal use, so
long as they are being cultivated in a discrete and enclosed location on your
own property, or with permission from the property owner.

### Cons:

**You have to be especially careful and responsible, because driving under the
influence of cannabis is 100% illegal, and could get you a hefty fine or a
loss of your license for some time.**

We know, it’s tempting to jump in your car after smoking some cannabis, but
this action is extremely punishable by law in Colorado, and could cause you to
end up with a DUI and having to cough up quite a bit of cash for a dumb
mistake.

**The dispensary going journey can be a bit stiff and formal, and you’ll have
to take your herb home to legally enjoy it.**

In Colorado, herb needs be consumed on private property with the permission of
the owner. Furthermore, dispensaries have somewhat of a pharmacy vibe to them
most of the time, feeling formal, sometimes stiff and a bit more like a
doctor’s office than the relaxed atmosphere of an Amsterdam coffeeshop.

**Not all locals agree with the legalization of cannabis, so you can’t just
walk around acting high and smoking - at least not without getting a few weird
looks (and maybe even some legal or social confrontations).**

Believe it or not, some residents of Colorado are still opposed to the
legalization of cannabis. For this reason, they don’t take lightly to those
running around acting high and may even get in your face about it or call the
cops. For this reason, Colorado is maybe a bit more of a threatening
environment to be openly smoking pot in - not to mention it is illegal to do
so openly on the streets.

**You have to be 21 to legally purchase cannabis.**

This can be a real bummer for those who are legally adults (18+), but still
cannot legally get their hands on some green.

**Although there are some activities to do around Colorado, these options are
more modern and not as rich in history.**

You certainly are not going to find historical museums and old-European style
houses in Colorado. There’s of course plenty to do, but all of these
activities are quite modern and might not appeal to everyone.

## Final Thoughts:

At the end of the day, both Amsterdam and Colorado share pros and cons, and
even if these two locations both serve cannabis relatively openly, they are
intensely different from one another, for their own special reasons. Both
Amsterdam and Colorado have a lot to offer, in addition to good weed, it just
depends on what you desire. It is hard to say if Amsterdam cannabis is better
than Colorado marijuana- essentially both places shine on their own.

If you’ve been wondering about the pros and cons of Amsterdam weed versus
Colorado weed, then this article is for you. We hope you found this read to be
not only entertaining, but also educational and informative. It is important
to remember that the consumption of cannabis is the sole responsibility of the
user, and discretion should always be taken.

__Share

2 comments

  1. **William Phelps** on June 8, 2019 

Hardly makes a difference

I do not understand what is the point of such debates and such questions in
the first place. Weed is weed, and if you are able to find a genuine pot
seller, you will definitely have the coolest weed with white ashes once you
smoke. It does not matter if it is Colorado or Amsterdam or any other place
for that matter.

  1. **Forbidden Fruit (@BannedintheUSSA)** on March 13, 2018 

Sounds like the quality & variety of herb is better in Colorado while the
attitudes & history are better in Amsterdam. I'd rather get high somewhere I
won't have to be paranoid about being judged or arrested, personally. Plus the
combo of weed + coffee is just amazing. Whoever dreamt up coffee shops is a
genius.

I've never been to Amsterdam OR gotten weed from a legal American shop,
incidentally. Colorado has lots of natural beauty, but the elevation makes me
ill & it sounds like a lot of undesirable people have moved there since the
Green Rush. Can't wait until all states legalize! I'm still baffled that this
non-toxic plant with hundreds of medicinal uses is illegal in most of the
world.

Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Your Review*

Name *

Email *

Your overall rating of this listing:

Title of your review*:

Most Popular Articles

![](https://www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/CBD300250.jpg)

This Will Blow Your Mind

5% Coupon Code: 5OFFCBD1

Tags: Advertisment

The 7 Best CBD Oils For Anxiety [ 2019 Update ]

The Definitive Guide to CBD Oils

Tags: Best CBD Oils, CBD Anxiety, CBD Oils for Anxiety

The 25 Best CBD Oil Brands for 2019 [Pain Relief, Anxiety, Stress]

The Updated 2019 Guide to CBD oil

Tags: Best CBD Oils, CBD for Pain, CBD Pain Relief

How Long Does Marijuana Stay in Your System [Fully Explained]

The comprehensive guide

Tags: Drug Test, Marijuana Urine Test, THC

Get Your Marijuana Card and Become a Qualified MMJ Patient

Easy online process. Connect to Local Doctors. No appointment needed!

Tags: Medical Cannabis, Medical Card, Medical Card Online

3 Creative Ways to Get a Medical Marijuana Card Online

We've done the research for you!

Tags: Medical marijuana card online, MMJ Card, NuggMD

Cannabis 101: What Does Weed Do to You?

How cannabis affects your body and mind

Tags: CBD, Endocannabinoid System, THC

How to Tell the Good Weed from the Bad [5 Techniques]

How to choose high-quality bud and avoid getting ripped off

Tags: Buyer's Guide, Cannabis, Quality Weed

The Black Cannabis Strain [Complete Review]

Voted one of this year's top 10 Cannabis Strains

Tags: Black Marijuana Strain, Cannabis, Cannabis Strain Review

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * Google plus

  * ![Marijuanabreak logo](/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/logo_white_marijuana_break.svg)

  * Extra Links

About Us  
Contact Us  
Advertise with Us  
Blog  
Recipes

Term of Use  
Privacy Policy  
Disclaimer

Best CBD Oil | What is CBD | Best CBD Oil for Anxiety | CBD Oil for Sleep |
Buy CBD Oil | CBD for Dogs | Best CBD Vape Oil | CBD for Sale | CBD Oil Dosage
| CBD Capsules | CBD Gummies | Medical Marijuana Card | Medical Marijuana Card
Near Me | NuggMD Review | Online THC Calculator

![DMCA.com Protection Status](//images.dmca.com/Badges/dmca-

badge-w100-5x1-09.png?ID=940ea271-1034-4da9-a52f-cb270f710f9a)

© 2000 - 2019 All Rights Reserved Digital Millennium Copyright Act Services
Ltd. | DMCA.com Privacy policy

Username or Email Address *

Password *

Extra password

Remember me Lost your password?

Log In

Forgotten Password

Get New Password

Cancel

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

