

Visit Sweden

Sweden's official website for tourism and travel information

  * Facts and info
  * Destinations
  * Explore
  * Things to do
  *   * 

Toggle menu

  * Facts and info
  * Destinations
  * Explore
  * Things to do

  * Press

  * Corporate
  * Travel Trade
  * Brochures
  * FAQs

Two women in a Stockholm store are looking at a dress.

Shopping, Stockholm

Photo: Tove Freiij/imagbank.sweden.se

Destination

# Shopping in Stockholm

**External links**

Shopping guide to Stockholm

Shopping guide to Stockholm

Swedish fashion

Find out more about Swedish fashion

Scandinavian design

Find out more about Swedish design

The essence of Swedish fashion is simple, wearable looks with a high trend
factor and at reasonable prices. The fact that fashion is one of the most
popular forms of contemporary cultural expression is obvious in Stockholm’s
prime fashion shopping districts.

Drottninggatan in Stockholm is choc-a-bloc with small specialist shops, big
stores like H&M and Zara, Swedish fashion brand stores and just about every
type of retailer imaginable. Look out for Designtorget at Sergels Torg; it
sells household design/functional objects mostly created by up and coming
Nordic designers that you are unlikely to find anywhere else.

If you are more into high-end shopping you should really visit Biblioteksgatan
(map), between the squares of Stureplan and Norrmalmstorg. Here you will find
luxury brands like Gucci, Prada, Marc Jacobs, Michel Kors and much more. You
will also find some Swedish fashion labels like Acne, Whyred, Hope and Tiger
of Sweden.

### NK – Nordiska Kompaniet

NK department store on Hamngatan in the City area is where Stockholm’s well-
heeled shop. Occupying four floors of one of Stockholms most imposing
buildings, NK is a class act and stylishly fills its space with Swedish and
international fashion, designer and household goodies, cosmetics, shoes etc.
Go to the basement here for uniquely Swedish and Nordic artglass, crystalware
and kitchenware. Well-known Swedish preppy unisex mainstays such as Gant and
J. Lindeberg are here, as well Scandi favourites Fillipa K. Acne and Tiger.

**Opening hours**

Weekdays: 10 - 20 (10 a.m - 8 p.m)  
Saturdays: 10 - 18 (10 a.m - 6 p.m)  
Sundays: 11 - 17 (11 a.m - 5 p.m)

Please check the opening hours on NK's own homepage before your visit.

### Åhléns department store

Åhléns Stockholm City is at the intersection of Drottninggatan and Hamngatan
and is one of those department stores that sells absolutely everything – from
a bar of soap, to designer artglass. Åhléns is big in international and
Swedish brand fashion, beauty and cosmetic products. Check out their own brand
household goods for excellent quality and price. And lucky you – Åhléns is
open until 9.00 every week day.

If you'd like to visit another of Åhléns department stores you can find the
closest here: Åhléns department stores

### Mood

MOOD Stockholm opened in mars 2012 and has quickly achieved a status as the
natural meeting spot, both for the stockholmers and for tourists from all over
the world. In the vibrant and vivid environment you can shop, hangout and work
during most hours of the day. MOOD Stockholm is quite simply a enjoyable and
modern city within the city.

**Opening hours**

Weekdays: 10 - 19 (10 a.m - 7 p.m)  
Saturdays: 10 - 18 (10 a.m - 6 p.m)  
Sundays: 11 - 17 (11 a.m - 5 p.m)

Double check the opening hours on MOOD Stockholm's own homepage before
visiting!

![Shopping](https://dqgroc0ic5iei.cloudfront.net/images/_MG_4104-IBSweb_xBQm005.width-800.jpg)MOOD
is Stockholm’s newest shopping mall. It is the home to a varied selection of
boutiques and restaurants. Photo: Tuukka Ervasti/imagebank.sweden.se

### Mall of Scandinavia

Mall of Scandinavia opened in November 2015 and it is the second largest mall
in the Nordic countries with around 174 stores, 41 restaurants and with
Swedens very first IMAX Theatre with 500 seats. You will find the very best in
fashion, sports and beauty, interior design and technology all under one roof
here. Mall of Scandinavia is located near the Solna commuter rail station,
only two stations from Stockholm Central Station (T-Centralen) in Stockholm
City and approximately seven minutes from the Stockholm city centre.

Opening hours from 10.00 a.m until 9.00 p.m - every day of the week.

**Categories**

  * Shopping

**Tags**

  * city
  * shopping area

Sponsored Article

A restaurant called Orangeriet on a crowded summer evening, with Lake Mälaren
in the background.

### Food and drink in Stockholm

Stockholm is now positioning itself as the “Capital of Scandinavia" and
Stockholm for sure is one of Europe’s most dynamic foodie scenes.

A man with a backpack exits a store in Stockholm as two women enter it.

### Fashion

H&M is literally the biggest name in global fashion, but how about those
smaller fashion houses with designs on your pockets? Heard of Acne, Filippa K,
J Lindberg, Nudie Jeans, Cheap Monday, WE, WESC and Weekday? Come and see them
on their home patch in Sweden.

Two clear glass vases with greenery on the shelf of a String shelf, a famous
design from Svenskt Tenn.

### Design

Heard of H&M and IKEA? Swedish. Acne, J. Lindberg, WESC, Filippa K, House of
Dagmar? Also all Swedish.

Sponsored Article

Two women sit in a coffee shop and drink coffee and eat a Swedish cream bun
called Semla.

### Cafés in Stockholm

Stockholm is simply pickled with cafés. Swedes love to fika (coffee break),
and Stockholmers follow suit. You will rarely find an empty café morning,
noon, or night as every Stockholmer has at least one fika a day.

Follow us: Facebook Twitter Instagram

  * Press
  * Corporate
  * Travel Trade
  * Brochures
  * FAQs

Sweden.se

VisitSweden.com

Privacy Policy

Cookies and analytics

Copyright © 2019 Visit Sweden

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

