

Skip to main content

## The Globe and Mail

### Opinion Even with legalized marijuana, organized crime isn’t going away

Member Benefits Subscribe Register Log in My account My account AdChoices

Search

Search

  * Site navigation
  * Your reading history

  *     *       *         *           *             *               *                 *                   *                     *                       *                         *                           * 

### Quick links

  * Horoscopes
  * Puzzles
  * Member Benefits
  * Newsletters
  * Globe Shop
  * Investigations
  * Death Notices (Legacy.com)

### Customer service

  * My account

  * Customer help

  * Contact us

  * Subscribe

  * Log in

  * Log out

### Article text size

  * A

0

  * A

+2

  * A

+4

  * A

+6

The subject who is truly loyal to the Chief Magistrate will neither advise nor
submit to arbitrary measures.

To view your reading history, you must be logged in.

Log in Register

  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms & Conditions

Opinion

# Even with legalized marijuana, organized crime isn’t going away

Jerry Langton

Special to The Globe and Mail

Published May 25, 2018 Updated May 25, 2018

Comments

Open this photo in gallery
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/83sFbddq5HDVgwW2pGkcBxi5vz4=/620x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/SYG7FPTWEFCJJBCUFEAPPIYZLE.JPG)

Workers produce medical marijuana at Canopy Growth Corporation's Tweed
facility in Smiths Falls, Ont., on Feb. 12, 2018.

Sean Kilpatrick/CP

_Jerry Langton’s books include_ The Hard Way Out _and_ The Secret Life of
Bikers: Inside the Hidden World of Organized Crime.

Many Canadians believe that the legalization of recreational marijuana use
will deal a crippling blow to organized crime. I’d love to be able to say
that’s true, but I can’t.

Neither the marijuana market nor organized crime works the way that most
Canadians I have spoken to – including members of the media, politicians and
even some cops – believe it does.

Story continues below advertisement

The overwhelmingly popular belief is that there are colossal shipments of weed
flooding over our borders from other countries, particularly from Latin
America. It’s not true, and hasn’t been for a very long time. According to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s 2017 World Drug Report, Canada has
the world’s eighth-biggest illegal marijuana crop – and is a net exporter. In
fact, Canada is the leading supplier of illegal marijuana to several
countries, including Japan and Australia, and sends a huge amount of weed
south of the border.

The growth was, if you’ll forgive me, organic. For decades, Canadians who
wanted weed had to buy it from a dealer who had received a shipment from
California, Hawaii, Mexico, Jamaica or some other warm place. But there were
some flaws in that economic plan. Supply was unpredictable, ripoffs and
arrests were commonplace and prices were generally at the whim of the importer
and dealer.

So, many Canadians started farming weed indoors. It began as a cottage
industry, but is now among the country’s leading exports.

Another common misconception is that crime organizations in Canada make a
significant amount of their revenue through domestic marijuana sales. They
don’t, and haven’t for years. It’s simply not a good product for them. An
ounce of weed is the size of a small sandwich, has a strong, easily detectable
scent and retails for maybe $200. And it’s everywhere. But an ounce of cocaine
is the size of a Brazil nut and sells for about $2,000. And it’s scarce.
Besides, if a marijuana buyer doesn’t like your product, he or she will often
walk away. For more habit-forming drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine,
heroin and prescription painkillers, they’re more or less a captive clientele.

Canadian organized crime has historically left marijuana trafficking to the
lower echelons of crime, concentrating instead on more high-profit products. I
don’t mean to say organized crime in Canada does not make money off marijuana.
The export market is strong. But, domestically, the Mafia and individual
members of big biker clubs generally profit by allowing others to grow and
sell marijuana in their claimed territory in exchange for kicking a percentage
upstairs. Growers and dealers who refuse to play along can expect a visit –
usually in the form of a home invasion – that often combines robbery with
assault. But that happens to a lot of other businesses, too – such as tattoo
shops, leather stores, gyms, bars and restaurants.

Organized crime’s revenue stream from the domestic marijuana trade pales
compared with more lucrative pursuits. Organized crime started making real
money here after opium and several other drugs were declared illegal in 1908.
But they really became established after recreational alcohol was prohibited
first in Canada and then the United States. They first moved booze north, and
then south as the laws changed. With alcohol legal again in both countries,
organized crime diversified, running the sex trade, illegal gambling, sports
fixing, loan sharking, protection rackets, money laundering, extortion,
identity theft, human trafficking, muscle for hire (often for politicians) and
many other activities. As marijuana became more popular, it was also a big
earner. But – even at its peak – it was tiny compared with the profits
generated by heroin. And that was still much smaller, and almost made
redundant, by the towering stacks of cash made by organized crime once they
established cocaine pipelines, first from Venezuela, then Colombia and, later,
Mexico. That was followed by a smaller boom in methamphetamine sales. And,
they also make big money from steroids and so-called date-rape pills. And
guns. And stolen vehicles. And lots of other sources.

Most illegal drugs have natural declines as the public sees what their effects
can be. But some Canadians with short-term memories have created a major
uptick in the heroin market of late. And organized crime is also experiencing
another boom – this time in the sale of prescription drugs. It’s kind of a
perfect crime. They are not that hard to acquire, can be sold for huge
profits, cause customers to become dependent and it’s pretty difficult for law
enforcement to stop. And, other than untimely deaths, there’s very little
public or media stigma associated with their use.

Story continues below advertisement

Story continues below advertisement

To illustrate how quickly organized crime adapts in Canada, think back to the
early 1990s. The federal government enacted a huge tax increase on cigarettes.
Within a year, more than a third of all cigarettes smoked in Canada were
estimated to be smuggled in from the United States (in Quebec, it was more
like two-thirds), all orchestrated by organized crime. In 1994, the tax hike
was repealed as Prime Minister Jean Chrétien told the House of Commons:
“Smuggling is threatening the safety of our communities and the livelihood of
law-abiding merchants. The organized crime networks that control 95 per cent
of the tobacco smuggling also supply and distribute smuggled liquor, firearms
and drugs. It is essential that we take strong steps to dismantle these
networks.”

I’ve talked with many members of law enforcement and pro- and anti-
legalization advocates in the American states that have already legalized
recreational marijuana. They have almost all acknowledged a slight but not
significant dip in crime. The two who did not were a conservative Colorado
sheriff who was facing a difficult re-election process and wrote in a letter
to voters that crime was up significantly in his district, although that
assertion was at odds with a study by Metropolitan State University of Denver,
the admittedly partisan Drug Policy Alliance, the Colorado Department of
Public Safety and, most important, the FBI Uniform Crime Report, which all
claimed a slight downturn in crime in the same community over the same period.
The other was a sheriff in a more blue-collar Colorado community who said
crime was up in his district; but blamed it on “opioids.”

At most, the legalization of recreational weed will be an annoyance to major
crime organizations such as the Hells Angels, MS-13, 14K, the Cosa Nostra and
’Ndrangheta, although small fry, such as street gangs who answer to the big
boys, will certainly suffer more.

Don’t shed a tear for Canadian organized crime as they face marijuana
legalization. They’ll adapt.

## Related

Opinion

Medical marijuana is a mirage

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![]()

Opinion

The red flags ahead of Canada’s marijuana legalization

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![]()

Opinion

Forget about oil. Alberta is poised to become the province of marijuana

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![]()

Follow us on Twitter @globedebate Opens in a new window

Report an error Editorial code of conduct

Due to technical reasons, we have temporarily removed commenting from our
articles. We hope to have this fixed soon. Thank you for your patience. If you
are looking to give feedback on our new site, please send it along to
feedback@globeandmail.com. If you want to write a letter to the editor, please
forward to letters@globeandmail.com.

Comments

Show comments

Welcome to The Globe and Mail’s comment community. This is a space where
subscribers can engage with each other and Globe staff. Non-subscribers can
read and sort comments but will not be able to engage with them in any way.
Click here to subscribe.

If you would like to write a letter to the editor, please forward it to
letters@globeandmail.com. Readers can also interact with The Globe on Facebook
and Twitter .

Log in Subscribe to comment Why do I need to subscribe?

Welcome to The Globe and Mail’s comment community. This is a space where
subscribers can engage with each other and Globe staff. Non-subscribers can
read and sort comments but will not be able to engage with them in any way.
Click here to subscribe.

If you would like to write a letter to the editor, please forward it to
letters@globeandmail.com. Readers can also interact with The Globe on Facebook
and Twitter .

I'm a print subscriber, link to my account Subscribe to comment Why do I need
to subscribe?

**Discussion loading ...**

Read most recent letters to the editor.

![Cannabis pro newsletter](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/files/dev/cannabis-

pro/cannabis-cem-units-v10/tgam-ROC-promo-335.png)

Page ancestor:Back to Cannabis Professional

Top Stories

Vancouver development permits surged before building fees increase implemented

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/lqbCrYFJzX3avq4fLBrGQgR-k5w=/1x0:3499x2332/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/YZ4K73HVHFGCXHERGUXQRHWGVA.JPG)

Nick Nurse’s controversial use of late, costly timeout leaves many Raptors
fans, observers puzzled

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/tEiJwoBl4pwgz48d3X84xudwh3Q=/0x5:1939x1298/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/NRSE3AFZ5JBYRJMK2K4CBV3SAE.jpg)

Toronto’s Wave Financial purchased by H&R; Block for $537-million

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/5v3FJ8CT5pq6KKz7JtRuE31wM70=/0x0:5760x3840/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/OZAR6CWFEJDSDPXM2M3WA2Y5BY.jpg)

Order of Canada recipient Peter Dalglish found guilty in Nepal of sexually
assaulting children

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/feIPRVzR9johwXlyNyATxw-p5Ok=/0x0:2095x1396/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/OPFEIBBPNNHQ3B7AMGZ32LX73E.jpg)

Alberta municipality fined $300,000 for federal environmental breach
Subscriber content

‘I missed a big chunk of the game': Raptors fans frustrated by Rogers, Bell
outages during key moments of NBA Finals

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/j-5SDwo1qVuu8JWJwIiTf1qDySE=/0x0:3600x2400/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/R7KNSYED6NFUHBE6XE3O7HLU3Y.jpg)

Cornered: Canadian schools reach a turning point in use of seclusion rooms for
children with disabilities

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/T283A9uWWzZqQC5B9qaQebWDpz8=/0x0:6608x4405/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/7DG6K2BOMZH73LVRXPYBWTOASI.JPG)

Ontario Premier’s chief of staff goes ahead with libel suit against former PC
MPP Hillier

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/ho6XoAD4_dj0hLFqmGiMJgp0jrw=/0x0:3600x2400/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-

anglerfish-tgam-prod-

tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/42E7XMZ7VBHE5H46JUD5G2K4U4.jpg)

Oprah Winfrey appearance gets cancelled by Toronto Raptors as NBA Finals push
ahead

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/JN6YrLKnpX0VqNN-

PugsveC4VCI=/6x0:3690x2456/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-anglerfish-tgam-

prod-tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/4FQRG2MHBFBZDBRAD2YIJ7UQYM.jpg)

How Conservative Senator Plett slows down the Liberal agenda

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
![](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/resizer/pZdQ_W6__U-

wORkQpBSq_DPLKjQ=/66x0:2933x1911/75x0/filters:quality\(80\)/arc-anglerfish-

tgam-prod-tgam.s3.amazonaws.com/public/5T6TNNO4D5G43OY24V4FVEC7RY.JPG)

  * Terms & Conditions
  * Community Guidelines
  * Privacy Policy
  * Disclaimer

Skip footer navigation

  * Subscribe

    * Globeandmail.com

    * The Globe and Mail Newspaper

    * Globe2Go

    * The New York Times

    * Globe Email Newsletters

    * Gift Subscription

  * Business Services

    * Advertise with Us

    * Corporate & Group Subscriptions

    * Content Licensing

    * DataStore

    * Report On Business Top 1000

    * Globe Event Centre

  * Contact Us

    * Address and Phone Number

    * Public Editor

    * Staff

    * Staff PGP Directory

    * SecureDrop

    * Submit an article

  * Reader Services

    * My Globeandmail.com Account

    * Technical Support & FAQs

    * Manage my home delivery

    * Manage my privacy preferences

    * Manage my advertising preferences

    * Member Benefits

  * About Us

    * Company Information

    * Work at The Globe

    * Accessibility Policy

    * Editorial Code of Conduct

    * Sustainability

    * Licensing & Permissions

    * Election Advertising Registry

Return to start of footer navigation

(C) Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail Inc. All rights reserved.

351 King Street East, Suite 1600, Toronto, ON Canada, M5A 0N1

Phillip Crawley, Publisher

##

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa *[ON]: Ontario

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario

