

Breaking News

World+

USAfricaAmericasAsiaAustraliaChinaEuropeMiddle EastIndiaUK

WorldUS PoliticsBusinessEntertainmentSportTravelStyleHealthVideo

Live TV __

Search »

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

Home

World

  * US
  * Africa
  * Americas
  * Asia
  * Australia
  * China
  * Europe
  * Middle East
  * India
  * UK

US Politics

  * 45
  * Congress
  * Supreme Court
  * Facts First
  * 2020 Election

Business

  * Markets
  * Tech
  * Media
  * Success
  * Perspectives
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

  * Stars
  * Screen
  * Binge
  * Culture
  * Media

Tech

  * Innovate
  * Gadget
  * Mission: Ahead
  * Upstarts
  * Business Evolved
  * Work Transformed
  * Innovative Cities

Sport

  * Football
  * Tennis
  * Equestrian
  * Golf
  * Skiing
  * Horse Racing
  * Formula E
  * F1
  * Sailing
  * Rugby

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

  * Destinations
  * Food & Drink
  * Play
  * Stay
  * Videos

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

  * Arts
  * Design
  * Fashion
  * Architecture
  * Luxury
  * Autos
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

  * Food
  * Fitness
  * Wellness
  * Parenting
  * Live Longer

Features

  * Freedom Project
  * Impact Your World
  * Inside Africa
  * 2 degrees
  * CNN Heroes
  * All Features

Video

  * Video news
  * Feature shows
  * HLN
  * TV shows
  * TV schedule
  * Faces of CNN Worldwide
  * CNNVR

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

  * How To Watch VR
  * Archives

More…

  * Weather
  * CNN Profiles
  * Leadership
  * Pressroom
  * Partner sites
  * Work for CNN

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)U.S.

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)International

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_espaniol.png)Español

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_arabic.png)Arabic

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

FacebookTwitterInstagram

![american jail clip

4_00003512](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622163153-american-jail-

clip-4-00003512-exlarge-169.jpg)

![american jail clip

4_00003512](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622163153-american-jail-

clip-4-00003512-exlarge-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## What the criminal justice system costs you

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

What the criminal justice system costs you 01:08

# 5 facts behind America's high incarceration rate

By Drew Kann, CNN

Updated 1950 GMT (0350 HKT) April 21, 2019

Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as
it unfolds.

(CNN)Year after year, the United States beats out much larger countries --
India, China -- and more totalitarian ones --Russia and the Philippines -- for
the distinction of having the highest incarceration rate in the world.

According to a 2018 report from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), nearly
2.2 million adults were held in America's prisons and jails at the end of
2016. That means for every 100,000 people residing in the United States,
approximately 655 of them were behind bars.

If the US prison population were a city, it would be among the country's 10
largest. More people are behind bars in America than there are living in major
cities such as Philadelphia or Dallas.

But after decades of explosive growth, there are signs that the country is
turning the corner on mass incarceration.

The prison population decreased in 2016 for the third straight year, and
prison reform, in general, is one of the rare issues with bipartisan support
on Capitol Hill and in the White House.

Read More

On the other hand, approximately $80 billion is still spent each year on
corrections facilities alone, according to a Prison Policy Initiative report,
dwarfing the $68 billion discretionary budget of the Department of Education.

Clearly, this issue is complicated.

To better understand who the system impacts, it requires looking beyond the
big numbers. Here are five key facts that bring the scope of the criminal
justice system into focus.

### Most inmates are held in state prisons and local jails -- not federal

prisons.

![One missed payment put him back behind

bars](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![One missed payment put him back behind

bars](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622160552-american-jail-

clip-1-00011417-large-169.jpg)

![american jail clip

1_00011417](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622160552-american-jail-

clip-1-00011417-large-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## One missed payment put him back behind bars

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

One missed payment put him back behind bars 01:29

Prison reform solutions often focus on the federal government, but the vast
majority of incarcerated people are held in facilities controlled by state and
local governments, according to the Prison Policy Initiative.

The nonpartisan think tank found that more than 1.3 million people are held in
state prisons, while more than 600,000 people behind bars are in one of the
country's 3,000+ local jails.

These jails -- sometimes dubbed the "front door" of the criminal justice
system -- often hold people who haven't yet been convicted of a crime.

### In many cities and states, money often decides who stays in jail and who

gets out.

![She's in jail for 6 months over

$545](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![She's in jail for 6 months over

$545](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622162910-american-jail-

clip-3-00000000-large-169.jpg)

![american jail clip

3_00000000](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180622162910-american-jail-

clip-3-00000000-large-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## She's in jail for 6 months over $545

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

She's in jail for 6 months over $545 01:21

The BJS reports that in 2016, nearly two-thirds of all inmates in local jails
were not convicted.

So why were they behind bars?

Many who are arrested and go to jail are able to get out quickly by simply
posting bail. But those who can't afford it are essentially trapped -- they
either sit in jail until the court takes action, or work with a bail bond
agent to secure their freedom (with the latter option often saddling them with
debt).

Advocates will quickly point out how this system puts the poor at a huge
disadvantage. Stuck in jail because they can't afford to pay bail, inmates are
unable to work or support their families, making them particularly susceptible
to the spiral of debt and incarceration.

The bail bond business, as with others tied to the criminal justice system, is
extremely lucrative, bringing in more than $2 billion in profit each year,
according to a 2017 report by nonprofit civil rights advocacy group Color of
Change and the ACLU's Campaign for Smart Justice.

### The 'war on drugs' isn't solely to blame for mass incarceration.

![Nearly half of all inmates in federal prisons are held on drug charges, but

drug offenders make up a smaller proportion of the population in state prisons

and

jails.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Nearly half of all inmates in federal prisons are held on drug charges, but

drug offenders make up a smaller proportion of the population in state prisons

and jails.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180627111449-american-

jail-04-large-169.jpg)

Nearly half of all inmates in federal prisons are held on drug charges, but
drug offenders make up a smaller proportion of the population in state prisons
and jails.

Some have said that the "war on drugs" is responsible for America's massive
prison and jail populations.

And while this rings true in many federal prisons -- where nearly half of all
inmates are locked up for drug charges, often serving lengthy sentences --
it's a different story in state prisons and local jails.

In these facilities, where the vast majority of incarcerated people are
housed, Prison Policy Initiative says those held for drug offenses are a much
smaller proportion of the overall population.

But this still oversimplifies the relationship between drugs and mass
incarceration.

For one, there is huge variation from state-to-state in how drug policies are
enforced, according to a Pew analysis. States like Louisiana and Oklahoma, for
instance, lock up drug offenders at rates far exceeding most others.

Though drugs may not be the primary reason most people are in state and local
prisons, law enforcement agencies around the country are still making drug
arrests in huge numbers.

In 2016, drug arrests actually increased about 10% from the previous year to
more than 1.25 million, according to the FBI's Uniform Crime Report.

### Once you're in the criminal justice system, it's often difficult to get

out.

![Corde, who is featured in CNN Films 'American Jail,' spent time in

jail for a DUI. After he was released, he was rearrested for missing one

payment.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Corde, who is featured in CNN Films 'American Jail,' spent time in

jail for a DUI. After he was released, he was rearrested for missing one

payment.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180627111011-american-

jail-02-large-169.jpg)

Corde, who is featured in CNN Films 'American Jail,' spent time in jail for a
DUI. After he was released, he was rearrested for missing one payment.

For some, just one arrest is enough to get caught up in the system.

There have been several studies on recidivism, but one of the most extensive
was released in 2016 by the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), which
tracked more than 25,000 federal offenders over an eight-year period.

Officials reported that nearly half of those monitored were rearrested for a
new crime or for a violation of supervision conditions. And for about half, it
took less than two years for them to run afoul of the law again.

Other studies have found correlations between the length of a person's rap
sheet and the likelihood of recidivism.

A 2017 USSC study showed that offenders without any previous contact with the
criminal justice system had an 11.7 percent lower recidivism rate than those
with at least some prior contact with law enforcement.

### Minorities are still overrepresented in the prison population, but racial

and ethnic gaps are shrinking.

![African Americans still make up a disproportionate amount of those behind

bars.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![African Americans still make up a disproportionate amount of those behind

bars.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180627111210-american-

jail-03-large-169.jpg)

African Americans still make up a disproportionate amount of those behind
bars.

It has been a defining characteristic of the criminal justice system for
years, and it's still the case today: compared to the racial makeup of the
overall US population, African-Americans continue to make up a
disproportionate amount of the prison population. (Nonprofit organizations
such as The Vera Institute have written extensively about this issue.)

Though African-Americans comprise only about 12% of the total US population,
they represent 33 percent of the federal and state prison population. That's
compared to whites, who constitute 64% of American adults but just 30% of
those behind bars, according to a Pew Research analysis of Bureau of Justice
Statistics data.

But as the overall incarcerated population has slowly retreated from its peak
in 2009, a shift is happening in American prisons: the disparity between the
number of African-Americans and whites locked up is shrinking.

Between 2009 and 2016, Pew's analysis shows the African-American prison
population fell 17%, exceeding the 10% drop in the number of whites behind
bars. The Hispanic population was virtually unchanged over the same period.

There are a number of ideas about what's behind this closing gap, from stiffer
law enforcement in rural, predominately white areas, to the scourge of opioids
and heroin, which have hit white communities hardest.

  *   *   * Home

  * World

    1. US
    2. Africa
    3. Americas
    4. Asia
    5. Australia
    6. China
    7. Europe
    8. Middle East
    9. India
    10. UK
  * US Politics

    1. 45
    2. Congress
    3. Supreme Court
    4. Facts First
    5. 2020 Election
  * Business

    1. Markets
    2. Tech
    3. Media
    4. Success
    5. Perspectives
    6. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

    1. Stars
    2. Screen
    3. Binge
    4. Culture
    5. Media
  * Tech

    1. Innovate
    2. Gadget
    3. Mission: Ahead
    4. Upstarts
    5. Business Evolved
    6. Work Transformed
    7. Innovative Cities
  * Sport

    1. Football
    2. Tennis
    3. Equestrian
    4. Golf
    5. Skiing
    6. Horse Racing
    7. Formula E
    8. F1
    9. Sailing
    10. Rugby
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

    1. Destinations
    2. Food & Drink
    3. Play
    4. Stay
    5. Videos
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

    1. Arts
    2. Design
    3. Fashion
    4. Architecture
    5. Luxury
    6. Autos
    7. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

    1. Food
    2. Fitness
    3. Wellness
    4. Parenting
    5. Live Longer
  * Features

    1. Freedom Project
    2. Impact Your World
    3. Inside Africa
    4. 2 degrees
    5. CNN Heroes
    6. All Features
  * Video

    1. Video news
    2. Feature shows
    3. HLN
    4. TV shows
    5. TV schedule
    6. Faces of CNN Worldwide
    7. CNNVR
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

    1. How To Watch VR
    2. Archives
  * More…

    1. Weather
    2. CNN Profiles
    3. Leadership
    4. Pressroom
    5. Partner sites
    6. Work for CNN

International Edition

  * Set edition preference:
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Confirm
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Arabic
  * Español

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans ™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Accessibility & CC
  * AdChoices
  * Modern Slavery Act Statement
  * Advertise with us
  * About us
  * CNN Store
  * Newsletters
  * Transcripts
  * License Footage
  * CNN Newsource

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif?labels=noscript%3ANo%20Labels%20Set)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

