

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » DrugFacts » Methamphetamine

# Methamphetamine

Email Facebook Twitter

Revised May 2019

## What is methamphetamine?

![Crystal

methamphetamine](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/crystal_meth.jpg)Photo
by DEA Crystal methamphetamine

Methamphetamine is a powerful, highly addictive stimulant that affects the
central nervous system. Crystal methamphetamine is a form of the drug that
looks like glass fragments or shiny, bluish-white rocks. It is chemically
similar to amphetamine, a drug used to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy, a sleep disorder.

Other common names for methamphetamine include _blue, crystal, ice, meth,_ and
_speed_.

## How do people use methamphetamine?

People can take methamphetamine by:

  * smoking 
  * swallowing (pill) 
  * snorting 
  * injecting the powder that has been dissolved in water/alcohol 

Because the "high" from the drug both starts and fades quickly, people often
take repeated doses in a "binge and crash" pattern. In some cases, people take
methamphetamine in a form of binging known as a "run," giving up food and
sleep while continuing to take the drug every few hours for up to several
days.

## How does methamphetamine affect the brain?

Methamphetamine increases the amount of the natural chemical dopamine in the
brain. Dopamine is involved in body movement, motivation, and reinforcement of
rewarding behaviors. The drug's ability to rapidly release high levels of
dopamine in reward areas of the brain strongly reinforces drug-taking
behavior, making the user want to repeat the experience.

### Short-Term Effects

Taking even small amounts of methamphetamine can result in many of the same
health effects as those of other stimulants, such as cocaine or amphetamines.
These include:

  * increased wakefulness and physical activity 
  * decreased appetite 
  * faster breathing 
  * rapid and/or irregular heartbeat 
  * increased blood pressure and body temperature 

### How Do Manufacturers Make Methamphetamine?

Currently, most methamphetamine in the United States is produced by
transactional criminal organizations (TCOs) in Mexico. This methamphetamine is
highly pure, potent, and low in price. The drug can be easily made in small
clandestine laboratories, with relatively inexpensive over-the-counter
ingredients such as pseudoephedrine, a common ingredient in cold medications.
To curb this kind of production, the law requires pharmacies and other retail
stores to keep a purchase record of products containing pseudoephedrine, and
take steps to limit sales.

Methamphetamine production also involves a number of other very dangerous
chemicals. Toxic effects from these chemicals can remain in the environment
long after the lab has been shut down, causing a wide range of health problems
for people living in the area. These chemicals can also result in deadly lab
explosions and house fires.

## What are other health effects of methamphetamine?

![Close-up of rotted teeth brought on by prolonged methamphetamine

use.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/meth_mouth.jpg)Photo
by Dozenist/CC BY-SA "Meth mouth"

### Long-Term Effects

People who inject methamphetamine are at increased risk of contracting
infectious diseases such as HIV and hepatitis B and C. These diseases are
transmitted through contact with blood or other bodily fluids that can remain
on drug equipment. Methamphetamine use can also alter judgment and decision-
making leading to risky behaviors, such as unprotected sex, which also
increases risk for infection.

Methamphetamine use may worsen the progression of HIV/AIDS and its
consequences. Studies indicate that HIV causes more injury to nerve cells and
more cognitive problems in people who use methamphetamine than it does in
people who have HIV and don't use the drug.1 Cognitive problems are those
involved with thinking, understanding, learning, and remembering.

Long-term methamphetamine use has many other negative consequences, including:

  * extreme weight loss 
  * addiction 
  * severe dental problems ("meth mouth") 
  * intense itching, leading to skin sores from scratching 
  * anxiety 
  * changes in brain structure and function 
  * confusion 
  * memory loss 
  * sleeping problems 
  * violent behavior 
  * _paranoia_ --extreme and unreasonable distrust of others 
  * _hallucinations_ --sensations and images that seem real though they aren't 

In addition, continued methamphetamine use causes changes in the brain's
dopamine system that are associated with reduced coordination and impaired
verbal learning. In studies of people who used methamphetamine over the long
term, severe changes also affected areas of the brain involved with emotion
and memory.2 This may explain many of the emotional and cognitive problems
seen in those who use methamphetamine.

Although some of these brain changes may reverse after being off the drug for
a year or more, other changes may not recover even after a long period of
time.3 A recent study even suggests that people who once used methamphetamine
have an increased the risk of developing Parkinson's disease, a disorder of
the nerves that affects movement.4

## Are there health effects from exposure to secondhand methamphetamine

smoke?

Researchers don't yet know whether people breathing in secondhand
methamphetamine smoke can get high or have other health effects. What they do
know is that people can test positive for methamphetamine after exposure to
secondhand smoke.5,6 More research is needed in this area.

## Can a person overdose on methamphetamine?

Yes, a person can overdose on methamphetamine. An overdose occurs when the
person uses too much of a drug and has a toxic reaction that results in
serious, harmful symptoms or death.

In 2017, about 15 percent of all drug overdose deaths involved the
methamphetamine category, and 50 percent of those deaths also involved an
opioid, with half of those cases related to the synthetic opioid fentanyl.
(CDC Wonder Multiple Causes of Death--see #42 on Meth RR.) It is important to
note that cheap, dangerous synthetic opioids are sometimes added to street
methamphetamine without the user knowing

## How can a methamphetamine overdose be treated?

Because methamphetamine overdose often leads to a stroke, heart attack, or
organ problems, first responders and emergency room doctors try to treat the
overdose by treating these conditions, with the intent of:

  * restoring blood flow to the affected part of the brain (stroke) 
  * restoring blood flow to the heart (heart attack) 
  * treating the organ problems 

## Is methamphetamine addictive?

Yes, methamphetamine is highly addictive. When people stop taking it,
withdrawal symptoms can include:

  * anxiety 
  * fatigue 
  * severe depression 
  * psychosis 
  * intense drug cravings 

## How is methamphetamine addiction treated?

While research is underway, there are currently no government-approved
medications to treat methamphetamine addiction. The good news is that
methamphetamine misuse can be prevented and addiction to the drug can be
treated with behavioral therapies. The most effective treatments for
methamphetamine addiction so far are behavioral therapies, such as:

  * cognitive-behavioral therapy, which helps patients recognize, avoid, and cope with the situations likely to trigger drug use. 
  * motivational incentives, which uses vouchers or small cash rewards to encourage patients to remain drug-free 

Research also continues toward development of medicines and other new
treatments for methamphetamine use, including vaccines, and noninvasive
stimulation of the brain using magnetic fields. People can and do recover from
methamphetamine addiction if they have ready access to effective treatments
that address the multitude of medical and personal problems resulting from
long-term use.

### Points to Remember

  * Methamphetamine is usually a white, bitter-tasting powder or a pill. Crystal methamphetamine looks like glass fragments or shiny, bluish-white rocks. 
  * Methamphetamine is a stimulant drug that is chemically similar to amphetamine (a drug used to treat ADHD and narcolepsy). 
  * People can take methamphetamine by smoking, swallowing, snorting, or injecting the drug. 
  * Methamphetamine increases the amount of dopamine in the brain, which is involved in movement, motivation, and reinforcement of rewarding behaviors. 
  * Short-term health effects include increased wakefulness and physical activity, decreased appetite, and increased blood pressure and body temperature. 
  * Long-term health effects include risk of addiction; risk of contracting HIV and hepatitis; severe dental problems ("meth mouth"); intense itching, leading to skin sores from scratching; violent behavior; and paranoia. 
  * Methamphetamine can be highly addictive. When people stop taking it, withdrawal symptoms can include anxiety, fatigue, severe depression, psychosis, and intense drug cravings. 
  * Researchers don't yet know if people breathing in secondhand methamphetamine smoke can get high or suffer other health effects. 
  * A person can overdose on methamphetamine. Because methamphetamine overdose often leads to a stroke, heart attack, or organ problems, first responders and emergency room doctors try to treat the overdose by treating these conditions. 
  * The most effective treatments for methamphetamine addiction so far are behavioral therapies. There are currently no government-approved medications to treat methamphetamine addiction. 

## Learn More

For more information about methamphetamine, visit our:

  * Methamphetamine webpage
  * Commonly Abused Drugs chart

### References

  1. Chang L, Ernst T, Speck O, Grob CS. Additive effects of HIV and chronic methamphetamine use on brain metabolite abnormalities. _Am J Psychiatry_. 2005;162(2):361-369. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.2.361. 
  2. Volkow ND, Chang L, Wang GJ, et al. Association of dopamine transporter reduction with psychomotor impairment in methamphetamine abusers. _Am J Psychiatry_. 2001;158(3):377-382. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.158.3.377. 
  3. Wang G-J, Volkow ND, Chang L, et al. Partial recovery of brain metabolism in methamphetamine abusers after protracted abstinence. _Am J Psychiatry_. 2004;161(2):242-248. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.2.242. 
  4. Curtin K, Fleckenstein AE, Robison RJ, Crookston MJ, Smith KR, Hanson GR. Methamphetamine/amphetamine abuse and risk of Parkinson 's disease in Utah: a population-based assessment. _Drug Alcohol Depend_. 2015;146:30-38. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.10.027. 
  5. Bassindale T. Quantitative analysis of methamphetamine in hair of children removed from clandestine laboratories--evidence of passive exposure? _Forensic Sci Int_. 2012;219(1-3):179-182. doi:10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.003. 
  6. Farst K, Reading Meyer JA, Mac Bird T, James L, Robbins JM. Hair drug testing of children suspected of exposure to the manufacture of methamphetamine. _J Forensic Leg Med_. 2011;18(3):110-114. doi:10.1016/j.jflm.2011.01.013. 

This publication is available for your use and may be reproduced **in its
entirety** without permission from the NIDA. Citation of the source is
appreciated, using the following language: Source: National Institute on Drug
Abuse; National Institutes of Health; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

This page was last updated May 2019

![DrugFacts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/drugfacts.jpg)

## More DrugFacts

### Health Effects of Specific Drugs

Anabolic Steroids

Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products

Cocaine

Electronic Cigarettes (E-cigarettes)

Fentanyl

Hallucinogens

Heroin

Inhalants

Kratom

Marijuana

Marijuana as Medicine

MDMA (Ecstasy/Molly)

Methamphetamine

Over-the-Counter Medicines

Prescription CNS Depressants

Prescription Opioids

Prescription Stimulants

Synthetic Cannabinoids (K2/Spice)

Synthetic Cathinones ("Bath Salts")

### Effects of Drug Use

Comorbidity: Substance Use Disorders and Other Mental Illnesses

Drug Use and Viral Infections (HIV, Hepatitis)

Drugged Driving

Understanding Drug Use and Addiction

### Survey Data

Drug-Related Hospital Emergency Room Visits

Monitoring the Future Survey: High School and Youth Trends

Nationwide Trends

Treatment Statistics

### Prevention and Treatment

Lessons from Prevention Research

Substance Abuse in the Military

Treatment Approaches for Drug Addiction

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (357KB)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2019, May 16). Methamphetamine. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/methamphetamine

NIDA. "Methamphetamine." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 16 May. 2019,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/methamphetamine.

NIDA. Methamphetamine. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/methamphetamine. May 16,
2019.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Additional Drug Facts

![Drug Facts for

Teens](http://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/n4t_webbadge_235px.jpg)  
![Easy-to-read Drug

Facts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/easyread-

badge.jpg)

## Other Articles of Interest

### NIDA Notes

  * Narrative of Discovery: The Quest for a Medication To Treat Methamphetamine Addiction, Part 4

  * Narrative of Discovery: The Quest for a Medication To Treat Methamphetamine Addiction, Part 3

### Nora's Blog

  * The Concerning Link Between Inadequate Sleep and Adolescent Substance Use

  * Substance Use in American Indian Youth is Worse than We Thought

### Science Highlight

  * A look at drug craving

  * Do rats prefer palatable foods over meth?

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## Research Report

![Methamphetamine Research Report

cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/meth_rrs_smcover.jpg)

### Metham-phetamine

Provides an overview of the latest scientific findings on methamphetamine,
including short- and long-term health consequences, effects on pregnancy, and
potential prevention and treatment options.

Read more

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

