

__Contact Us

__Insurance

__Admissions

__Teen Addiction

Search

![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-logo-Loch.png)
![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/apple-icon-152x152.png)

__

352.771.2700 Recovery Is Possible __

__

  * Drug Addiction __
    *       * Drug Addiction Overview
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Alcohol
    * Cocaine
    * Heroin
    * Marijuana
    * Meth
    * Xanax
    * Stimulants
    * Adderall
    * Amphetamines
    * Bath Salts
    * Crack
    * Ecstasy, MDMA
    * Spice, K2
    *       * Opioid/Opiates
    * Codeine
    * Fentanyl
    * OxyContin
    * Hydrocodone
    * Dilaudid
    * Lortab
    * Kratom
    * Morphine
    * Oxycodone
    * Vicodin
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Ativan
    * Klonopin
    * Valium
    * Librium
    *       * Prescription Drugs
    * Percocet
    * Methadone
    * Ambien
    * Tramadol
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
    * Narcan
    * Ultram
    * Fioricet
    * Trazodone
    * Drug Index
      * Ayahuasca
      * CBD (Cannabidiol)
      * Kava
      * Peyote
    *       * ![Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/psychological-vs-physical-addiction-social-150x150.jpg)

Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic

![Can you become addicted to Heroin the first

time?](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/addicted-

first-time-100x100.jpg)

Can You Become Addicted to Heroin the First Time?

* * *

__ Drug Abuse Hotline

__ Alcohol Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Mental Health __
    *       * Anxiety Disorders
      * Anxiety
      * Generalized Anxiety
      * Panic Disorder
      * Social Anxiety
    * Personality Disorders
      * Antisocial PD
      * Borderline PD
      * Dissociative Identity Disorder
      * Histrionic PD
      * Schizoid PD
    * Stress Related Disorders
      * Adjustment Disorder
      * PTSD
    *       * Eating Disorders
      * Anorexia
      * Binge Eating
      * Bulimia
      * Restrictive Food Intake
    * Depression & Mood Disorders
      * Bipolar Disorder
      * Depression
      * Major Depressive Disorder
      * Postpartum Depression
    * Obsessive Compulsive Disorders
      * Body Dysmorphia
      * Gender Dysphoria
      * Impulse Control Disorder
      * OCD
    *       * Other Mental Health Issues
      * ADHD/ADD
      * Phobias
      * Psychosis
      * Schizophrenia
      * Sleep Disorders
    * Common Co-Occurring Disorders
      * Process Addictions
      * Anxiety and Substance Abuse
      * Borderline PD and Drug Abuse
      * Depression and Drug Abuse
      * Panic Disorder and Drug Abuse
      * PTSD and Substance Abuse
      * Schizophrenia and Drug Abuse
    *       * ![comforting a woman experiencing a mental health crisis](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/What-is-mental-health-first-aid-150x150.jpg)

Mental Health First Aid

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Addiction Treatment __
    *       * Drug Addiction Treatment
      * Alcoholism Treatment
      * Medical Detox
      * Medication-Assisted Treatment
      * Inpatient Rehab
      * Partial Hospitalization
      * Intensive Outpatient
      * Outpatient Rehab
      * Aftercare
      * Dual Diagnosis
    *       * Understanding Treatment
      * Our Treatment Philosophy
      * Drug Rehab
      * Drug Detox
      * Intervention
      * Friends & Family Portal
    * Treatment Therapies
      * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
      * Dialectical Behavioral Therapy
      * Individual/Group Therapy
      * Intensive Therapy
      * Substance Abuse Treatment Centers and Rehab
      * Substance Abuse Counseling
    *       * Mental Health/Dual Diagnosis
      * Treatments for Anxiety
      * Bipolar Treatments
      * Treatments for Schizophrenia
      * Depression Treatments
      * PTSD Treatments
    *       * ![10 Tips to Help Family Members of Addicts Cope](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shutterstock_285296222-e1494436072654-150x150.jpg)

10 Tips to Help Family Members of Those Struggling With Addiction Cope

![](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/@istock_000013186202_large-600x400-150x150.jpg)

10 Signs You Need Professional Help

* * *

__ Heroin Hotline

__ Marijuana Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Our Rehab Centers __
    * Locations Overview
    *       * Nationwide Adult Rehab Centers
    * The Recovery Village Umatilla (FL)
    * Orlando Recovery Center (FL)
    * The Recovery Village at Palmer Lake (CO)
    * The Recovery Village Columbus (OH)
    * The Recovery Village Ridgefield (WA)
    *       * Specialty Rehab Centers
    * Next Generation Village (FL)
    * IAFF Recovery Center (MD)
    * Aftercare
    * Next Step Village (FL)
  * Treatment By State __
    *       * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    *       * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    *       * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    *       * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
  * Resources __
    *       * Sobriety Calculator
    * Friends and Family
    * Teen Addiction
    * College Students
    * LGBTQ+ Addiction
    * Active Duty Military
    * Military Veterans
    *       * Fitness & Nutrition
    * Spiritual Resources
    * Domestic Violence
    * Lawyers
    * Caregiver Resources
    * Cancer Patients
    * Elderly
  * Recovery Blog __
    * Inside Addiction
  * __Insurance
  * __Contact Us
  * __Admissions
  *     * Search

__ **Don't wait another day. Help is a phone call away.** 352.771.2700

_close_ What To Expect

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit to
treatment** until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help
you heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and we are **ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns.**

__

352.771.2700

Recovery Is Possible

Home ____ Speed: The Addicting World of Amphetamine Drugs

![Speed: The Addicting World of Amphetamine

Drugs](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/speed-

addicting-world-of-amphetamine-drugs-700x366.jpg)

__Share 5

__Tweet

__Share

5 Shares

# Speed: the addicting world of amphetamine drugs

People from all walks of life, classes, and backgrounds can form addictions to
stimulant drugs like amphetamines (aka speed). These stimulant pills are used
by professionals, students, housewives, laborers, and street-level addicts
alike for a number of reasons. The occasional use of speed stimulants can give
a person more energy, help suppress an appetite, and increase focus. Because
of these perceived positive human benefits, amphetamines are used widely
around the world.

On the surface, speed can appear to benefit the user, without them seeing any
of the harmful effects of the drug. But there is a downside to overuse of
speed — the drug can cause both physical and psychological addictions. This
dependence on speed can start to control the person, develop a physical
dependence, and lead to a loss of jobs, families, and homes.

## What is Speed?

Speed is a common street drug, made synthetically in manufacturing facilities
or ‘super labs’ around the world and sold under a wide variety of legal and
illegal means. Some of the street names for amphetamine include meth, ice,
crystal meth, and crank.

Speed impacts chemical processes in the brain (impacting dopamine and
norepinephrine) and neurotransmitter chemicals that play a key role in
regulating a person’s central nervous system. In other words, taking speed
essentially ‘cranks up’ the level of dopamine in a person. Dopamine is the
pleasurable chemical created in the brain when a person enjoys good sex, eats
good food, and drinks alcoholic beverages.

By taking the drug and speeding up the dopamine levels, the user experiences
euphoric feelings that can last anywhere from 15-30 minutes or even up to
several hours. Speed also promotes a loss of appetite, leading people to think
it’s an effective weight loss solution. But taking amphetamines and not eating
for 12 hours can be just as destructive to a human body as eating too much.

But all this stimulating the brain comes at a price: the brain starts to
change structurally as a result of the drug’s high-impact stimulation. This
damage eventually is seen in abnormal behavior, which is often seen as a sign
of speed addiction.

## Speed’s Addictive Effects

Short term use of speed offers a user excitable feelings and a revved-up
intensity of thoughts, clarity, focus, and speech patterns. But long-term
amphetamine use can seriously damages a person’s brain and body. Every time
the drug is used, the user’s brain suffers further strain.

Long-term use of the drug can result in depression and memory loss. Other
physical side effects of speed include:

  * Psychotic delusions.
  * Very high body temperatures.
  * Destruction of the cardiovascular system.
  * Headaches and nausea.
  * Paranoia, shakes, and sweating.

These effects can later morph into psychosis. Without emergency drug treatment
from an addiction treatment center, a person may develop permanent brain
damage from chronic amphetamine usage.

## Crystal Meth

Another manufactured form of speed is crystal meth. This drug is a
crystallized synthetic drug that is produced in a variety of substances and
resembles shiny rocks or pieces of glass. Meth can be found in powder form,
liquid form, pill form, and sometimes even in a form for physical insertion.

Use of the drug initially gives the user a stimulating blast of energy,
libido, concentration, and pleasure. However, further use can result in
nausea, paranoia, and other debilitating effects.

The increased dosages and pill-popping frequency over-stimulate the brain.
Eventually, the brain looks to the amphetamine to provide the dopamine
stimulation. At this stage, certain withdrawal symptoms can affect the user,
including anger, restlessness, confused thinking, sweating, and shaking.

## Treatment for Speed Addiction

The first step of treatment for an amphetamine addiction is detox. But once
the drug is taken away, the addict may experience severe withdrawal from the
psychological and physical dependence on the stimulant. He or she will feel
the loss of the enhanced energy from the drug.

If you or a loved one has developed a dependence on speed, amphetamine detox
can be your first step towards recovery. Reach out to us to learn more about
how our treatment program can be tailored to fit your needs.

Sources

"World Drug Report 2016" United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. June 2016.
Accessed September 24, 2016. http://www.unodc.org/wdr2016/

"How is methamphetamine manufactured?" National Institute on Drug Abuse.
September 2013. Accessed September 25, 2016.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/methamphetamine/how-
methamphetamine-manufactured

Brannan, Amy. "The Negative Side Effects of Speed Are Numerous" Exploring
Life’s Mysteries. January 15, 2016. Accessed September 25, 2016.
http://www.exploringlifesmysteries.com/side-effects-of-speed/

Speed: The Addicting World of Amphetamine Drugs

4.4 (88.57%) 7 vote[s]

__Share 5

__Tweet

__Share

5 Shares

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now.

__352.771.2700 __What to expect when I call?

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit** to
treatment until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help you
heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and **we are ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns 24/7.**

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now. __352.771.2700

## Ready to start? We're here for you.

__352.771.2700

![The Recovery Village Drug Rehab Center](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-

logo-Loch.png)

![The Recovery Village](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/The-Recovery-Village.jpg) The Recovery Village

633 Umatilla Blvd. Umatilla, FL 32784

(352) 771-2700

### About Us

  * About
  * Our Team
  * Philosophy
  * Careers

### Get Started

  * Admissions
  * Insurance
  * Locations
  * Contact Us

### Legal

  * Notice Of Privacy Practices
  * Terms and Conditions
  * Privacy Policy

* * *

(C) The Recovery Village at Umatilla All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

