

Puppy Leaks

Tips & Tricks For Dog Owners

        
                  * Start Here
          * Topics
            * Training
            * Health
            * Studies
            * Why Do Dogs…
            * Opinion
          * Blog
          * About
          * Contact
        

You are here: Home / Research / 8 Studies That Answer Whether or Not Dogs Have
Feelings

![Do Dogs Have Feelings?](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-

content/uploads/2014/07/cutue.png)

# 8 Studies That Answer Whether or Not Dogs Have Feelings

Last updated on December 27, 2018 By Jen Gabbard 12 Comments

205shares

        
                  * Pinterest
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
        

Do you think dogs have feelings? Most of us dog owners believe they do, yet we
haven't had much scientific proof to back it up. But that's changing.

Canine cognitive science has come a long way over the past decade, and we can
now prove dogs do have feelings. Not just simple feelings either; they display
complex emotions such as jealousy and it's quite possible that they have their
own moral code. Researchers are just beginning to scratch the surface when it
comes to understanding how complex their feelings really are.

### Do Dogs Have Feelings? The Proof Is in the Science

Do dogs have feelings? Scientific studies are not only proving that dogs do
have feelings, they're finding that canine emotions are more complex than we
thought. Lawmakers are also taking notice and giving dogs the status of a
sentient being. Earlier this year France declared dogs are no longer just
considered personal property; they're now afforded rights as living beings.

> No one has ever tortured a clock. Animals suffer, they have emotions and
feelings. It is not a question of making animals subjects of the law…but
simply of protecting them against certain forms of cruelty. - Luc Ferry;
former education minister

### Owners Have Known About Dog Emotions For Years

Does your dog have a wide variety of emotions? Most dog owners would say yes.
Does he ponder the meaning of life? Probably not, but science is helping us
get closer to understanding canine emotions and they might not be as simple as
we once thought.

We've often compared dogs to being as mentally complex as a 2 year old child.
We know that they're adept at understanding our body language and voices
better than any other creature but how much do we know about their signals to
us?

Dogs are the only non-primate animal to look people in the eyes. After studies
on the domestication of wolves researchers were expecting to find eye contact
as a shared trait. It's a unique behavior between humans and dogs. Dogs seek
out eye contact from humans but not from their own parents.

> Bonding with owners is much more important for dogs than other pets. -
Attila Andics

All dog owners have a lot of anecdotal evidence of their own dogs emotions but
it's still quite misunderstood by science. Amazingly enough over the past few
years some very diligent researchers have been able to train dogs to sit still
in M.R.I. scanners to get a better understanding of what's actually going on
inside Fido's mind.

The dogs are not sedated, that wouldn't prove very useful when testing for
cognitive behaviors, the dogs are sitting still voluntarily. This new line of
research will provide us with a much better understanding of what dogs are and
are not capable of feeling emotionally.

### Dog Emotions Are Complex & Often Misunderstood

We're now discovering that we share a lot of the same brain functionality as
mans best friend. It helps to explain why we have been able to form such a
close bond with them and why they seem to understand a lot of our emotional
cues. We know that dogs feel joy, happiness, fear, and stress but we don't
know a lot about other dog emotions.

Now researchers are able to dive deeper into the study of dog neuroscience and
they're beginning to see how _similar_ and we are to our canine companion when
it comes to emotions.

So yes; dogs do have feelings. Not only that - their feelings are much more
complex than we previously thought. The next time someone asks "Do dogs have
feelings?" cite these eight scientific studies that prove that yes, dogs do
have feelings.

![dog emotions](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-

content/uploads/2014/07/dogemotions.jpg)

photo credit: Found Animals

### **1. Study Finds Dogs Feel Love & Attachment

**

In October of 2013 there was an article called Dogs Are People, Too published
in the New York Times. Researchers trained 12 dogs to enter M.R.I. scanners to
have their brains analyzed while they were introduced to certain signals. Hand
signals indicating food would stimulate the caudate nucleus, the region of the
brain associated with anticipation of things we enjoy.

The caudate in dogs also increased activity when the smell of a familiar
person was introduced or upon the dogs owner reentering the room. Many of the
same things that activate the human caudate act the same way in canines. The
caudate is so predictable in humans it can predict preferences in food.
Scientists refer to this similarity between human and canine brain activity a
functional homology.

### **2. Dogs Read Out Moods With Voice Detection

**

Earlier this year researchers released a study that found dogs read our moods
by deciphering voices in a little part of their brain. 11 dogs were trained to
sit inside M.R.I. scanners for 10 minutes while they listened to 200 dog,
people, and environmental noises. Just as with humans the dogs were found to
have a small set of neurons that lit up strongest when they heard the voice of
their own species.

They also found that humans and dogs process emotional noise data the same
way. The primary auditory cortex was activated more when a happy sample was
played more than a sad sound in both species. The study suggests that both
humans and dogs this part of the brain is adept at understanding the different
subtleties in voice tones.

> "Like people, dogs use simple acoustic parameters to extract out the
feelings from a sound," Andics says. "For instance, when you laugh, 'Ha ha
ha,' it has short, quick pieces. But if you make the pieces longer, 'Haaaa,
haaaa, haaaa,' it starts to sound like crying or whining. This is what people
— and dogs — pay attention to." -Attila Andics; MTA-ELTE

### **3. Dogs Can Recognize Generosity & Act Accordingly

**

In 2017 a study was published on dogs being able to recognize selfish vs.
generous behavior. Researchers in this study observed as the dog would sit
leashed by his owner in a room with two other strangers. The strangers were
both given a bowl of smelly food which contained sausage and cereal. A third
person would enter the room, acting as a beggar, she would go up to the first
stranger asking for some food. He would say "NO" in a loud stern voice and
shoo her away with his arm.

This first person would then went to the other person for food. This second
stranger would say OK in a nice sounding voice and place a bit of food in the
beggars mouth. The beggar would then leave the room and after a few minuted
the dogs owner would untie their canine and let him do as he chooses. Over two
thirds of the time the dog would go right up to the nicer stranger who shared
their food with the beggar.

### **4. Research Suggests Dogs Feel Empathy**

In June of 2012 there was a study released on empathy in dogs. 18 dogs varying
in age and breed were exposed to four separate 20 second conditions where the
dogs owner or a stranger hummed, spoke in a casual manner, or pretended to
cry. None of the dogs responded to the humans who were just talking and a few
responded to the humming.

Most of the dogs approached and touched the human as they were pretending to
cry. The study found that the dogs approaching the humans who were crying did
so in a submissive manner consistent with empathic concern. No preference was
found in regards to which person the dog approached, the stranger or the
owner. The study concluded that they were responding to the emotion, not their
own needs.

> The dogs approached whoever was crying regardless of their identity. Thus
they were responding to the person's emotion, not their own needs, which is
suggestive of empathic-like comfort-offering behavior." -Jennifer Mayor;
University of London

### **5. Do Dogs Feel Guilt & Shame?**

Scientists said earlier this year that dog's do not feel shame or guilt. We
all know the look, ears back and head cowered. A researcher at Barnard College
in New York City videotaped 14 dogs in a series of trials to gauge their
reaction when their owner left the room after telling them not to eat a treat.

When owners returned they found that regardless of whether the dog ate the
treat or not the dogs responded in the same way when their owner scolded them.
It wasn't guilt that prompted the look but a direct reaction to the scolding
from their owner. The researcher said she doesn't necessarily know that dog's
can't feel guilt, just that the 'guilty look' isn't an indication of it.

### **6. Dogs Exhibit Jealousy & Envy**

In 2008 scientists at the University of Vienna, Austria tested 43 dogs to see
if they found evidence of jealousy or envy. The dogs were all trained to shake
paws so the researchers would ask each of them to shake. All of the dogs were
performing well until they noticed that some of the other dogs were being
rewarded more handsomely with treats.

The dogs who did not receive a treat for their paw started performing much
worse, only obeying 13 out of 30 times. They were also exhibiting stress
behaviors such as licking or scratching themselves. They were showing
unhappiness at the unfair situation.

> "The fate of a wolf or coyote pack can really hang on whether an individual
pulls its weight, these animals learn not to tolerate unfairness." - Marc
Bekoff; University of Colorado

### **7. Research Has Found That Dogs Can Laugh

**

Apparently dogs do laugh. The sound of a dog laugh is somewhat like a pant to
the human ear. Patricia Simonet studied dogs' reponses while she played back
an audio recording of another dog laughing.

When the dogs heard the sound and were tested individually they would go and
pick up a toy and do the playbow pose. She tested the same dogs on growls,
whines, and barks. When puppies heard the growling they would pee on the
floor. She also found that playing the dog laugh to a stressed out dog could
calm him down rather than exciting him.

### **8. Dogs Can Be Optimists/Pessimists**

Research found that some dogs who exhibit separation anxiety might be affected
by negative emotional states like pessimism. The study was conducted at the
UK's Bristol University. 24 dogs who had recently entered an animal shelter
were studied. They would first teach each of the dogs for separation anxiety
by placing the animal inside of a room alone for 20 minutes.

The next day they would repeat this behavior and record the dogs behavior. The
ones who had separation anxiety would bark, scratch at the door, and jump on
furniture. These same 24 dogs were also given food bowls in specific areas of
a room, on one side they could always expect it to be full, and on the other
it would be empty. This was repeated until the dogs knew what to expect.

The researchers then started placing additional bowls in ambiguous places in
the room. The dogs that immediately ran to the new food bowl were considered
optimistic and the dogs who didn't approach the new bowl were the pessimistic
ones. The dogs who were pessimists when it came to the food bowl were the ones
who expressed more separation anxiety behaviors.

Here's a similar study that was conducted earlier this year at the University
of Sydney:

### Dogs Really Are Mans Best Friend

We often wonder why we feel so close to our dogs, why there seems to be some
sort of mutual understanding. It's a relationship that has been ongoing for
thousands of years.

The relationship has always been mutually beneficial; they protect us and help
us hunt while we provide them with food and shelter. Perhaps working side by
side with the canine for so long has taught us how to communicate with one
another in a way we have yet to fully understand.

I think we can all agree that the studies show that dogs do in fact love us -
maybe more than we ever expected.

So what do you say when someone asks you if dogs have feelings? I find it a
bit hard to believe that anyone whose owned a dog would say no. I often
wondered if I was over estimating my dogs emotional intelligence, but now I
think we've just begun to understand how emotionally complex they really are.

![do dogs have feelings](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-

content/uploads/2014/07/dogfeelings.jpg)

Do dogs have feelings? I have no doubt in my mind they do.

### Recommended Reading

        
                  * ![Study Finds That Dogs Judge Humans For Being Rude](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/eyeye-150x150.png)Study Finds That Dogs Judge Humans For Being Rude
          * ![Study Finds Kids Report More Satisfaction With Pets Over Siblings](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/snowdogkid-150x150.png)Study Finds Kids Report More Satisfaction With Pets Over Siblings
          * ![Is Your Dog Sneaky? Study Finds Dogs Use Deception on Humans](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/play-150x150.png)Is Your Dog Sneaky? Study Finds Dogs Use Deception on Humans
          * ![Jealousy In Dogs: Just Like Humans New Study Suggests](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/pugwhut-150x150.png)Jealousy In Dogs: Just Like Humans New Study Suggests
        

205shares

        
                  * Pinterest
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
        

Tagged With: science & research Filed Under: Research

#### Let's Keep In Touch

![](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/lillaika.png)Join
our free monthly newsletter for the latest news, tips & deals.  
Follow us on Facebook & Pinterest for the latest posts and updates.

« Kong Wobbler Review: Interactive Dog Toy & Food Dispenser

Help Animal Shelters Without Leaving Home »

### Comments

        
                  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a70448b923b43a46b59b5740097a89b?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Joanne Frame says
        

September 5, 2014 at 6:19 pm

Interesting selection of studies - thankyou 🙂

Reply

        
                  2. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4e718832c9ae869d352ef67847262789?s=48&d=mm&r=g)sage says
        

September 11, 2014 at 12:20 am

I can see these emotions in Sage. It was nice to read the studies that
affirmed what I suspected.

Reply

        
                  3. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6d36e2ef2310032c04693a0187217a71?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Beth_Daily_Dog_Tag says
        

September 11, 2014 at 4:18 am

This is very interesting! I'll have to see if I can tell when my dogs are
laughing!

Reply

        
                  4. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c9797859042bf2ba3fe2f96e0ea114c9?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Elaine says
        

September 15, 2014 at 10:27 pm

These are all such fascinating studies. It's funny how dogs do understand
guilt to some degree. On the rare occasions Haley would get into some trouble
when I was away from home, I always knew from the moment I would open the
door. If she wasn't standing there to greet me, she was feeling guilty about
some trouble she had gotten into, even if hours had passed. They may not
understand discipline after the fact, but there sure is something going on
with feelings of guilt, lol. Great article!

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2b6c4f646ce43bf157db5e1694a7c6db?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Jen Gabbard says
        

September 16, 2014 at 2:13 am

Yeah I have mixed feelings about the guilt study. Even though there's no
evidence that they're feeling guilt I can't help but feel like my dog Laika
definitely does even without punishment.

Reply

        
                  5. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7ef44fb1a723828ab3bb7e88c5a15e53?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Will says
        

September 16, 2014 at 3:53 am

I love keeping up to date on the latest in canine science, so thanks for
providing these summaries and links. I've already read a few of them, but lots
more good stuff to go through.

Reply

        
                  6. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e3dfe689864033df2a47154e100b1958?s=48&d=mm&r=g)SheSpeaksBark says
        

September 16, 2014 at 5:47 am

I love all the studies you've cited- gives me a lot of great reading to do!
After working in direct contact with hundreds of dogs over the years, I firmly
believe that our dogs have feelings, much more complex than we humans give
them credit for.

Reply

        
                  7. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3bce62dfbe48af63d74cdc116211fad1?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Who Rescued Who? says
        

March 3, 2015 at 9:28 pm

Very fascinating article!

Reply

        
                  8. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4274031bc1f60a3cb6d0d98efb7d0b6d?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Catherine Armato, Dogs Luv Us says
        

May 12, 2015 at 6:00 pm

Wow, Fascinating post! I loved reading this. I never had any doubt about my
dogs having emotions & feelings, thanks for providing the science to back that
up! Sharing widely!

Reply

        
                  9. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a1b6c785c554bb056b472af9d9babe8f?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Lauren Miller says
        

May 12, 2015 at 7:20 pm

Such a great article! I love all the different studies! So interesting! 😀

Reply

        
                  10. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f92d75211728615c6c58086ebaacf6da?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Jeannie fusting says
        

May 9, 2017 at 4:03 pm

That's is why I cannot understand humans who do not treat their dogs with the
love and respect they deserve! Chaining them, leaving them outside in the heat
and cold, no care,etc.! Why have the animal?

Reply

        
                  11. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7edd6a9e5c89cb13dbf44590a8786aa3?s=48&d=mm&r=g)Rose says
        

May 26, 2019 at 7:25 am

Yes.They do.I saw my dog's face everytime I have to leave.He has a face like
someone who attends a funeral.The eyes are reddish.

Reply

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is
processed.

![](https://www.puppyleaks.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/jg3.png)

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

#### Popular Posts

        
                  * 33 Easy Ways to Keep Your Dog Busy Indoors
          * How To Increase Your Dogs Impulse Control
          * 59 Simple Life Hacks for Dog Owners
          * 39 Healthy Treats You Can Stuff in a Kong
          * 26 Simple Boredom Busters for Dogs
          * 25 Easy Dog Treat Recipes: 5 Ingredients or Less
          * 13 Steps to Improve Your Dog's Recall
        

#### Categories

Categories Select Category Dog Articles Dog Training Health Latest Dog News
Opinion Research Roundups Shelters & Rescue Videos & Photos Why Do Dogs

#### Follow Us

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

#### Affiliate Disclosure

Puppy Leaks is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an
affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn
advertising fees by advertising and linking to Amazon.com

© Copyright Puppy Leaks; All Rights Reserved · Contact * Disclosure *
Resources * Privacy Policy * Archives

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

