

Skip To Main Content

# CrimeSolutions.gov

Skip To Main Content

Home | Help | Contact Us | Site Map | Glossary

Skip To Main Content

Search Site Advanced Search

Skip To Main Content

Skip To Main Content

  * Topics A-Z
  * Corrections & Reentry
    * Community Corrections
    * Inmate Programs & Treatment
    * Recidivism
    * Reentry/Release
  * Courts
    * Diversion
    * Sentencing & Sanctions
    * Specialized & Problem Solving Courts
  * Crime & Crime Prevention
    * Community Crime Prevention Strategies
    * Gangs
    * Justice Systems
    * Property Crime 
    * Violent Crime
  * Drugs & Substance Abuse
    * Drug & Alcohol Crime & Offenses
    * Prevention & Education 
    * Treatment
  * Juveniles
    * Child Protection/Health 
    * Children Exposed to Violence
    * Delinquency Prevention
    * Risk & Protective Factors
    * Schools
    * Special Populations
  * Law Enforcement
    * Equipment
    * Information System
    * Policing Strategies
  * Technology & Forensics
    * Forensics/Evidence
    * Justice Information Systems
    * Technologies
  * Victims & Victimization
    * Crime Victimization
    * Crisis Intervention/ Response
    * Health & Mental Health

Skip To Main Content **Additional Resources:**

  * Learn more about the Evidence Ratings
  * Find out how to Nominate a Program for review
  * See our Glossary of terms and definitions
  * Access our FAQs
  * Get notified when new program reviews are added

Skip To Main Content

A A A

Home > Practices > Street-Level Drug Law Enforcement

# Practice Profile

## Street-Level Drug Law Enforcement

**Evidence Ratings for Outcomes:**  
![Promising - One Meta-Analysis](images/promising_small.jpg) | Crime  &
Delinquency - Drug and alcohol offenses  
---|---  
![Promising - One Meta-Analysis](images/promising_small.jpg) | Crime &
Delinquency - Violent offenses  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | Crime &
Delinquency - Property offenses  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | Crime &
Delinquency - Public order offenses  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | Crime &
Delinquency - Multiple crime/offense types

Practice Description

**Practice Goals/Practice Theory**  
Street-level drug law enforcement practices are policing strategies that aim
to reduce or prevent illicit drug use, drug dealing, and associated problems
at drug-dealing locations.

Policing strategies are sometimes thought of as falling into four categories:
standard  
policing, community policing, problem-oriented policing, and hot spots
policing. These categories are based on the Weisburd and Eck (2004) conceptual
model of law enforcement strategies, which classifies strategies based on the
diversity of interventions used, and the level of focus. The diversity of
interventions refers to the number of different approaches used to address the
problem, including those carried out by the police as well as other partners
who can play a key role in addressing community problems. For example, a
problem-oriented-partnership-policing approach could include a law
enforcement-housing services collaboration in which inspectors clean up
problem areas and buildings in high-crime areas. Strategies that rely on a
more diverse set of tactics are thought to be more effective than those that
rely on a smaller number of tactics. The level of focus refers to the extent
to which the police rely on generic approaches or those that are focused on
certain people, places, times, or specific offense types. Focused
interventions are thought to be more effective than more generic approaches. A
visual representation of these two dimensions for classifying policing
strategies can be found in Weisburd and Eck (2004, 45).

* * *

**Practice Components**  
_Standard policing_ approaches traditionally rely on unfocused strategies such
as routine police patrols, calls for service, and arrests. Street-level, drug
law enforcement strategies typically require greater diversity and focus;
therefore, they generally fall within the three remaining categories:
community-wide approaches, problem-oriented-partnership approaches, and hot
spots policing. These approaches are classified as having low diversity of
interventions and a low degree of focus.  
__  
_Community-wide policing_ approaches include a diverse array of intervention
tactics that rely on police-community stakeholder partnerships as well as
partnerships between police and other service agencies. Intervention services
are targeted at a broader neighborhood rather than to a specific high-crime
area and seek to improve police-community relations, build neighborhood
cohesion, and increase trust in police. Community members work with police to
develop, implement, and maintain drug law enforcement activities in the
neighborhood. These approaches are classified as having high diversity of
interventions and a low degree of focus.

_Hot spots policing_ involves traditional policing activities focused on hot
spots of crime activity. Through this approach, law enforcement agencies can
focus limited resources in areas where crime is most likely to occur. The
appeal of focusing limited resources on a small number of high-crime areas is
based on the belief that if crime can be prevented at these hot spots, then
total crime across the city might also be reduced. Examples of tactics used
are police raids on suspected drug houses, police crackdowns in high-crime
areas, bust-buy operations, street sweeps, saturated patrol, curfew and
truancy enforcement, and warrant servicing. These approaches are classified as
having a low diversity of interventions and a high degree of focus.

_Problem-oriented -partnership policing _approaches focus on high-crime areas
and rely on agencies and partnerships outside of law enforcement-such as
housing and building inspectors, local businesses, and community members-to
provide services in support of crime prevention. Examples of multiagency
approaches include building inspection crackdowns at high-crime locations,
collaborative efforts to improve problem areas, and drug market identification
using geographic information-systems data. These types of strategies usually
stress the importance of police efforts to analyze drug use activity and
associated problems (such as disorder, violence, and fear of crime) and the
use of partnerships and collaborations. These approaches are classified as
having a high diversity of interventions and a high degree of focus.

## Meta-Analysis Outcomes

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

![Promising - One Meta-Analysis](images/promising_small.jpg) | **Crime &
Delinquency - Drug and alcohol offenses**  
Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts (2006) examined the results from four studies
and found that street-level, drug law enforcement practices had a significant
impact on drug-related calls for service (odds ratio=1.33). This means that
areas targeted by street-level, drug law enforcement strategies were less
likely to report drug-related calls for service compared with comparison
areas.  
---|---  
![Promising - One Meta-Analysis](images/promising_small.jpg) | **Crime &
Delinquency - Violent offenses**  
Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts (2006) examined the results from eight studies
and found that street-level, drug law enforcement practices had a significant
impact on offenses against persons (odds ratio=1.06). This means that targeted
areas were less likely to have offenses committed against persons compared
with comparison areas.  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | **Crime &
Delinquency - Property offenses**  
Aggregating the results from seven studies, Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts
(2006) found that street-level drug law enforcement practices had no
significant impact on property offenses.  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | **Crime &
Delinquency - Public order offenses**  
Aggregating the results from three studies, Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts
(2006) found that street-level, drug law enforcement practices had no
significant impact on public order calls for service.  
![No Effects - One Meta-Analysis](images/ineffective_small.jpg) | **Crime &
Delinquency - Multiple crime/offense types**  
Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts (2006) examined the results from five studies
and found that street-level drug law enforcement practices had no significant
impact on total offenses.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Meta-Analysis Methodology

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

## **Meta-Analysis Snapshot**

| **Literature Coverage Dates** | **Number of Studies** | **Number of Study
Participants**  
**Meta-Analysis 1** | 1970 - 1999| 14| 0

**Meta-Analysis 1**  
Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts (2006) conducted a meta-analysis of street-
level, law enforcement practices targeting street-level drug markets. The
literature search included all available published and unpublished studies of
policing interventions implemented to reduce or prevent illegal drug use, drug
dealing, and the associated problems at drug-dealing places.

Studies were included in the meta-analysis if they targeted street-level drug
problems, were police-led, reported changes in outcome measures by place
rather than by person, were evaluated using pre-posttests with the comparison
group, and had enough data to calculate an effect size. A total of 14 studies
met these criteria.

Policing approaches analyzed in the studies were separated into three
categories: hot spots policing (four studies), problem-oriented-partnership
policing with a geographic focus (five studies), and community-wide policing
(five studies). Three studies used random assignment to conditions, three
studies used statistical-matching procedures, and the remaining eight studies
used nonequivalent group designs. Comparison areas received unfocused law
enforcement efforts. Four of the studies examined policing approaches
implemented before 1990, six studies examined strategies implemented between
1990 and 1994, and four studies looked at strategies implemented between 1995
and 1999.

The authors reported effect sizes as odds ratios and conducted a random
effects analysis. To measure the impact of street-level, drug law enforcement,
the authors examined effects on drug-related calls for service, offenses
against persons, property offenses, public-order-related calls for service,
and on total offenses.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Cost

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

There is no cost information available for this practice.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Other Information

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

Mazerolle, Soole, and Rombouts (2006) conducted additional tests—called
moderator analyses—to examine the individual impacts of problem-
oriented–partnership policing, community-wide policing, and hot spots policing
on outcome measures. The authors found that there were no significant
differences between the three street-level, drug law enforcement strategies
when looking at offenses against persons and property crime. However, it
appeared that the problem-oriented–partnership approach was more effective
than the other two approaches in dealing with drug offenses, drug-related
calls for service, and overall total offenses. Based on their review of
street-level, law enforcement strategies, the authors concluded that
collaborative, community-wide-policing efforts and building better law
enforcement–community relations are more effective than enforcement-only
approaches in dealing with drug and drug-related offenses.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Evidence-Base (Meta-Analyses Reviewed)

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

These sources were used in the development of the practice profile:

**Meta-Analysis 1**  
Mazerolle, Lorraine, David W. Soole, and Sacha Rombouts. 2006. "Street-level
Drug Law Enforcement: A Meta-Analytical Review." _Journal of Experimental
Criminology_ 2(4):409-35.  
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11292-006-9017-6

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Additional References

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

These sources were used in the development of the practice profile:

Mazerolle, Lorraine Green. 2005. _A Systematic Review of Drug Law Enforcement
Strategies_. Canberra, Australia: Turning Point Alcohol and Drug Centre.  
http://faculty.uml.edu/jbyrne/44.590/2005-02-mazerolle.pdf

Mazerolle, Lorraine, David W. Soole, and Sacha Rombouts. 2007. "Street-Level
Drug Law Enforcement: A Meta-Analytic Review." _Campbell Systematic Reviews_
3(2).  
http://www.campbellcollaboration.org/lib/project/25/

Weisburd, David, and John E. Eck. 2004. "What Can Police Do to Reduce Crime,
Disorder, and Fear?" _The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science_ 593:43-65.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

## Related Programs

![top border](images/2_accord_top.jpg)

Following are CrimeSolutions.gov-rated programs that are related to this
practice:

**Minneapolis (MN) Hot Spots Experiment** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
A program that increased police presence in crime “hot spots” to reduce
criminal activity in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The program is rated Effective.
In hot spots that did not receive intensified police patrols, there was a
greater increase in citizen calls to police than in the experimental
locations. There also was less observed disorder at the experimental sites.

**San Diego (Calif.) Drug Abatement Response Team (DART)** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
This program is designed to reduce drug dealing at residential rental
properties by encouraging improved property management practices. The program
is rated Effective. Properties that received the full intervention (letter
from police department, meeting with police and code enforcement, and
threatened nuisance abatement) experienced a significant reduction in crime at
rental properties with drug problems and more drug offender evictions.

**Nashville (Tenn.) Drug Market Intervention** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A policing program that used community mobilization, strategic planning, and
pulling levers notifications to reduce drug dealing in a high-crime area. The
program is rated Promising. As a result of the intervention, postintervention
drug crime incidents declined, and surveyed residents believed that street
drug markets were less of an issue after implementation. There was no
statistically significant evidence that the intervention impacted Type 1 UCR
offenses or calls for service.

**Specialized Multi Agency Response Team (SMART)** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
A drug-control program designed to reduce drug-related problems and improve
habitation conditions at targeted sites. The program is rated Effective. Half
the treatment sites experienced improvements in field contacts or arrests.
There were reductions in the number of individuals contacted or arrested at
the same SMART site; in the number of persons displaced to a catchment area
address; and in the number of new individuals attracted to a site (suggesting
a small net diffusion of benefits).

**Kansas City (MO) Police Department Street Narcotics Unit** ![Promising -

One study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A special police unit developed to conduct raids of crack houses to reduce
crack-related crime and improve public order in Kansas City, Missouri. The
program is rated Promising. There were fewer calls for service and reported
offenses for the experimental group. The Follow-up effects were sustained for
both outcomes for about 2 weeks after the experiment ended.

**Operation Safe Streets (Philadelphia, Pa.)** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A problem-oriented policing program targeted at high-crime areas and drug
corners to prevent violent and drug-related crime. The program is rated
Promising. Localized analysis of the intervention areas found reductions in
violent and drug crime rates. Analysis on the adjoining areas suggests the
intervention caused some spatial diffusion of benefits for violent and drug
crime displacement. There were no statistically significant effects on
citywide homicides, violent or drug crime rates.

**Weed and Seed (Miami, Fla.)** ![No Effects - One

study](images/ineffective_small.jpg)  
This is a community-based approach to reducing and preventing crime while
revitalizing the community. The program is rated No Effect. There was no
significant reduction in violent offenses in the Liberty City treatment area
after the crackdown, but reductions were observed in the control and
displacement catchment (buffer) areas.

**Dallas (Texas) Anti-Gang Initiative** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A policing initiative that used intensive patrol and enforcement of curfew and
truancy ordinances to reduce gang-related activity and violence among
juveniles in Dallas, Texas. The program is rated Promising. There was a
statistically significant decrease in violent gang-related offenses. There
were no statistically significant reductions in gang-related offenses reported
to police.

**Hot Spots Policing (Lowell, Mass.)** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
A crime-reduction policing strategy that uses a disorder policing approach to
concentrate on improving physical and social order in high-crime locations in
Lowell, Mass. The program is rated Effective. There was a statistically
significant reduction of the total number of calls for service in the
treatment areas relative to the control. Observed disorder was alleviated and
calls for service were not significantly displaced into surrounding treatment
areas.

**Hot Spots Policing (Jacksonville, FL)** ![No Effects - One

study](images/ineffective_small.jpg)  
A geographically focused policing strategy intended to reduce violent crime in
high-crime areas using problem-oriented policing and directed patrol
techniques. The program is rated No Effects. There was a significant reduction
in nondomestic violent crime (i.e., street violence) in hot spots that were
assigned to the problem-oriented policing condition, but no significant
reductions in violent crime, property crime, and calls for service.

**Drug Market Analysis Program (Jersey City, NJ)** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A "hot spots" policing program targeting identified drug activity locations to
reduce public disorder by engaging local residents and business owners and
applying pressure via crackdowns. The program is rated Promising. There was no
significant difference between the experimental and control locations on
violence and property offenses; but, there were reductions in disorder and
narcotics offenses and fewer calls for service for some measures in the
treatment catchment areas.

**Problem-Oriented Policing in Violent Crime Places (Jersey City, NJ)**
![Promising - One study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
The program is a focused policing strategy intended to reduce violent crime in
high-crime locations through the modification of specific characteristics and
situations that promote violence. The program is rated Promising. The citizen
calls for service were significantly reduced at three of the five treatment
locations. Reported criminal incidents were significantly reduced at two of
the treatment places. Social and physical disorder were alleviated 91 percent.

**Police Foot Patrol–Philadelphia 2009** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
This program used a foot patrol to reduce violent crime in hot spots in
Philadelphia, Pa. It involved having rookie officers patrol areas (an average
of 1.3 miles of streets) during two shifts per day. This program is rated
Effective. There were significant reductions in reported violent crime,
although the effect seemed to fade once officers were removed from their
targeted beats.

**Safe Street Teams (Boston, MA)** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A place-based, problem-oriented policing strategy implemented by the Boston
(Massachusetts) Police Department in response to a sudden increase in violent
crimes. The program is rated Promising. The results showed that the
intervention had significant reductions in total violent index crimes,
robberies, and aggravated assaults over the 10-year study period; however,
there were no significant reductions in homicides and sexual assaults.

**Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy (CAPS)** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
The program brings police, local government agencies, and the community
together to prioritize problems and prevention efforts in five Chicago
neighborhoods. The program is rated Promising. The study found that in close
to half of the target beats, there was a reduction in crime versus what was
found in comparison beats. However, the results also showed that there were
some unsuccessful cases where the crime rate in the intervention increased
versus the comparison beat.

**Operation Impact (Newark, New Jersey)** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A saturation foot-patrol initiative implemented in Newark, New Jersey, in
2008. The program is rated Promising. The intervention reduced overall
violence, aggravated assault, and shootings in the targeted area. Evidence for
a reduction in murder rates was less clear and The initiative does not appear
to have influenced the number of robberies.

**High Point Drug Market Intervention** ![Effective - One

study](images/effective_small.jpg)  
A problem-oriented policing program that aims to eliminate overt drug markets
and the problems associated with them through a deterrence-based, pulling-
levers framework. The program is rated Effective. The Intervention had a
statistically significant impact on reducing violent incidents in the target
areas.

**Rockford Pulling Levers Drug Market Intervention** ![Promising - One

study](images/promising_small.jpg)  
A problem-oriented policing strategy that aims to combat drug markets and the
problems associated with them, in a high- crime neighborhood, through a
deterrence-based, pulling levers framework. The program is rated Promising.
The program was shown to significantly reduce nonviolent offenses in the
target area, but not violent offenses.

![bottom border](images/2_accord_bttm.jpg)

Hidden Button

Practice Snapshot

## **Settings:** High Crime Neighborhoods/Hot Spots

**Practice Type:** Alcohol and Drug Prevention, Community and Problem Oriented
Policing, Community Awareness/Mobilization, General deterrence, Hot Spots
Policing, Situational Crime Prevention, Specific deterrence, Violence
Prevention, Weed and Seed Programs

**Unit of Analysis:** Places

Skip To Main ContentHome | Help | Contact Us | Site Map | All Programs &
Practices | Topics | About CrimeSolutions.gov | Resources | FAQs | Nominate  
DOJ | OJP | NIJ | FOIA | Accessibility | Privacy Policy | Legal Policies and
Disclaimers | USA.gov

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

