

Menu

# Something Swedish

##

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/swedennewyorkbannernew1.png)

# Sundays in Sweden: Söndagar i Sverige

January 15, 2012 by megalagom 4 Comments

Walking the streets of Sweden feels like a different place on Sundays. All the
shops are closed aside from food stores, restaurants, and the mall. The
streets are empty and quiet. Coming from a big city I'm still adjusting to
this part of Swedish life. The part where everyone slows down. I do enjoy it,
its relaxing and peaceful but certainly not what I'm used to. Most stores
close early on Saturdays as well, and many people take a month long vacation
in July. There is certainly a bit of inconvenience to this but once adjusted
(and working!) I'm sure I'll appreciate it. People know when to take a break
here, in fact they take a " **fika** ," which translates into coffee break but
means a bit more than that. **Fika** is more of a social activity, its an
important part of the day to sit down with friends or co-workers to take a
break and have some coffee along with sweet delicious pastries. _Pastries!_
That brings me full circle back to the Swedish Sundays, when the bakery around
the corner from us, Östras Bröd, teases us by baking all day long while being
closed. The sweet aroma wafts into our apartment and mocks us! What I would do
for a Wienerbröd or Semla!

Today we ventured to the mall to do a little bit of shopping, our target:
Biltema. A store that started based around car _[bil!]_ parts and such that
has extended to (cheaper) housewares and more. Being that I have been here for
only almost a month, I am still rebuilding my crafting supplies and always
finding new things we can use around our apartment! (Some more useful than
others) Our outing was a success, coming home and unpacking our bags felt like
Christmas! I managed to find two things that I was going to ask my brother to
mail to me from home (The prices in other stores were way too high). I 'll
have to come up with different items for my first care package from the U.S.,
_**any ideas?**_

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/01/img_09152.jpg?w=820)

60.128161 18.643501

Advertisements

### Rate this:

### Share this:

  * Tweet
  *     * ![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/pidgets/pinit_fg_en_rect_gray_20.png)
  *     * Email
  * Share on Tumblr
  *     * Print
  * 

### Like this:

Like Loading...

### _Related_

Categories: Shopping & Money, Sweden | Tags: Culture, Food, Sunday, Sweden |
Permalink.

### 4 thoughts on " Sundays in Sweden: Söndagar i Sverige"

Leave a comment

  1. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/930d522fb1be5485685c46e6c92b2c05?s=65&d=identicon&r=G)

WanderingSwede  
January 17, 2012 at 12:54 pm

Hi, thanks for commenting on my blog, I'd figure I'd check yours out too!

I have a question though - just where in Sweden do you live?! Your quote "All
the shops are closed aside from food stores, restaurants, and the mall. The
streets are empty and quiet" definitely rules out Stockholm!

We were in London the weekend before Christmas, and were extremely annoyed by
the fact that the stores that were even open, opened at noon at the earliest…
In Stockholm the store hours are usually the same on a Sunday as a Saturday,
except for maybe an hour in the evening.

So, if you get sick of calm Sundays - head to the capital!

Cheers!

Reply

  1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/acffb0501d8205d586b31bee58ae6ec3?s=65&d=identicon&r=G)

megalagom  
January 17, 2012 at 1:38 pm

Certainly not Stockholm! The capital (Or any of the larger cities, Goteborg,
Malmo?) of any country is always different than the rest, I would assume! We
are in a smaller town in southern Sweden. I still haven't been to Stockholm
yet but looking forward to it. I know my hubby would rather live in a medium
sized-larger city, but I am content for the time being.

Reply

  1. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e2cc9d9a691b758a0b197f5c8e571262?s=65&d=identicon&r=G)

Susan  
January 17, 2012 at 11:20 pm

I am absolutely enjoying your blog and a bit of vicarious living through your
words. I can see the pilot for a sit-com in your future! Keep on living,
loving and writing about it all. Congrats on your first month anniversary
abroad.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/acffb0501d8205d586b31bee58ae6ec3?s=65&d=identicon&r=G)
    

megalagom  
January 17, 2012 at 11:27 pm

Thank you Susan! Glad you like it! I hope you continue reading, because I plan
to keep on posting!

Reply

### Comments, Feedback, Questions, and Answers are Welcome Here! Cancel reply

Enter your comment here...

Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:

  *     *       *         *           * 

![Gravatar](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

Email (required) (Address never made public)

Name (required)

Website

![WordPress.com

Logo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Google

photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Google account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Twitter

picture](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Facebook

photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( Log Out / Change )

Cancel

Connecting to %s

Notify me of new comments via email.

Notify me of new posts via email.

# Post navigation

<- Previous Post

Next Post ->

Search for:

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/aboutt.png)

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/linkst.png)

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/lagomt.png)

![](https://somethingswedish.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/blogst.png)

### Blog Stats

  * 703,643 hits

Join 666 other followers

Subscribe

### As Time Goes By

As Time Goes By Select Month April 2016 (1) February 2016 (1) December 2015
(1) September 2015 (1) June 2015 (1) May 2015 (5) April 2015 (1) February 2015
(1) January 2015 (3) November 2014 (1) September 2014 (1) June 2014 (2) May
2014 (2) April 2014 (1) January 2014 (4) December 2013 (4) October 2013 (2)
September 2013 (5) August 2013 (4) July 2013 (2) June 2013 (5) May 2013 (5)
April 2013 (2) March 2013 (3) February 2013 (3) January 2013 (5) December 2012
(6) November 2012 (5) October 2012 (5) September 2012 (5) August 2012 (6) July
2012 (1) June 2012 (10) May 2012 (12) April 2012 (11) March 2012 (16) February
2012 (20) January 2012 (18)

### Experiencing

  * Adjusting & Differences (31) 
  * American in Sweden (46) 
  * Blogging (13) 
  * Cooking (14) 
  * Cultures & Traditions (1) 
  * Entertainment (23) 
  * Family (11) 
  * Featured (16) 
  * Food & Drinks (29) 
  * Halmstad (25) 
  * Holidays (13) 
  * Holidays, Cultures & Traditions (37) 
  * Home (11) 
  * Inspiration (11) 
  * Language (36) 
  * News (2) 
  * Photography (17) 
  * Reading & Writing (6) 
  * Shopping & Money (10) 
  * Studying in Sweden (1) 
  * Sweden (157) 
  * Travel (27) 
  * Working in Sweden (9) 

### Facebook Fun

> Facebook Fun

### Recent Posts

  * Winter in Sweden is SVÅR!
  * Voting Abroad
  * Transcript Headache
  * Finding Sweden in New York City
  * International Midsummer Celebrations
  * Halmstad Pride 2015
  * New Swedish Defense System

### Sweets! (Swedish Tweets!)

  * A video of Swedish man scaring off a charging bear simply by roaring: youtube.com/watch?v=CcokEo… - 4 years ago
  * Well, that was fun. Back to barely using twitter for the next 364 days #eurovision2015 - 4 years ago
  * Congratulations #sweden #swe #swedenforthewin #eurovision2015 - 4 years ago

Follow @SomethinSwedish

###

  * Register
  * Log in
  * Entries RSS
  * Comments RSS
  * WordPress.com

(c) All photographs on SomethingSwedish.wordpress.com are taken by Megalagom
and belong to Megalagom unless otherwise specified.

Advertisements

Blog at WordPress.com.

Top

Post to

Cancel

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/mu-plugins/post-

flair/sharing/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website,
you agree to their use.  
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

%d bloggers like this:

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

