

  * Cooking

  * Science

  * Industry

  * Growing

  * Policy

  * Advocacy

  * Medical

  * Culture

  * Events

  * _Platform Privacy_

  * _Privacy Settings_

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxNjk0Nzg0NDk3Mzk0OTkw/navbar.png)

  * Cooking
  * Science
  * Industry
  * Growing
  * Policy
  * Advocacy
  * Medical
  * Culture
  * Events

  *     *       *         * 

![](https://theweedblog.com/.image/c_fit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_700/MTYwMzUwNzc1OTUwNzEzOTM1/large.png)

  * ![Logo](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxNjk0Nzg0NDk3Mzk0OTkw/navbar.png)
  * Cooking
  * Science
  * Industry
  * Growing
  * Policy
  * Advocacy
  * Medical
  * Culture
  * Events

# Why Is Alcohol Legal But Not Marijuana?

It’s no secret that history repeats itself, it’s just not always obvious while
it’s actually happening.

Author:

    
    
    TheWeedBlog
    

Publish date:

    
    
    Mar 24, 2017
    

Updated on

    
    
    Mar 26, 2019
    

  *     *       * 

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/t_share/MTYyODMyODQ4NTU2OTI2ODE3/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

Case in point: America's seemingly endless war on marijuana can trace its
roots directly to the prohibition era, which was a spectacular disaster in
every way. This is a topic that TWB has posted about before, and also one that
is certainly tied to why we, as an industry, call this plant cannabis and not
marijuana.

But, do you ever wonder why alcohol (one of the most lethal, destructive, and
addictive substances in the world) is perfectly legal and marijuana isn't? For
answers, it's helpful to look back on America's failed experiment with alcohol
prohibition (spoiler alert: prohibition didn't stop people from drinking!).

**Prohibition: The Criminalization of Alcohol**

Prohibition, which lasted from 1920 to 1933, was deemed "the noble
experiment." It was intended to reduce alcohol-related crime and corruption,
as well as improve health and hygiene in America. You have to remember, before
Alcoholics Anonymous was created in 1935, there were virtually zero successful
treatments for alcoholism. Essentially, alcohol addiction was a death
sentence.

Unfortunately, "the noble experiment" created anything but a noble, healthy
environment. Because people couldn't get alcohol legally, they started making
it themselves. A slew of health and hygiene issues ensued. People even died
from consuming homemade brews, or "bathtub" alcohol.

But that wasn't all. The illicit liquor trade created countless opportunities
for criminals, and as a result, jails and courthouses were overflowing with
so-called bootleggers. The public health and safety issues continued to get
worse and worse, and prohibition actually made alcohol abuse an even bigger
problem than it already was. Not only did people continue to drink, but they
were now drinking dangerous homemade booze sold by gangsters.

**The Criminalization of Marijuana**

​

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/t_share/MTYyODMyODQ4NTU3MDU3ODg5/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

Fast forward to 1937 and you're in for a big dose of deja vu. Harry Anslinger,
the first Federal Bureau of Narcotics commissioner, claimed that marijuana
could lead to insanity if it was used enough. Anslinger had no scientific data
to back up his claims, but his propaganda convinced the majority of the public
to side with him. Anslinger helped usher in the creation of the Marijuana Tax
Act of 1937, which effectively criminalized the possession and sale of
marijuana.

According to a 2016 report from the ACLU and Human Rights Watch, almost
137,000 people are behind bars on the grounds of simple drug possession.
Scores of Americans have been imprisoned for nonviolent marijuana offenses.
Prisons and courthouses are overflowing with people arrested for possession of
drugs, marijuana in particular. The parallels to the prohibition of alcohol
aren't exactly subtle, and yet the country has been reluctant to admit
Prohibition 2.0 has failed, spectacularly.

**The Consequences**

Marijuana is currently listed as a Schedule I drug, which means the only way
to access it in many cases is illegally. That's led to a thriving black market
for marijuana and other popular drugs. Despite the war on marijuana, millions
of Americans still consume the drug regularly.

We started this piece with a simple question, "Why is alcohol legal and
marijuana isn't?"

There is no good answer, no rational reason, no logical explanation for why
alcohol is perfectly legal and marijuana isn't. History repeats itself, but we
should learn from our past mistakes. Prohibition didn't work during the
Roaring 20s, and it won't work in the 21st century either.

Author Bio: Whitney Diedrich is a budtender and marketing specialist at
Greeley Gallery, a family owned and operated Portland dispensary. Since 2014,
Greeley Gallery has provided a safe and comfortable environment for customers
to get the information they need, and the highest quality cannabis products
available.

By

TheWeedBlog

  *     *       * 

#

![Related](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxODEwNDcyOTMxMTc0MDEz/section_header_art_xtrasmall_related.svg)

![Why Is Alcohol Legal But Not

Marijuana](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0NjAxNjI2NDIxMDg5/alcoholdanger.jpg)

Ending Marijuana Prohibition

## Why Is Alcohol Legal But Not Marijuana?

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMyOTIyNjQ1MjQzNDgw/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## Alcohol Prohibition Ended 80 Years Ago, Marijuana Prohibition Is Up

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMyODQzMTg4NDc5ODQx/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## Cannabis Is Not a Partisan Issue: Legalize It

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMzMTE4NjAzMDYwODI0/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

medical

## Why Marinol Is Not As Good As Real Marijuana

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMyOTQ4MTQ3MTM2MDg4/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## Rep. Blumenauer Endorses Marijuana Legalization, But Not Measure 80

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMyOTEwODM0MzQ1ODI1/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## Why I Support Marijuana Legalization And Regulation

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMyODc2MjA2MjM3NTM3/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## Marijuana Legalization Is Not Exactly ‘Inevitable’ In CA In 2016

![Image placeholder

title](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyODMzNTYyODYzNjc1MjMz/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

advocacy

## NH HB 1526 Would Decriminalize, Not Legalize, Marijuana Possession

  * Platform Privacy

(C) 2019 The Weed Blog

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

