

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

  * Comments & replies 
  * Public profile 
  * Account details 
  * Emails & marketing 

* * *

  * Membership 
  * Contributions 
  * Subscriptions 

* * *

  * Sign out 

Search

  * switch to the International edition 
  * switch to the UK edition 
  * switch to the US edition 
  * switch to the Australia edition 

current edition: International edition

  * News 
  * Opinion 
  * Sport 
  * Culture 
  * Lifestyle 

Show More __

  * __News
    * World news 
    * UK news 
    * Science 
    * Cities 
    * Global development 
    * Football 
    * Tech 
    * Business 
    * Environment 
    * Obituaries 
  * __Opinion
    * The Guardian view 
    * Columnists 
    * Cartoons 
    * Opinion videos 
    * Letters 
  * __Sport
    * Football 
    * Cricket 
    * Rugby union 
    * Tennis 
    * Cycling 
    * F1 
    * Golf 
    * US sports 
  * __Culture
    * Books 
    * Music 
    * TV & radio 
    * Art & design 
    * Film 
    * Games 
    * Classical 
    * Stage 
  * __Lifestyle
    * Fashion 
    * Food 
    * Recipes 
    * Love & sex 
    * Health & fitness 
    * Home & garden 
    * Women 
    * Men 
    * Family 
    * Travel 
    * Money 

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

  * Make a contribution 
  * Subscribe 

  * __International edition

    * switch to the UK edition 
    * switch to the US edition 
    * switch to the Australia edition 
  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 
  * The Guardian app 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * Pictures 
  * Newsletters 
  * Today's paper 
  * Inside the Guardian 
  * The Observer 
  * Guardian Weekly 
  * Crosswords 
  * Facebook 
  * Twitter 

  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 

  * Money 

  * Property 
  * Pensions 
  * Savings 
  * Borrowing 
  * Careers 

More

Opinion

Work & careers

# We should all be working a four-day week. Here’s why

![Owen Jones](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/uploads/2017/10/09/Owen-

Jones,-L.png?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=aa371e55ae8df24bc4e19efcf92be6cb)

Owen Jones

Ending life-sapping excessive hours was a pioneering demand for the labour
movement. For the sake of our health and the economy we need to revisit it

Thu 16 Nov 2017 06.00 GMT Last modified on Mon 27 Nov 2017 13.40 GMT

  * Share on Facebook
  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email

![Father and child

baking](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/f274273e05d362105ef8a28f3e8375976fb565e9/0_69_2121_1273/master/2121.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=ac8c569b1fe19f072b3e001fd62b0940)

‘An extra day off work is not going to inevitably lead to men pulling their
weight more at home. But a four-day week could be … part of a drive to promote
equal relationships between men and women.’ Photograph: SolStock/Getty Images

Imagine there was a single policy that would slash unemployment and
underemployment, tackle health conditions ranging from mental distress to high
blood pressure, increase productivity, help the environment, improve family
lives, encourage men to do more household tasks, and make people happier. It
sounds fantastical, but it exists, and it’s overdue: the introduction of a
four-day week.

The liberation of workers from excessive work was one of the pioneering
demands of the labour movement. From the ashes of the civil war, American
trade unionism rallied behind an eight-hour day, “a movement which ran with
express speed from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New England to
California”, as Karl Marx put it. In 1890 hundreds of thousands thronged into
Hyde Park in a historic protest for the same demand. It is a cause that
urgently needs reclaiming.

## The machine age is upon us. We must not let it grind society to pieces |

Chuka Umunna

Read more

Many Britons work too much. It’s not just the 37.5 hours a week clocked up on
average by full-time workers; it’s the unpaid overtime too. According to the
TUC, workers put in 2.1bn unpaid hours last year – that’s an astonishing
£33.6bn of free labour.

That overwork causes significant damage. Last year, 12.5m work days were lost
because of work-related stress, depression or anxiety. The biggest single
cause by a long way – in some 44% of cases – was workload. Stress can heighten
the risk of all manner of health problems, from high blood pressure to
strokes. Research even suggests that working long hours increases the risk of
excessive drinking. And then there’s the economic cost: over £5bn a year,
according to the Health and Safety Executive. No wonder the public health
expert John Ashton is among those suggesting a four-day week could improve the
nation’s health.

So the renewed call for a four-day week from Autonomy Institute is very
welcome. “We want to shift people’s perspectives, to better work and less
work,” says the thinktank’s Will Stronge. Indeed, a deeply unhealthy
distribution of work scars our society. While some are working too much, with
damaging consequences for their health and family lives, there are 3.3 million
or so “underemployed” workers who want more hours. A four-day week would force
a redistribution of these hours, to the benefit of everyone. This will be even
more important if automation in sectors such as manufacturing, administration
and retail creates more poorly paid work and more underemployment.

A four-day working week could also help tackle climate change: as the New
Economics Foundation thinktank notes, countries with shorter working weeks are
more likely to have a smaller carbon footprint. This is no economy-wrecking
suggestion either. German and Dutch employees work less than we do but their
economies are stronger than ours. It could boost productivity: the evidence
suggests if you work fewer hours, you are more productive, hour for hour – and
less stress means less time off work. Indeed, a recent experiment with a six-
hour working day at a Swedish nursing home produced promising results: higher
productivity and fewer sick days. If those productivity gains are passed on to
staff, working fewer hours doesn’t necessarily entail a pay cut.

Then there’s the argument for gender equality. Despite the strides made by the
women’s movement, women still do 60% more unpaid household work on average
than men. An extra day off work is not going to inevitably lead to men pulling
their weight more at home. But, as Autonomy suggests, a four-day week could be
unveiled as part of a drive to promote equal relationships between men and
women. A national campaign could encourage men to use their new free time to
equally balance household labour, which remains defined by sexist attitudes.

It is heartening to see the resurrection of one of the great early causes of
the labour movement. Germany’s biggest union, IG Metall, is calling for a
28-hour week for shift workers and those with caring responsibilities.

## CitySprint accused of 'making a mockery' of employment rights

Read more

That said, on its own the demand is not enough. Now that socialism is re-
emerging as a political force that can no longer be ignored or ridiculed, the
struggle for more time for leisure, family and relaxation should be linked to
broader fights. Increased public ownership of the economy should be structured
to create more worker self-management and control. If technology means a
further reduction in secure work, a universal basic income – a basic stipend
paid to all citizens as a right – may become ever more salient.

Sure, work can be a fulfilling activity for some. It strikes me, though, that
few would disagree with the notion that we should spend more time with our
families, watching our children grow, exercising, reading books, or just
relaxing. So much of our lives is surrendered to subordinating ourselves to
the needs and whims of others, turning human beings into cash cows rather than
independent, well-rounded individuals.

Our social model means economic growth all too often involves concentrating
wealth produced by the many into the bank accounts of the few, without
improving the lives of the majority. Growth should deliver not just shared
prosperity and improved public services but a better balance between work,
family and leisure.

Labour politicians now position themselves as the harbingers of a new society,
not mere tinkerers with the existing order. That must surely mean building a
new economy that lightens the freedom-sapping burden of work. Labour may win
the opportunity to build a socialist Britain. If it does, it must be ambitious
enough to liberate citizens from the excesses of work.

Topics

  * Work & careers 
  * Opinion 

  * Work-life balance 

  * Economic growth (GDP) 
  * Economics 
  * Economic policy 
  * comment 

  * Share on Facebook

  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email
  * Share on LinkedIn
  * Share on Pinterest
  * Share on WhatsApp
  * Share on Messenger

  * Reuse this content

## View all comments >

Order by

  * newest
  * oldest
  * recommendations

Show 25

  * 25
  * 50
  * 100
  * All

Threads

  * collapsed
  * expanded
  * unthreaded

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## Most popular

  * Money 
  * Property 
  * Pensions 
  * Savings 
  * Borrowing 
  * Careers 

  * Contact us

  * Complaints & corrections
  * SecureDrop
  * Work for us
  * Privacy policy
  * Cookie policy
  * Terms & conditions
  * Help

  * All topics

  * All writers
  * Digital newspaper archive
  * Facebook
  * Twitter

  * Advertise with us

  * Search UK jobs
  * Dating
  * Discount Codes

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Work+%26+careers%2CWork-

life+balance%2CEconomic+growth+%28GDP%29%2CEconomics%2CEconomic+policy%2CPolitics%2CSociety%2CMoney)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

