

Explore

![Inverse

Logo](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/logo_desktop.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2&w=246)

Follow

ScienceMarijuanaShareSubscribe

# What is Marinol?

## The synthetic THC is still the subject of ongoing research

![unknown strain weed pot jazz cabbage devil's lettuce marinol

dronabinol](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/dc/a7/15/0d/525e/45e9/8f49/00fc25d55ab7/marinol-

isnt-derived-from-real-pot-its-synthesized-in-a-

lab.jpeg?rect=0%2C130%2C3456%2C1727&auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2&w=650)

By Dan Robitzski on June 2, 2017

Filed Under Answers, Drugs, Health & Medicine

Back in 1985, the U.S. Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approved a synthetic
form of marijuana called Marinol to help cancer patients cope with the nausea
caused by their chemotherapy treatments. The drug, also known as dronabinol,
is still being studied today. In May, it was found to help reduce the amount
of seizures in people with severe cases of epilepsy (though it also gave them
diarrhea.)

It has also been used to bolster the appetite of people fighting anorexia,
both as a standalone disorder or as a symptom of treatments for HIV.

Marinol is a synthetic, artificially-developed form of delta-9 THC, the active
ingredient in jazz cabbage that is most responsible for getting you high.

Many criticize Marinol’s existence: Some point out to the veritable money
landfall to be made for pharmaceutical companies that can develop synthetic
THC when natural marijuana is illegal.

Either way, the drug is still kicking, and more potential uses are being
investigated all the time. This use of synthetic weed could remove some
barriers that still prevent scientists from conducting real marijuana
research. According to clinicaltrials.gov, a database of every medical
experiment conducted, there are currently 41 ongoing studies on Marinol that
are either recruiting participants or will begin doing so soon.

![marinol dronabinol synthetic thc marijuana clinical trials

clinicaltrials](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![marinol

dronabinol synthetic thc marijuana clinical trials

clinicaltrials](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)Scientists
are about to experiment and see how Marinol affects all of these medical
conditions.

The science behind these studies is surprisingly solid. Many clinical trials
are plagued by endpoint changes, where the researchers or pharmaceutical
company behind the experiment change things around while the study is still
ongoing. A quick scan of some of the Marinol studies reveals very few of these
changes, meaning that the claims made by scientists about the drugs are
generally backed up by reliable evidence.

It’s important to remember that Marinol is still essentially pot, so if you
are prescribed the drug then you definitely shouldn’t drive or do anything
that you wouldn’t do while high.

Media via Screenshot of clinicaltrials.gov, Flickr / eggrole

Related Stories

![joint](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![joint](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)

##### Medical Marijuana Study Reveals a Counterintuitive L...

![cbd for pain and inflammation

](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![cbd

for pain and inflammation

](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)

##### These CBD Softgels Are Specifically Designed to Prov...

![weed workouts

](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![weed

workouts

](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)

##### Exercise Data Reveals 2 Reasons Why Athletes Combine...

![Dog](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![Dog](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)

##### Is CBD Safe for Your Dog? Why Some Owners Swear by t...

![marijuana](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)![marijuana](https://fsmedia.imgix.net/assets/placeholder.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2)

##### Opioids Safely Mixed With Cannabis Predict a Way Out...

  * Follow inverse on Facebook
  * Follow humans+ on Facebook
  * Follow star wars on Facebook
  * Follow science & chill on Facebook
  * Follow inverse on Flipboard
  * Follow inverse on Apple News

Watch your brain on blank on Facebook

Sign up for our newsletter

sign up

  *     *       *   * About

  * Topics
  * Archive
  * Browse
  * Privacy
  * Commerce
  * Terms
  * DMCA
  * Corrections
  * Newsletter Contest
  * 2019

Filters

Sort by relevanceSort by recentSort by oldest

  * Science
  * Innovation
  * Entertainment
  * Culture
  * Mind & Body

  * Brave New Worlds

Brave New Worlds

  * Humans+

Humans+

  * Life in Space

Life in Space

  * Point B

Point B

  * Replicant

Replicant

  * Science & Chill

Science & Chill

  * About
  * Topics
  * Archive
  * Browse
  * Privacy
  * Commerce
  * Terms
  * DMCA
  * Corrections
  * Newsletter Contest
  * 2019

![Comscore](//b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=19987187&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-dsZ5hTqk9YtgS.gif)

![Facebook

Pixel](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1455869871397255&ev=PageView&noscript=1)![reddit

pixel](https://alb.reddit.com/snoo.gif?q=CAAHAAABAAoACQAAAAACWQ1QAA==&s=XEpByt_R434fqqGl0DfctKqGILDzrA7eDqfNEeDOv7E=)![linkedin

pixel](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=275370&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

