

Skip to content

MarijuanaBreak

Keywords

  * Medical Cards
  * Health
  * Reviews
    * Medical Clinics
    * CBD
    * Vape
    * Detox
    * Dispensaries
    * Weed Boxes
  * Strains
  * Growing
  * More

    * Recipes
    * Blog
    * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Disclaimer
  * Home

  * /
  * Health
  * /
  * The Link Between Marijuana & Dopamine

# The Link Between Marijuana & Dopamine

Based on medical research

![MarijuanaBreak Staff](https://www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/icon-150x150.jpg) MarijuanaBreak Staff / Updated on
March 7, 2019

![Marijuana & Dopamine](//www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-

load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)

__Share

If you are a marijuana consumer, you might find that the plant increases your
level of dopamine in the short term. The result is a wonderful feeling of
euphoria where you believe just about anything is possible. Things are more
humorous (almost everything in fact) and you feel at ease with yourself and
the world.

However, new research has revealed something disturbing: long-term, heavy
marijuana usage could **reduce** your levels of dopamine. Low dopamine levels
are associated with a variety of medical issues including depression ,
fatigue, and mood changes. This is big news as an estimated **78 million
Americans** have tried marijuana - 55 million in the last year and almost 23
million in the last month. More importantly, of the 9.5% of adults that
admitted marijuana use in a 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, about
one-third reported marijuana addiction symptoms.

## What is Dopamine?

![dopamine](//www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-

load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)

Although dopamine has been studied for over 60 years and has been the subject
of an estimated **110,000 research papers** , it is still a source of
disagreement amongst neuroscientists.

> Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that acts as a chemical messenger and
transmits signals between the brain’s neurons (or nerve cells).

There are different neurotransmitters in different parts of your brain, and
there are two main areas of the brain that produce dopamine: the **ventral
tegmental area** and the **substantia nigra**. The actual combined area of
these brain parts is less than the size of a postage stamp, but they produce
dopamine which relays the signals that ultimately travel through the brain.

Once the brain cells that make dopamine die off, the result is a raft of
problems. For example, drug addiction and Parkinson’s disease have both been
linked to a lack of dopamine. Thus, many Parkinson’s patients have to take a
drug in order to increase their dopamine levels so they can move about
normally.

## How Are Marijuana & Dopamine Linked?

![Marijuana strains and phobia](//www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-

content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)

Dopamine is the chemical responsible for **activating** the pleasure centers
in your brain. When you smoke marijuana in the short-term, have sex, or
eat/drink something you love, the pleasure you feel is caused by heightened
dopamine production. The reason why illicit drugs are so addictive is that
they activate this _pleasure pathway_ , and you become hooked on the sensation
before you even know it.

Short-term marijuana use is known to **increase dopamine** in your brain
indirectly. While the cannabinoids contained in weed don’t act on the dopamine
neurons directly, they do act on the body 's endocannabinoid system (ECS),
which temporarily suppresses GABA inhibitors. GABA neurons are neurons that
inhibit dopamine production - when they're suppressed, dopamine production
increases.

Endocannabinoids (the cannabinoids that are produced naturally by the body)
play a huge role in our daily functions. A 2013 study by Dubreucq et al., for
instance, looked at mice that had been born with no cannabinoid receptors. The
researchers found that these mice used their exercise wheels up to 30% less
often than healthy mice.

## Marijuana Is Awesome for Dopamine Production in the Short-Term

Additional studies show that THC is more effective than CBD in terms of
positively impacting dopamine in the short-term. A 1997 study on rats by the
author French discovered that THC - the psychoactive compound of cannabis -
stimulated dopamine neurons in the midbrain. It took almost 20 years for a
study to show the same effects on humans, but the recent 2016 study by Bassong
et al. accomplished exactly that.

French also conducted a similar study using CBD instead of THC, and found that
there was no evidence of cannabidiol increasing the dopamine in reward
pathways. In simple terms, the effect of THC on dopamine explains why you feel
so good during and after a smoke. Overall, the new research suggests that
marijuana users might want to cut down on use or risk long-term dopamine
damage.

## Does Marijuana Cause a Long-Term Reduction in Dopamine?

While the strongest body of evidence has appeared only recently, there have
been studies on the effects of long-term marijuana use on dopamine for
decades. A 1998 study by Jentscha et al. discovered that regular weed usage
over a long period reduced the level of dopamine in the brain’s prefrontal
cortex. This area of the brain is associated with complicated tasks such as
memory, planning, and decision-making.

It was a 2016 study led by Professor Oliver Howes, however, that dropped the
dopamine bombshell. While other prior studies had found links between heavy
long-term cannabis use and anxiety, depression, and schizophrenia, researchers
were **unable** to pinpoint the causes of these associations. Howe and his
team believed they found the answer when they reviewed a host of previous
studies on how THC affects the brain.

The authors of the study concluded the review by suggesting:

> “THC exposure produces complex, diverse, and potentially long-term effects
on the dopamine system.”

Moreover, they went on to say:

> “these include increased nerve firing and dopamine release in response to
acute THC, as well as dopaminergic blunting associated with long-term use.”

According to the authors of the study, the findings explain why **long-term**
weed users are at greater risk of suffering from mental health problems. Howes
was also critical of animal studies, saying they are far too short to offer
any real insight. The team was also concerned about the **existing gaps** in
marijuana research, particularly in regard to a lack of studies on what
happens to our dopamine system once we stop using marijuana.

## Final Thoughts on Marijuana and Dopamine

While it is important not to panic when hearing about the latest research
surrounding the link between marijuana and long-term dopamine reduction, it
should provide weed smokers with **plenty** of food for thought. We always
advocate smoking responsibly, and this review of a long list of studies should
only serve to strengthen our warning.

The bottom line is, it will take years of research on human patients before
these findings can be either confirmed or questioned. What we do know, is that
studies on animals are all but useless since they take place over a period of
**weeks** and not years. For now, we will wait with bated breath to find out
what else the scientific community has to say about marijuana’s link to
dopamine.

**Sources**  
http://recointensive.com/marijuana-statistics-2017-55-million-americans-admit-
use/  
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/what-scope-
marijuana-use-in-united-states  
http://edition.cnn.com/2016/08/08/health/marijuana-use-doubles-gallup-
poll/index.html  
https://www.sciencenewsforstudents.org/article/explainer-what-dopamine  
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/mouse-man/200904/what-is-dopamine  
http://www.biologicalpsychiatryjournal.com/article/S0006-3223(12)00952-3/abstract  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9175591  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18754005  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9106740  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304394098002547  
https://www.nature.com/articles/nature20153  
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/314222.php

__Share

10 comments

  1. **Alen** on May 29, 2019 

MJ can be enjoyed responsibly

I smoked heavy THC for over a year several times a week and developed extreme
anxiety after quitting cold turkey. It took me several months of diligent
healthy lifestyle, eating heathy and exercising to get back to baseline. While
I think MJ isnt as harmful as say alcohol or other hard drugs I do think it
shouldn't be abused and can be enjoyed responsibly.

  1. **Angela Ortiz** on May 18, 2019 

Science Students here?

I think marijuana is great for stoners, and this article is meant for science
students. Dopamine or something else, but marijuana definitely gives a great
high if dabbed or smoked. Why go into the nitty-gritties of its composition?

  1. **Joseph** on April 27, 2019 

23 YO on college

Been smoking for 3 years daily, sometimes only at night and sometimes during
the day, i dont think i have depression but I sure have less dopamine, now
that i moved to illinois theres no way i can smoke pot here. I needa mention
that i have no issues to sleep, or to study. The only fact i approve about
this is that I feel less motivate. But once I go to the gym or I date my gf I
feel fine. All my stoner friends I asked em’ if they feel like me, all of em
said yes. But they dont care.

I’ll keep smoking pot but not daily just casually, or when I go to the beach

  1. **Noa** on April 3, 2019 

Be Warned!

I've been smoking THC daily for six years and stopped using it 70 days ago. I
noticed that I'm having difficulties with decision making and feeling my
emotions. I also do not notice any improvements in my mood since stopping the
drug. Reading this article further causes me to believe that smoking weed has
sever long term side effects on my dopamine system that we might never recover
from. To all people considering using this drug as a "natural remedy" I would
advice extreem caution. Good luck

  1. **TrapKick** on January 6, 2019 

Cannabis and Dystonia

I've been diagnosed with Dystonia which is a severe tightening of muscles. I
have had 2 spinal fusion, nerve blocks, taken soooo many drugs and in the past
6 months I started cannabis. It has changed my life. My muscles are relaxed
and o feel so much better. If you look at Dystonia it can be cause by a lack
of dopamine. I'm working with a neurologist now, but cannabis has been a great
troubleshooting tool for me.

  1. **Branwen Brown** on August 15, 2018 

and I have been on snri for 5 yrs now,, and they bring me more anxiety and
many other issues, I use marijuana to calm these serious feelings,, I can't
face the crowd unless I smoke, I can't manage the world these days, everything
is overwhelming so I Stay away, go where I can keep calm, where the weed at,,
Really clear that the meds are worse for me,  
Did any ever consider that perhaps the dopamine levels in people who have been
depressed most of their lives are scarcly low, or was already halted in
production,, so now when we add some natural cannabinoods we have relief and
clarity, yes it makes ya feel like your are capable of pushing through the
long list of challenges people face every day,, mostly lack of income to feed
ourselfs properly,, with good food we'd all feel better,, but would you call
food a drug because it brings pleasure,, no! the way you address this like its
a Drug,, could simply be a supplement to the lack of joy one has the chance to
obtain.. in this dog eat dog world.

    
    
    1. **Meme** on December 18, 2018
    

Still not convinced. I will always use herb over pharmaceutical.

Branwen brown.. Well said! With all the money in this world.. Isn't it telling
that NO scientist has concluded a full human test on cannabis. I wonder why
that is!? Oh yes.. It brings far too many benefits and would crush Cancer
research too. None of these studies advise the previous mental state of the
persons being tested and is all too vague. I trust my gut that the good out
ways the bad for my own needs.

Also… "high Street cannabis" that has been mentioned for its high potency and
possible added chemicals. Id just like to compare this to your average food
and herbs you buy. If you don't eat organic then its basically the same.
Nutrients are added to cannabis for a fuller flower exactly the same as the
nutrients and GMOS that are added into your daily foods. There is no
difference! Apart from the fact you will NEVER know what your food is sprayed
with (they wear protective gear to do this!) And if your close to your
supplier, you may know exactly what is being put in your cannabis. Rest
assured they wouldn't need to wear protective gear and a mouth mask like your
healthy fruit and veg at waitrose. Unfortunately this corporate greedy world
makes it too expensive and difficult to access and diet on whole organic for
many reasons £££££…..

  1. **Ethan** on July 4, 2018 

I used marijuana on a daily basis for three and a half years and then quit
cold turkey. I've been struggling with sever anxiety and insomnia over the
past 4 months, and have treated with an SSRI for a month now.

While I am a fan of weed and will probably resume using recreationally one
day, I advise against daily use of it.

    
    
    1. **Ibby** on April 2, 2019
    

Weed is bad long term

@ethan i was abusing weed for 19 years i stopped smoking it 5 months ago since
stopping i have suffered severr mentel helth problems depression anxiety
overthinking worrying loss of intrest in everything in life. Doctors put me on
ssri a month ago was wondering how are you doing now if u could reply be much
appreciated thankyou.

    
    
    2. **David** on September 22, 2018
    

SSRIs are dangerous

@Ethan, studies appear to show weed has fewer and less severe side effects and
greater pharmacalogical benefit than SSRIs. A large Harvard studies showed
that SSRIs are essentially placebo in benefit but toxic nonetheless.

Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Your Review*

Name *

Email *

Your overall rating of this listing:

Title of your review*:

Most Popular Articles

![](https://www.marijuanabreak.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/CBD300250.jpg)

This Will Blow Your Mind

5% Coupon Code: 5OFFCBD1

Tags: Advertisment

The 7 Best CBD Oils For Anxiety [ 2019 Update ]

The Definitive Guide to CBD Oils

Tags: Best CBD Oils, CBD Anxiety, CBD Oils for Anxiety

The 25 Best CBD Oil Brands for 2019 [Pain Relief, Anxiety, Stress]

The Updated 2019 Guide to CBD oil

Tags: Best CBD Oils, CBD for Pain, CBD Pain Relief

How Long Does Marijuana Stay in Your System [Fully Explained]

The comprehensive guide

Tags: Drug Test, Marijuana Urine Test, THC

Get Your Marijuana Card and Become a Qualified MMJ Patient

Easy online process. Connect to Local Doctors. No appointment needed!

Tags: Medical Cannabis, Medical Card, Medical Card Online

3 Creative Ways to Get a Medical Marijuana Card Online

We've done the research for you!

Tags: Medical marijuana card online, MMJ Card, NuggMD

Cannabis 101: What Does Weed Do to You?

How cannabis affects your body and mind

Tags: CBD, Endocannabinoid System, THC

How to Tell the Good Weed from the Bad [5 Techniques]

How to choose high-quality bud and avoid getting ripped off

Tags: Buyer's Guide, Cannabis, Quality Weed

The Black Cannabis Strain [Complete Review]

Voted one of this year's top 10 Cannabis Strains

Tags: Black Marijuana Strain, Cannabis, Cannabis Strain Review

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * Google plus

  * ![Marijuanabreak logo](/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/logo_white_marijuana_break.svg)

  * Extra Links

About Us  
Contact Us  
Advertise with Us  
Blog  
Recipes

Term of Use  
Privacy Policy  
Disclaimer

Best CBD Oil | What is CBD | Best CBD Oil for Anxiety | CBD Oil for Sleep |
Buy CBD Oil | CBD for Dogs | Best CBD Vape Oil | CBD for Sale | CBD Oil Dosage
| CBD Capsules | CBD Gummies | Medical Marijuana Card | Medical Marijuana Card
Near Me | NuggMD Review | Online THC Calculator

![DMCA.com Protection Status](//images.dmca.com/Badges/dmca-

badge-w100-5x1-09.png?ID=940ea271-1034-4da9-a52f-cb270f710f9a)

© 2000 - 2019 All Rights Reserved Digital Millennium Copyright Act Services
Ltd. | DMCA.com Privacy policy

Username or Email Address *

Password *

Extra password

Remember me Lost your password?

Log In

Forgotten Password

Get New Password

Cancel

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

