

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)
    

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile/public/authors/joshua_leigh_gowin.jpg?itok=xYXL2REM)

### Joshua Gowin Ph.D.

You, Illuminated

Follow me on Twitter

Friend me on Faceook

# Long Term Effects of Marijuana on the Brain

## Part 3 exploring how marijuana alters brain function: long-term effects

Posted Sep 18, 2014

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/article-inline-

half/public/blogs/30826/2014/09/159898-164296.jpg?itok=CLJAJX1d)

Marijuana's recent legalization in two U.S. states means that its effects are
bobbing into many people's conversations these days, not just _High Times_
readers'. That makes its brain effects germane here at _You, Illuminated_.
This is the last post in a three-part series. Parts 1 and 2 covered
marijuana’s brain mechanism and seven short term effects. Now we’ll explore
marijuana's long term effects on the brain. Even if you weren’t familiar with
the brain mechanisms, the short term effects were probably familiar to most
readers. The long-term effects, however, are probably less known and certainly
more contentious.

Some long-term effects are carry-over short-term effects. Since fat attracts
THC and cellular walls in your body are composed of fat, THC gets sucked up by
cells everywhere. THC then gets re-released gradually, which is why you can
test positive for marijuana up to a month after you put down your hash pipe.
So many short-term effects, like impaired memory and driving, might endure.

To test this idea, a recent study compared the short term memory and
information processing speed of people who used marijuana in the past 4 weeks
to people who had never used it. The recent marijuana users remembered less
and processed information more slowly than the people who never smoked, even
though the users didn’t smoke that day. Among the marijuana users, those who
used more marijuana in the past 28 days performed worse than those who used
less. The authors concluded, “cannabis use is associated with cognitive
impairments that persist after abstinence.”

As long as THC remains in the body, it stands to reason, marijuana continues
to affect the brain. What’s less clear is whether marijuana can actually
change the brain. Once the last traces of THC have been excreted, could brain
function remain altered for months, or years, after?

Few studies have addressed this question and the lack of clarity provides
fodder for debate. To remove some ambiguity, Nora Volkow, director of the
National Institute on Drug Abuse, recently wrote a summary in the New England
Journal of Medicine of the scientific findings on the lasting effects of
marijuana use. The entire article is worth reading, but I’ll highlight two key
conclusions here.

  1. Risk of addiction

Smoking marijuana won’t set an irreversible course for addiction, but you must
start using marijuana to become addicted. Almost one in ten people who use
marijuana will eventually become dependent on it, according to findings from
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Half of
the people who eventually met criteria for marijuana dependence did so within
four years of their first use.

A little under half of people who seek treatment for marijuana dependence
experience withdrawal when they try to quit, becoming anxious, irritable or
depressed. These symptoms can precipitate relapse, making it harder to quit.

  1. Alterations in brain development

The brain can be molded and developed throughout our lives, but since it is
particularly malleable from the months before birth to our twenty-first
birthday, researchers have wondered whether smoking marijuana during
adolescence could change the brain’s development.

A team led by Andrew Zalesky from The University of Melbourne, Australia
examined this question by performing MRI scans on regular marijuana users who
started smoking in adolescence and a comparison group who never smoked. They
found that the neural connections between the brain’s left and right
hemispheres were impaired in the marijuana users relative to the non-users,
which could mean that smokers’ brains have poorer internal communication.

Zalesky’s study, like much of the human work, compared people who already
smoke to those who never smoked, so it doesn’t show that brains changed after
the person started smoking. Smokers’ brains may have been different to begin
with. The earlier someone started smoking, however, the more pronounced the
impairments were, suggesting marijuana may cause changes.

Zalesky’s study is hardly unassailable proof, but the suggestion is powerful.
Especially considering a study in New Zealand that followed over a thousand
individuals from birth to age 38, showed that people who started smoking
marijuana in their teens had lower IQs in their thirties compared to their
childhood.

The IQ declines were not associated with personality, socioeconomic status,
current drug use or presence of psychiatric diseases. The people who started
smoking youngest and who smoked most heavily showed the greatest drop in
cognitive performance.

The deficits extended beyond laboratory tests. People who lived with the study
participants filled out questionnaires about the memory and smarts of
participants. The participants who started smoking marijuana as teens had more
memory troubles in daily life, according to the people who knew them best.

Causal studies of change due to marijuana are, of course, unethical in humans.
The evidence we do have suggests that marijuana probably won’t scramble your
brain, but if you start smoking heavily as a teen, it may slow your brain
down.

Clearly, we still have much to learn about the long-term effects of marijuana
on the brain. The few studies available suggest that marijuana may change the
brain’s function, especially if used when the brain is still undergoing rapid
development. However, more studies need to confirm these suggestions and
identify more specific alterations. Any conclusions may be premature, but it
makes you wonder.

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

25 Comments

### THC

Submitted by tony h ridler on September 19, 2014 - 2:02am

I am making an observation, based on a character 'Rainman', of the movie
title. "There's a little bit of 'Rainman', in all of us", was taken out of
quotation, from an interview with Tom Cruise, and Dustin Hoffman.Anyone could
get testy, when taken out of their comfort-zone, and, talent, whilst being
only recognised, via reflection, is cultivated out of curiosity, or boredom.

  * Reply to tony h ridler
  * Quote tony h ridler

### A personal account

Submitted by Anonymous on September 19, 2014 - 1:03pm

Growing up in Amsterdam and being under the impression that marijuana was
completely harmless (hippy parents, bad education and blind to any warnings
from the outside world), I've been addicted to marijuana from my 14th till my
21st, then again from my 24th till my 26th. I had some short periods
afterwards, but nothing serious.

I'm 32 now and didn't have any craving for several years. Moving to a country
with strict drug laws certainly helped in my case, but at the same time I
believe that drug laws tend to have counterproductive effects on society.
Regulation (unlike the netherlands, which is decriminalization) and proper
education can go a long way.

I recently got tested for IQ by a psychologist, just as I was tested for IQ
when I was 15 because I was doing extremely poor in school after years of
being considered the best of my class. (I think my smoking habits had
something to do with my poor academic performances, but puberty, bullying, a
mild form of ADHD and very busy and hard working parents also played a roll).

My IQ hasn't dropped one bit (135 back then, 137 now) but I realize this is
purely anecdotal and can be attributed to several factors (when I was high I
would have endless discussions about philosophy with friends, we played
intelligent computer games and I read books. While it did made me apathetic
and even more rebellious towards school, I was still always looking for
intellectual challenges outside of school).

However, fast forward 7 years and I still haven't really achieved anything
constructive in life, I ruined relationships because I was always high and now
I started to get panic attacks each time I smoked a joint which caused me to
stop. The withdrawal symptoms were terrible and they initiated some sort of
OCD/anxiety disorder and nightmares that lasted for several months.

And i'm not the only one... I know what i'm about to say is not very
scientific, but about half of the people I know that smoked marijuana for
several years on a daily basis (n=~25), had to stop due to anxiety and panic
attacks, not start again because that's what they experienced during
withdrawal. If you scan message boards about anxiety disorders, the people
with problems after smoking weed are widely represented. I realize this isn't
conclusive evidence, but it should def be mentioned more often in articles
like this. Usually it's something something about short term memory, cognitive
decline and then increased risk of psychosis (something that's horrible to
read about when you suffer from anxiety and this notion can make things
significantly worse).

I'm a bit confused about these notions because there is no conclusive and def
no causal evidence for any of these long term effects. All the while the
anxiety thing should be very easy to measure. Ask 20 doctors that work with
addiction on a daily basis in a city like Amsterdam what the most common
disorder is they encounter in weed smokers, and i'm sure they'll say "anxiety"
in unison, and that's way beyond withdrawal. Yet, this is almost never
mentioned in articles like this.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### You make a good point that

Submitted by Joshua Gowin Ph.D. on September 19, 2014 - 5:03pm

You make a good point that there is a high likelihood of having other
psychiatric issues if someone is dependent on marijuana. I address this
briefly in the second post. One thing that is not clear, however, is the
direction of the relationship. Does dependence cause anxiety, does anxiety
lead to dependence or does a third factor cause them both? Based on the
evidence I've seen, it's unclear which of those situations is most likely. But
it is certainly something to be aware of. Thanks for commenting.

  * Reply to Joshua Gowin Ph.D.
  * Quote Joshua Gowin Ph.D.

### Speaking Engagement

Submitted by Robert Webster on February 26, 2016 - 9:35am

Joshua, do you ever speak to college students? I am looking for someone to
speak to a group of 50 college students who I oversee on the subject of pot
use with a developing brain and its adverse effects later on in life. Let me
know if this is something that you do. Best, Bob

  * Reply to Robert Webster
  * Quote Robert Webster

### Hi Robert,

Submitted by Joshua Gowin Ph.D. on February 26, 2016 - 9:48am

Hi Robert,  
Can you contact me via email?  
Thanks,  
Josh

  * Reply to Joshua Gowin Ph.D.
  * Quote Joshua Gowin Ph.D.

### Are you sure you had that IQ?

Submitted by Anonymous on March 13, 2015 - 12:30am

Are you sure you had that IQ? The IQ charts state that people with PHD's JD's
and M.D. have IQs of 125+...I may be reading it wrong I didn't look to in
depth into IQ scores (I will some time in a few days) So i'm kind of skeptical
you had 137 IQ score

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Its very possible that he has

Submitted by Jeremy Earle Johnke on April 1, 2015 - 12:49pm

Its very possible that he has an IQ that high. I read somewhere that people
who reach past a 120 IQ score that success and other things depends on way
diffrent variables than average, your average view of success. Iv met people
with enormous IQ scores who aren't considered "successful" in the views of
society

  * Reply to Jeremy Earle Johnke
  * Quote Jeremy Earle Johnke

### I've been smoking for about 2

Submitted by Bob on May 7, 2015 - 6:49pm

I've been smoking for about 2 years now (started at 21), and can only say that
my cognition has only increased with cannabis consumption. I used to get IQ
scores of 140, now i even managed to get 170.

Also, all sorts of creative thinking have vastly expanded, i learned how to
draw and do sculpture without any teacher and do fairly realistic works, using
spatial recognition, shading of colors and precise detail using a sort of
mental vectorial calculus.

I only smoke about once or twice per month, I let my tolerance drop to the
ground and then get really high (close to when i smoked for the first time).
Then... i can only say its like almost reaching nirvana, and my mind becomes
like a river of ideas and im able to deduce all sorts of problems without
effort.

  * Reply to Bob
  * Quote Bob

### IQ and pot

Submitted by David on February 11, 2019 - 11:18am

I agree with earlier posts about high IQ's. I was tested when I was a teen and
scored 147. I did an informal test in my 30's and scored 129. I was never a
stellar performer in school but I think that was mainly due to my environment
and upbringing. I don't think having a high IQ means you will automatically
become successful by todays standards. People can be extremely creative and
smart but not find the proper outlet for their skills or they can shun society
and become hermits.  
I also smoke a couple times a month. I found my sweet spot to be once every 10
days. I'd get high like it was the first time, have deep thoughts and
contemplate life and the universe, music and art and have mind blowing
epiphanies.  
I did go through a phase of smoking almost daily, which I found made me dull,
awful memory and recall, and no motivation to do anything. I think this was
also due to my unhappiness at work and lots of boredom. I've been off for a
couple months now (just for my own reasons, not due to anything other than
research) but am looking forward to starting back up again in a month or so.
Once every 10 days.

  * Reply to David
  * Quote David

### Permanent brain damage

Submitted by Belle on September 19, 2015 - 3:28pm

When I was 14, throughout that year I smoked weed four times, now I'm 15 and
havn't smoked for almost 3 months. I still feel cloudy, aren't as good at
forming sentences, memory, time management, or thinking. I used to be
thinkining of multiple things all the time, now my brain is empty. Have I done
permanent brain damage to myself? Will I ever heal?

  * Reply to Belle
  * Quote Belle

### Hi Belle,

Submitted by Joshua Gowin Ph.D. on September 22, 2015 - 12:17pm

Hi Belle,  
There's little chance that smoking four times would give you permanent brain
damage. It's unlikely that what you're experiencing has to do with marijuana.
If you are worried, you should consider seeking professional help.

  * Reply to Joshua Gowin Ph.D.
  * Quote Joshua Gowin Ph.D.

### Thank you for taking the time

Submitted by Belle on February 19, 2016 - 12:50am

Thank you for taking the time to reply! My symptoms persists and I'm still
worried. All I had is my intelligence and now I constantly worry I've lost it.
My brain seems slower, and has a block. I hope this will pass.

  * Reply to Belle
  * Quote Belle

### Fifteen is a bit young to be

Submitted by Will on August 8, 2016 - 2:42pm

Fifteen is a bit young to be partaking but there is literally a ZERO percent
chance you did permanent damage smoking cannabis a handful times. There is
actually no way any THC even remains in your system, so it is likely something
else is causing your problems. Hope you can figure it out.

  * Reply to Will
  * Quote Will

### My experience

Submitted by Trying to quit on January 16, 2016 - 3:01pm

There are definitely long term effects of marijuana consumption, speaking from
personal experience. I'm about to turn 30, and am starting to realize that
marijuana has likely led to a serious prevention of the realization of my
personal goals in life and an overall decline in my cognitive function. I've
dropped out of school multiple times, which at the time I couldn't really
figure out why. The first time was legitimate, because I wanted to change
careers, but after that, I've just been bad at keeping up with my classes, and
keeping focus overall. I get distracted easily and tend to become apathetic
towards completing my work, which I am now attributing to my daily marijuana
use. I've also had difficulty keeping stable employment, because I always make
some sort of excuse that what I am doing is not the right thing, due to a
persistent anxiety I have about my life goals, again likely attributable to my
marijuana use. It becomes a self feeding cycle, and as I continue to fail, I
get more anxious about everything, and as a result, smoke more, creating more
anxiety and poor behavior.

I've decided this week that my cannabis use must stop immediately, if I ever
want to meet my life goals and attain a fulfilling career. I remember when I
was young that I was in gifted and talented, and was considered exceedingly
smart overall. I would like to realize my potential and hopefully reverse the
cognitive damage I've done over the years. If anyone has any tips or resources
for quitting marijuana and rebuilding cognitive function, I would greatly
appreciate it. I haven't smoked in 3 days, and it is already starting to wear
on me, I have regular cravings, and keep trying to rationalize it in my mind.
This post was a way for me to stave off a craving and remind myself why I need
to quit.

To anyone young out there who is thinking about or already smoking marijuana,
it's fine to experiment, but please don't make it a habit, and realize that
there are very real long term effects to excessive use. I'm living proof of
this.

  * Reply to Trying to quit
  * Quote Trying to quit

### Hi, I really appreciate your

Submitted by Sarah on June 10, 2016 - 1:06am

Hi, I really appreciate your comment. I'm 22 and haven't been vaping/smoking
for as long as you, but I'm already finding myself addicted. I'm quitting cold
turkey because there is no middle ground for me. I hope you are doing well and
try not to feel down.

The reason why I get high is to avoid responsibilities or tasks to achieve my
goals. It promotes a sedentiary lifestyle. Perhaps if you dealt with the
sources of your anxiety by talking with someone about it then you won't need
marijuana to escape. Feel free to email me

  * Reply to Sarah
  * Quote Sarah

### Smoking at 17

Submitted by Mr l on February 11, 2016 - 8:38am

Hi, I am a 17 year old boy. Often I find my self in situations in which I am
impelled to smoke weed by my friends. I've smoked a few times in the past, yet
I've quit after reading that smoking until 21 leaves long term/ perminant
effects on the brain. My question is this- is it possible for me to smoke
sporadically? Let say, once a month, without being scared of perminant
effects?

  * Reply to Mr l
  * Quote Mr l

### Hi and thanks for your

Submitted by Joshua Gowin Ph.D. on February 16, 2016 - 11:33am

Hi and thanks for your questions. Let me preface by saying that I—and perhaps
no one—truly knows the answer to these questions. On the other hand,
anecdotally, there are plenty of people who have used marijuana as teens and
gone on to be successful in life, including US presidents.

  * Reply to Joshua Gowin Ph.D.
  * Quote Joshua Gowin Ph.D.

### KEEP SMOKING

Submitted by jOE on February 28, 2016 - 3:33pm

THE EFFECTS ARE DIFFERENT ON EVERYONE. BECAUSE NO 2 PEOPLES MAKE UP IS THE
SAME. I'VE BEEN SMOKING FOR 49 YEARS. I HAVE AN IQ OF 138. I FOUND THAT
RETIRING IMPROVED MY BRAIN SKILLS AND IF ANYTHING SLOW DOWN MY AWARENESS AND
MEMORY. LITTLE SLEEP AND STRESS CAUSED THAT. MY MIND STILL OPENS UP EVERY TIME
I SMOKE AND I FIND MY CREATIVITY INCREASES. YOU ARE PROBABLY ONE OFF THOSE
PEOPLE THAT DISLIKE MARIJUANA EITHER BECAUSE YOU CAN'T HANDLE IT OR LIKE OTHER
WHITES YOU HATE PEOPLE OF COLOR WHICH WAS WHY IT WAS OUTLAWED IN AMERIKA.

  * Reply to jOE
  * Quote jOE

### Inhalation of smoke

Submitted by Anthony Tin on March 13, 2016 - 3:52pm

I am now over 2 weeks clean after smoking for 15 years. Everyone has their own
views on pot but for me i would say thay it is an insidious drug and when used
in the long term can rob one of a full and connected life. As a long time
user, i will tell you now that you will never get that same high that you once
got during the first months or years of smoking. It slowly takes over and
subtly opens up a world of disorder and dependence. Personality is heavily
affected and negative mental habits form.

Having said that, the consumption of pot is primarily through inhaling toxic
smoke and id like to know how big a part this plays on memory loss and other
negative impacts on ones brain?

  * Reply to Anthony Tin
  * Quote Anthony Tin

### Marijuana a lowerclass solution

Submitted by ZippyZipZip on May 4, 2016 - 7:19pm

It's not that bad, I don't have any friends that smoke marijuana because I cut
ties with them. I am 25 about to finish a 3-year degree in Business arts. I
did an online IQ test and scored 110, so that's 1 standard deviation above the
mean.  
After high school which I passed with poor grades I was not able to do college
because I had no money, or real knowledge. I spent 2 years’ car hopping for a
living doing all sorts of Henry David Thoreau activities, and 1 year in
custody, 4 month of which was in a treatment center at the very end, and 3
months in a detention center, 3 months in another. I committed the crime
because I met a lawyer who would solve my problems for good, I was also
suffering from guilt over something I did, and was afraid I would get HIV on
the street, plus I knew I needed an education and prison would do in a
segregated room with books and television.  
Although I could blame marijuana for what I have amounted to I think it’s
because of my blue collar parents, and because I was a boy. My sister never
smoked and she competed a Msc, but she drinks. I don't drink alcohol, except
rarely when I think I can afford to break my sobriety, also no STDs.  
I don't have any friends that smoke like I said, I learned to pick up on the
street, and only buy dimes ($10 baggies). I can either travel to a vapor
lounge and use discreetly, or travel to my house 1 1/2 hours by public transit
and smoke in an alleyway leading to a pond near my house. the effects of using
are very euphoric.  
I know if I need to quit marijuana I can when the pressure to do school work
takes over. Over my life I have had 14 months of clean time (no alcohol, or
weed) which I will never do again as I am not a real addict, I also had 3
months from January of 2016 to April, I sparked my first joint the week of an
exam, and used regularly after exams were over. I am taking summer courses,
but will only do an ordinary B.A.., due to the effects of the record, and
perhaps your right marijuana has stunted my motivation to some degree, such as
I don’t care much for driving a car.  
I haven't worked in over 6 years, on disability since 2011. That being said
prison isn't bad, I learned to read there, and was fed very good food, and was
able to secure myself to an injectable anti psychotic and psychiatric
outpatient treatment, I like having a smaller penis that fits into skinny
jeans or dress pants. I think I am a success, as I was a marijuana smoker who
knows not to travel to parts of downtown where their is meth, and I can easily
get along with dope addicts if I needed to, although I have never used dope.  
I graduated with a college diploma in 2015, and I may do a university
certificate in marketing, or logistics in the future. I know when I start
working I will have to likely stop, depending on the work load as I know
marijuana can slow me down. I would say marijuana is psychologically
addicting, to the point where you would need to join a 12 step program, or an
online community if you needed help. I think marijuana is all I really have as
a reward, I can’t afford a strip club, and will not go back hopefully ever, I
could use an escort, but I have Ed, I don’t go on vacation I have stretch
marks, yup marijuana to a business degree and business profession, with
certificates is for me.

  * Reply to ZippyZipZip
  * Quote ZippyZipZip

### What a shame

Submitted by Monkey on June 11, 2016 - 1:12am

3 plants, innumerable hybrids, variable dose/ tollorence, confusion.  
Anecdotally, diagnosis cptsd, Tbi, bipolar, trapped nerve, ibd.  
Sativa helps with depression, pain and appetite, but does nothing for anxiety
or sleep.  
Indica relieves anxiety and helps to regulate sleep and mood, without this,
seemingly simple activities like visiting a shop can provoke an extreme
emotional reaction.  
In terms of causality, I blame supermarkets, and an unfortunate start in life,
but pay no attention to me, I'm quite mad.

  * Reply to Monkey
  * Quote Monkey

### Legalize!

Submitted by Fred Brown on October 10, 2016 - 5:48am

While recreational pot usage is controversial, many people agree and believe
that the drug should be legal for medical uses. Online Budz

  * Reply to Fred Brown
  * Quote Fred Brown

### all thanks to Mr Justin Scott

Submitted by Afred on October 16, 2018 - 6:04am

HERE IS MY TESTIMONY. I HAVE BEEN TRYING TO JOIN THE BROTHERHOOD OF ILLUMINATI
AND IT HAS BEEN PROVING ABORTIVE I HAVE TRIED SO MANY PEOPLE ALL TO NO AVAIL
UNTIL ONE DAY SOMEONE I DON’T EVEN KNOW SENT ME A NUMBER AND SAID THAT ALL I
HAVE BEEN LOOKING FOR LIES IN THE HANDS OF THAT NUMBER, I WAS WONDERING THEN I
TRIED CALLING THE NUMBER THAT SENT ME THE NUMBER BUT WAS NOT ALWAYS REACHABLE
THEN I DECIDED TO CALL THE NUMBER LOW AND BEHOLD FROM THEN MY LIFE HAS BEEN A
CHANGED ONE FOR THE BEST. MY BROTHERS AND SISTERS I AM NOW A LIVING PROOF THAT
THE GREAT ILLUMINATI EXISTS. SINCE THE VERY DAY I CALLED THAT NUMBER MY LIFE
HAS BEEN A CHANGED ONE. I WAS GIVING INSTRUCTION WHICH I DOUBTED TO FOLLOWED
BECAUSE THE ONCE I HAVE BEEN SEEING MADE ME REALLY TO LOOSE HOPE IN ALL OF
THEM BUT AT THE END I WAS INITIATED AS A MEMBER IN ILLUMINATI BROTHERHOOD
LEVEL 6, I WAS GIVING THE SUM OF 70 MILLION AND A CHOICE HOUSE IN UK WITH
CARS. MY DEAR BROTHERS AND SISTERS YOU WOUNT BELIEVE IN WHAT I AM SAYING RIGHT
NOW. INDEED THE BROTHERHOOD OF ILLUMINATI EXISTS,,,FOR MORE INFO.ON HOW TO
JOIN YOU CAN WHATSAPP US ON +2347031524375 or call +2347031524375

  * Reply to Afred
  * Quote Afred

### Hey Alfred

Submitted by Zendzian on December 28, 2018 - 4:57pm

Wahooey you!

  * Reply to Zendzian
  * Quote Zendzian

### I saw a study that

Submitted by David Nicholls on December 1, 2018 - 6:20pm

I saw a study that hallucinogenic Magic Mushrooms permanently alter
personality, making people more "open". Suspect something similar with'weed"
At with with legalization of "weed" it will be easier to study. my impression
of (white) people who smoke is they are more open & easy going but more
delusional that minor achievements (like having a tattoo or pony tail) are
major, so benefits & costs about equal amounts. Interesting it was once legal
& pervasive in Puerto Rico for a long time but was overwhelmingly voted
against in a referendum around 1918.

  * Reply to David Nicholls
  * Quote David Nicholls

## Post Comment

Your name

E-mail

The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.

Subject

Comment *

Notify me when new comments are posted

All comments __

Replies to my comment __

Leave this field blank

advertisement

### About the Author

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile_bottom/public/authors/joshua_leigh_gowin.jpg?itok=0Eb9SQNa)

**Joshua Gowin, Ph.D.** **,** earned his doctorate in behavioral neuroscience
at the University of Texas Health Science Center in Houston.

In Print:

The Psychology of Dexter (Psychology of Popular Culture)

View Author Profile

View Author Profile

### More Posts

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/newborn.jpg?itok=Z30bvvUG)

## Born Late: The Trouble With Due Dates

A classic study suggests what we get wrong about estimating delivery.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/blogs/30826/2014/10/161458-166080.jpg?itok=7I98cBKJ)

## How the Brain Processes Keeping up With the Joneses

The brain may use two systems for social comparisons

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/blogs/30826/2014/07/156053-160193.jpg?itok=5lc_6-2O)

## 7 Short-Term Effects of Marijuana on the Brain

Part 2 exploring how marijuana alters brain function: short-term effects

Continue Reading

advertisement

## Most Popular

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/robot-144x144-0_12-638_638_0.jpg?itok=l0ctuoaj)

Sex Robots and the End of Civilization

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/image1501-144x144-186_0-515_514.jpg?itok=YY3gsGoj)

New Neuroscience Discovery May Disrupt Biology

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/sebastian_kaulitzk_medically_accurate_illustration_of_vagus_nerve_gut-brain_axis-144x144-0_0-750_750_0.jpg?itok=Fqgj60gq)

Longer Exhalations Are an Easy Way to Hack Your Vagus Nerve

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/architecture-buildings-city-220444-144x144-537_0-1334_1337.jpg?itok=cQR3llvb)

The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/puppy_class_teaser-144x144-156_46-637_637.jpg?itok=OqnB4F4O)

Do Puppy Classes Have an Effect on Later Dog Behavior?

advertisement

## More Like This

  * Studies Show Long-Term Effects of Cannabis on the Brain 
  * 7 Short-Term Effects of Marijuana on the Brain
  * Does Long-Term Cannabis Use Stifle Motivation? 
  * Casual Marijuana Use Linked to Brain Changes in Young Adults
  * High Potency Marijuana Damages Cerebral Brain Connections

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

