

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

  *     *       *         * 

Log In or Sign Up

  * Log In
  * Sign Up

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * More 

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts ✕

# The federal drug scheduling system, explained

By German Lopez@germanrlopez Updated Aug 11, 2016, 9:05am EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** The federal drug scheduling system, explained

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

![](https://cdn.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/Qx-

RUssOLSDqTrabIGTDgxvIVO4=/82x0:2909x2120/1200x800/filters:focal\(82x0:2909x2120\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/49090513/GettyImages-98049909.0.jpg) Justin
Sullivan/Getty Images

The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has announced its decision: It will
keep marijuana in the same legal, regulatory category as heroin — schedule 1.

To many people, this is outrageous. Obviously, marijuana is nowhere as
dangerous as heroin. And it's not more dangerous than schedule 2 drugs like
cocaine and meth. So why the hell is pot schedule 1?

But the classification doesn't mean that the federal government thinks of
marijuana and heroin as equally dangerous drugs. The schedule reflects a more
complicated system — one that accounts for a drug's medical value as much as a
drug's potential for abuse.

A harsh schedule also does not mean a drug is totally illegal. Criminal laws,
while guided by the scheduling system, often take other factors into account.
For pot, they do — leaving it as one of the less-punished illicit drugs at the
federal level, even though it's schedule 1. And opioid painkillers, as one
example, are schedule 2 but legal for medical purposes.

Still, a drug's schedule is an important policy guide. A stricter schedule
lets the DEA more stringently limit access to a drug and its supply, which can
make a drug more difficult to research — as has happened for marijuana,
limiting researchers' ability to study the drug for its medical value. (As a
result, advocacy and medical groups have long contended that pot's schedule is
out of step with the available scientific evidence.)

So what is the scheduling system, how does it work, and what would it take to
reschedule a drug? Here's what you need to know.

### How does the US classify illicit drugs like marijuana?

![Prescription pills](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/uRoWUGoUhvZTvbZB3fR65hWhlXg=/0x0:2040x1476/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:2040x1476\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4241747/prescription%20pills.jpg) Stan
Honda/AFP via Getty Images

Under the Controlled Substances Act, the federal government — which has
largely relegated the regulation of drugs to the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) — puts each drug into a classification, known as a
schedule, based on its medical value and potential for abuse.

To initiate a schedule, the DEA first asks if a drug can be abused. If the
answer is yes, then it's put on a schedule. If no, the drug is left out. After
that, the drug's medical value and relative potential for abuse are evaluated
to decide where on the scale it lands.

"Congress did not clearly define abuse under the Controlled Substances Act"

The two big issues, then, are a drug's potential for abuse and its medical
value. Congress did not clearly define abuse under the Controlled Substances
Act. But for federal agencies responsible for classifying drugs, abuse is when
individuals take a substance recreationally and develop personal health
hazards or pose other risks to society as a whole. To find medical value, a
drug must have large-scale clinical trials to back it up — similar to what the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) would expect from any other drug entering
the market. **  
**

Schedule 1 drugs have no medical value and high potential for abuse, while
schedule 2 through 5 substances all have some medical value but differ in
ranking depending on their potential for abuse (from high to low).

Some examples of the drugs that are on each schedule:

  * Schedule 1: marijuana, heroin, LSD, ecstasy, and magic mushrooms 

  * Schedule 2: cocaine, meth, oxycodone, Adderall, Ritalin, and Vicodin 

  * Schedule 3: Tylenol with codeine, ketamine, anabolic steroids, and testosterone 

  * Schedule 4: Xanax, Soma, Darvocet, Valium, and Ambien 

  * Schedule 5: Robitussin AC, Lomotil, Motofen, Lyrica, and Parepectolin

In general, schedule 1 and 2 drugs have the most regulatory restrictions on
research, supply, and access, and schedule 5 drugs have the least.

### Does the federal government really consider marijuana more dangerous than

cocaine?

![Cocaine.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/2FTW6VYX3PY0Us54fJ2DTH52AVo=/0x0:2040x1654/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:2040x1654\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4241751/lines%20of%20cocaine.jpg) SSPL via
Getty Images

To many people, one of the more bewildering aspects of the scheduling system
is that marijuana is schedule 1 — the same category as heroin — while cocaine
and meth are schedule 2.

But that doesn't necessarily mean the federal government views marijuana and
heroin as equally dangerous drugs, or that it considers marijuana to be more
dangerous than meth or cocaine. Schedule 1 and 2 drugs are both described as
having "a high potential for abuse" — a vague description that doesn't rank
drugs in the two categories as equal or different.

The big distinction between schedule 1 and 2 substances, instead, is whether
the federal government thinks a drug has medical value. The DEA says schedule
2 substances have some medical value and schedule 1 substances do not, so the
latter receive more regulatory scrutiny even though they may not be more
dangerous.

"The war on drugs was initiated when much of the nation was in hysterics about
what drugs would do to the moral fabric of the country"

It may be helpful to think of the scheduling system as made up of two distinct
groups: nonmedical and medical. The nonmedical group comprises the schedule 1
drugs, which are considered to have no medical value and high potential for
abuse. The medical group comprises the schedule 2 to 5 drugs, which have some
medical value and are numerically ranked based on abuse potential.

There are some cultural considerations to the scheduling system, as well. The
war on drugs was initiated at a time when much of the nation was in hysterics
about what drugs like marijuana and LSD would do to the moral fabric of the
country. Marijuana was seen as dangerous not necessarily because of its direct
health effects, but because of the perception — partially rooted in racial
prejudices — that pot makes people immoral, lazy, and even violent. This
perception persists among many supporters of the war on drugs to this day, and
it's still reflected in America's drug scheduling.

Beyond the scheduling system, the federal government imposes criminal
trafficking penalties for drugs that don't always align with their scheduling.
For instance, marijuana trafficking is generally punished less severely than
cocaine. And state governments can set up their own criminal penalties and
schedules for drugs as well.

### Why does a drug's schedule matter?

![A bag of medical marijuana.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/vAnoup68e4Qh4Cd7Xk5C-b2rVAg=/0x0:2040x1360/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:2040x1360\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4241753/medical%20marijuana.jpg) Justin
Sullivan/Getty Images

A drug's schedule sets the groundwork for the federal regulation of a
controlled substance.

Schedule 1 and 2 drugs face the strictest regulations. Schedule 1 drugs are
effectively illegal for anything outside of research, and schedule 2 drugs can
be used for limited medical purposes with the DEA's approval — for example,
through a license for prescriptions.

The DEA even sets strict limits on the production of schedule 1 and 2 drugs,
although the limits vary from drug to drug. Only one place in the US — a
University of Mississippi farm — is currently allowed to grow marijuana under
federal regulations, and the pot is limited to research purposes. By
comparison, several private companies produce oxycodone, a schedule 2
substance, and use the drug for prescription painkillers.

"A drug's schedule can interfere with state laws"

A drug's schedule can interfere with state laws. Marijuana's schedule 1 status
is one reason banks are reluctant to open accounts for pot shops and growers
in Colorado and Washington, even though the businesses are legal under state
law.

Federal tax law also prohibits businesses from deducting many expenses related
to the trafficking of schedule 1 and 2 drugs, which can cause state-legal
marijuana businesses' effective income tax rates to soar as high as 90
percent.

The DEA sometimes uses marijuana's classification to pressure physicians,
hospitals, and pharmacies into not working with medical marijuana operations
that are compliant with state law. If these medical providers don't comply,
the DEA threatens to take back licensing that lets doctors prescribe drugs,
such as prescription painkillers with oxycodone, that contain scheduled
substances.

### What does it take to reschedule a drug?

![Congress.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/ZCjj3PKU2-x7xvSgnb8GMD4UrYY=/0x0:2040x1360/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:2040x1360\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4241755/Congress.jpg) Brendan Hoffman/Getty
Images

Congress could pass a law that changes or restricts a drug's schedule. But
Congress mostly leaves scheduling to federal agencies like the DEA. (One
exception: Congress previously passed the Hillory J. Farias and Samantha Reid
Date-Rape Prevention Act of 2000 and added gamma hydroxybutyric acid, a date
rape drug, to the scheduling system.)

The US attorney general can also initiate a review process that would look at
the available evidence and potentially change a drug's schedule. The review
includes several steps:

  1. The DEA, US Department of Health and Human Services, or public petition initiate a review.
  2. The DEA requests HHS to review the medical and scientific evidence regarding a drug's schedule.
  3. HHS, through the FDA, evaluates the drug and its schedule through an analysis based on eight factors. Among the factors: a drug's potential for abuse, the scientific evidence for a drug's pharmacological effects, and the scientific evidence for a drug's medical use.
  4. HHS recommends a schedule based on the scientific evidence.
  5. The DEA conducts its own review, with the HHS's determination in mind, and sets the final schedule.

Although very rigorous, this process has been successfully carried out in the
past. For example, the DEA in 2014 announced it had rescheduled hydrocodone
combination products, or opioid-based prescription painkillers, from schedule
3 to schedule 2.

"Almost 7 million Americans abuse controlled-substance prescription
medications, including opioid painkillers, resulting in more deaths from
prescription drug overdoses than auto accidents," former DEA head Michele
Leonhart said in a 2014 statement. "Today's action recognizes that these
products are some of the most addictive and potentially dangerous prescription
medications available."

### Can a drug be unscheduled?

![A marijuana plant.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/guB__rlOGwDjiTTAW9PqKGppcdo=/0x0:3357x2189/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:3357x2189\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4179862/marijuana%20plant.jpg) RJ
Sangosti/Denver Post via Getty Images

It's possible, but it's much more difficult than simply rescheduling a drug.

One big hurdle is international treaties. The US is party to international
agreements that effectively require some drugs, including marijuana, to remain
within the scheduling system — and possibly schedule 1 or 2.

Proving that a drug has no potential for abuse is also very difficult, if not
impossible. An American Scientist analysis, for instance, found even
relatively safe marijuana has some potential for dependence; it's less
addictive than heroin, meth, cocaine, nicotine, and alcohol, but more
addictive than hallucinogens such as LSD, which doesn't cause much, if any,
dependence. And since pot is widely used recreationally, that makes it a sure
lock-in for "high potential for abuse."

The two major recreational drugs not on the scheduling system — alcohol and
tobacco — required a specific exemption in the Controlled Substances Act. Mark
Kleiman, a drug policy expert, argues both would be marked schedule 1 if they
were evaluated today, since they're widely used recreationally, addictive,
detrimental to one's health and society, and deadly.

### Why is marijuana still schedule 1?

![A bud of marijuana.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/rfRlXt6S1LvnXP6SWeLaTs0pF0w=/0x0:3000x1914/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:3000x1914\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/3964930/GettyImages-149383341.jpg)

Frederic Brown/AFP via Getty Images

When marijuana's classification comes under review, its schedule 1 status is
consistently maintained due to insufficient scientific evidence of its medical
value.

Specifically, the scientific evidence available for marijuana doesn't pass the
threshold required by federal agencies to acknowledge a drug's potential as
medicine. No studies proved the drug's medical efficacy in controlled, large-
scale clinical environments. No studies established adequate safety protocols
for marijuana. And marijuana's full chemical structure has never been
characterized and analyzed.

There have been some studies showing marijuana has medical benefits,
particularly for pain and muscle stiffness. But these studies haven’t been
large enough to meet the threshold the DEA and other federal agencies, such as
the FDA, require to prove a drug has medical value — by proving its worth in
controlled, large-scale clinical trials.

"Changing marijuana's schedule is a bit of a Catch-22"

But one reason there isn't enough scientific evidence to change marijuana's
schedule 1 status might be, in fact, the drug's schedule 1 status. The DEA
restricts how much marijuana can go to research. To obtain legal marijuana
supplies for studies, researchers must get their studies approved by HHS, the
FDA, and the DEA.

Changing marijuana's schedule, in other words, is a bit of a Catch-22. There
needs to be a certain level of scientific research that proves marijuana has
medical value, but the federal government's restrictions make it difficult to
conduct that research.

To address those issues, the DEA hopes to allow much more research into pot in
other ways. For one, it’s increased the amount of pot grown for research over
the past few years, and it plans to continue doing so. Crucially, it also
plans to let more people and facilities grow marijuana for studies — aside
from University of Mississippi, the only federally legal grower right now.

That could significantly open up research access to pot — including
potentially higher-quality marijuana and different strains of the drug, which
the University of Mississippi doesn’t currently meet demands for. But the
effects of the changes remain to be seen.

While a reclassification would be a symbolic win for legalization advocates,
Kleiman says it wouldn't have much practical effect. Schedule 2 substances
typically require a prescription to be distributed, and the state-legal
marijuana dispensaries and retail outlets don’t work through traditional
prescriptions (they distribute "recommendations" for medical marijuana) — so
even rescheduling may not open up access. (Cocaine and meth are schedule 2,
and they’re definitely not easily legally available, after all.)

Still, if the federal government acknowledged pot’s medical value through a
schedule 2 classification, advocates hoped it would make federal agencies far
more receptive to paying for and approving medical research into pot. But the
DEA hopes its other steps will unlock far more research instead.

There would be some effects on policy, such as allowing state-legal marijuana
business to deduct certain taxes, if marijuana was reclassified to schedule 3
or lower. But that’s extremely unlikely: Schedule 3 and lower drugs need to
have some medical value _and_ not meet criteria for "high potential for
abuse." Since marijuana is widely used recreationally, it’s a lock-in for
"high potential for abuse," keeping it at schedule 1 or 2.

### Is there an alternative to the scheduling system?

![Bottles of alcohol.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/N3bsXrKG6jSb0fgbMaCnZEksxR8=/0x0:5616x3744/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:5616x3744\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4241757/alcohol.jpg) Mario Tama/Getty Images

Kleiman has proposed moving to a scheduling system that looks only at a drug's
potential for abuse without considering whether it has medical value. The
regime would control all intoxicating drugs, including alcohol, to try to
prevent problematic drug use, based on the scientific definition of drug abuse
disorders. Whether a drug has medical value would be addressed by a different
set of policies focused on medical drug production and health care.

"Whether something is medication is a separate set of issues," Kleiman said.
His ideal system "would classify drugs by dangerousness, with a penalties for
dealing ramping up with more dangerous drugs."

""The current prohibition system has generated many bad side effects""

One of the problems with the current scheduling system, Kleiman argued, is it
tries to lump drugs with completely different effects and risks into a few
categories. "There are lots of different drugs in the world, and we have to
figure out what to do with each of them," Kleiman said. "Some categorization
is helpful, but it's not as if the drugs neatly break down."

Kleiman, who supports decriminalizing illicit drug use and legalizing
marijuana, said an ideal replacement to the current scheduling system would
also come with less stringent criminal penalties.

"The current prohibition system has generated many bad side effects," Kleiman
said. "We should try to develop new policies that duplicate the success of
preventing the development of more drugs that are as big a problem as alcohol,
but with fewer of the costs."

The war on drugs, explained

* * *

### Watch: America's opioid epidemic, explained

## In this Storystream

### The opioid epidemic: America's deadliest drug overdose crisis

  * Can medical marijuana help combat the opioid epidemic? Maybe not, new study finds.
  * The federal government won't change marijuana's "schedule." Here's what that means.
  * Congress just passed a big bill to fight the opioid epidemic. But there’s a catch.

View all 256 stories

## Next Up In Explainers

  * The race to be the next British prime minister, briefly explained
  * Why are so many music festivals total disasters?
  * What Hong Kong’s massive protests are really about
  * Elaine Chao and Mitch McConnell’s potential conflict of interest, explained
  * “We don’t want to be knee-jerk”: YouTube responds to Vox on its harassment policies
  * What the House’s planned contempt vote against Barr actually means, explained

### Most Read

  1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
  2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.
  3. Mary Meeker’s most important trends on the internet Here are all the slides, plus analysis.
  4. Processed foods are a much bigger health problem than we thought They’ve been linked to disease and overeating. Could our microbiome explain why?
  5. Elaine Chao and Mitch McConnell’s potential conflict of interest, explained Chao oversaw grant money that could benefit her husband politically. Is it an ethics violation?

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 104. The sidebar size is long.

## The Latest

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989647/GettyImages_1147791146.165114.0.jpg)

## Vox Sentences: Maine moves to expand abortion access

By Catherine Kim

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989585/Anthony_Noto_2.0.0.jpg)

## Why SoFi would be interested in buying naming rights to the LA football

stadium

By Theodore Schleifer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989470/Rajiv_Shah_1.0.0.jpg)

## Rockefeller Foundation’s Rajiv Shah explains how tech can actually help

save the world

By Rani Molla

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989472/1144683170.jpg.0.jpg)

## Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for

representation

By Li Zhou

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989385/BlackLivesMatterFresnoLawsuit.0.jpg)

## Support for Black Lives Matter cost church its polling place designation,

lawsuit claims

By P.R. Lockhart

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989302/1155298105.jpg.0.jpg)

## How the US women’s team World Cup 13-0 win became about pay equity

By Tara Golshan

Chorus

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * GDPR Commitment
  * Communications Preferences

  * Contact

  * Send Us a Tip
  * Masthead
  * About Us
  * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

