

  * Home
  * Blog
  * Alumni
  * Resources
  * Contact
  * (888) 694-9996

![Pyramid Healthcare Logo](https://www.pyramidhealthcarepa.com/wp-

content/themes/pyramid/images/pyramid-healthcare-logo.png)

  * About
    * Center of Excellence
    * Recovery 360
    * Behavioral Healthcare Services Video
    * History/Leadership
    * Treatment Partners
    * Careers
  * Careers
  * Admissions
    * Assessment Process
    * Insurance & Payment
    * FAQs
    * Professional Referrals
  * Services
    * Get Help for Adults
    * Get Help for Teens
  * Locations
    * New Jersey
    * Hammonton
    * Pennsylvania
    * Central PA
    * Eastern PA
    * Western PA
    * Georgia
    * Pyramid Family Behavioral Healthcare
    * Assessment Center
  * Get Help

Menu

  * About
  * Careers
  * Admissions
  * Services
  * Locations
  * Get Help
  * Home
  * Blog
  * Resources
  * Contact

Home › Blog › Health Effects of Recreational and Medical Marijuana Use

# Health Effects of Recreational and Medical Marijuana Use

Jun 5, 2017 by Pyramid Healthcare

![Effects of Marijuana Use](https://www.pyramidhealthcarepa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/06/Effects-of-Marijuana-Use-360x360.jpg)

With marijuana legalization in several states for medicinal and recreational
purposes, many people are starting to relax their attitudes towards the drug.
It's important to recognize that even legal substances, like alcohol and
nicotine, can have incredibly harmful health hazards.

Research shows that marijuana has detrimental effects on the brain, body, and
mind. Even though marijuana seems harmless because it’s from the hemp plant,
Cannabis sativa, it is important to remember that it is still a drug and can
be dangerous.

## Physical

Marijuana smoke irritates the lungs, contributing to issues like daily cough
and phlegm, as well as lung illness including pneumonia and bronchitis.
Marijuana increases the heart rate for up to three hours after smoking. This
can increase the chance of a heart attack, especially in people who already
have heart disease.

Marijuana has a negative impact on fertility as well. Men who smoke marijuana
regularly demonstrate lower sperm count, which can contribute to difficulty
conceiving a child. Smoking marijuana during pregnancy has been linked to low
birth weight, and problems with attention, memory, and problem solving in the
child.

## Neurological

Marijuana affects the brain almost immediately after use. People experience
altered senses, an altered sense of time, changes in mood, impaired body
movement, difficulty with thinking and problem solving, and impaired memory.

People who begin using marijuana as teenagers and continue to use the drug
into adulthood have impaired function in the thinking, memory, and learning
parts of the brain. This can be long lasting or even permanent.

## Psychological

When someone is high on marijuana, they may experience temporary
hallucinations, or sensations and images that seem real even though they are
not. They may also experience temporary paranoia, which is an extreme and
unreasonable distrust of others.

Marijuana has also been linked to the development of psychotic disorders like
schizophrenia, especially if someone has a genetic predisposition.
Schizophrenia is characterized by hallucinations, paranoia, and disorganized
thinking. On the other hand, people with schizophrenia may find that their
symptoms are exacerbated by marijuana use. Long-term marijuana use has been
associated with other mental health conditions including depression, anxiety,
and suicidal thoughts among adolescents.

While marijuana use can have negative health consequences, medical marijuana
is frequently used to create an appetite in AIDS patients and reduce nausea
and vomiting associated with chemotherapy. It’s also been used to help relieve
symptoms of other medical conditions like glaucoma, seizure disorders, and
multiple sclerosis.

Despite normalization of marijuana, it is still an addictive substance. If you
or someone you know is addicted to marijuana, Pyramid Healthcare provides
treatment for teens and adults. Get confidential help for you or a loved one.

Written by Shaylyn Forte, LPC, CAADC

_References:_

  1. https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana
  2. http://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/the-health-effects-of-marijuana-from-recreational-and-medical-use-2016081910180
  3. http://www.webmd.com/pain-management/features/medical-marijuana-uses

_All content provided on the Pyramid Healthcare, Inc. blog is for
informational purposes only and is not intended to represent medical advice.
Pyramid Healthcare, Inc. and its blog authors make no guarantees as to the
accuracy or completeness of any information on this site or found by following
any link on this site. Pyramid Healthcare, Inc. and its blog authors will not
be liable for any errors or omissions in the information provided in the blog,
nor be liable for any losses, injuries, or damages from the display or use of
this information. The opinions stated in this blog reflect those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of Pyramid Healthcare, Inc. These terms
and conditions are subject to change at any time with or without notice._

Categories

  * Addiction
  * Adolescents
  * Blog
  * Events
  * Mental Health
  * News
  * PFBH Assessment Center
  * Press Releases
  * Pyramid Family Behavioral Healthcare
  * Recovery
  * Treatment

Recent Posts

  * Understanding Depression Relapses and Why They Occur
  * What Does a Mental Health Assessment Cover?
  * How Are Mental Health Disorders Diagnosed?
  * Pain Management for Opiate Addicts
  * Healing from Parental Criticism

## Contact Pyramid Healthcare and get confidential help.

  * First Name*

  * Last Name*

  * Email*

  * Phone*

  * Insurance?*

Insurance? (required)Blue CrossHMOMedicaidNo InsuranceOtherPPODon't Know

  * Seeking care for? (required)*

Seeking care for? (required)MyselfSpouseFamily MemberFriendNone of the above

  * Client's Name

  * How can we help you?

  *     * Yes, please verify my insurance for FREE.
  * Comments

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

ACCREDITED BY THE COMMISSION ON THE ACCREDITATION OF REHABILITATION FACILITIES

**By submitting this form, I agree to be contacted by Pyramid Healthcare.**
One of our experienced intake professionals will contact you shortly to
discuss your treatment and recovery options. We respect your privacy, and all
information shared with us is completely confidential.

![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/pfbh-logo-grayscale.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/Silvermistrecovery.com_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/myrealrecovery.com_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/OctoberRoad_Logo_Horizontal_Black.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/high_focus_center_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/silverridgerecovery.com_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/rehab_after_work_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/life_counseling_services_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/the_light_program_logo_gray.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/SOH_logo_h_grey.png) ![](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/mazzittiandsullivan.com_counseling_logo_gray.png)
![](/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/mazzittiandsullivan.com_EAP_logo_gray.png)

  * Admissions
  * Services
  * Locations
  * Careers
  * Social Media Policy
  * Privacy Policy

Copyright (C)2019 Pyramid Healthcare. All rights reserved. (888) 694-9996

Visit Our Recovery Communities

  * LinkedIn
  * Facebook

![](\\)

__CALL NOW

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

