

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » Research Reports » Marijuana » What are marijuana's
long-term effects on the brain?

# Marijuana

Email Facebook Twitter

## What are marijuana's long-term effects on the brain?

Substantial evidence from animal research and a growing number of studies in
humans indicate that marijuana exposure during development can cause long-term
or possibly permanent adverse changes in the brain. Rats exposed to THC before
birth, soon after birth, or during adolescence show notable problems with
specific learning and memory tasks later in life.32-34 Cognitive impairments
in adult rats exposed to THC during adolescence are associated with structural
and functional changes in the hippocampus.35-37 Studies in rats also show that
adolescent exposure to THC is associated with an altered reward system,
increasing the likelihood that an animal will self-administer other drugs
(e.g., heroin) when given an opportunity (see "Is marijuana a gateway drug?").

Imaging studies of marijuana's impact on brain structure in humans have shown
conflicting results. Some studies suggest regular marijuana use in adolescence
is associated with altered connectivity and reduced volume of specific brain
regions involved in a broad range of executive functions such as memory,
learning, and impulse control compared to people who do not use.38,39 Other
studies have not found significant structural differences between the brains
of people who do and do not use the drug.40

Several studies, including two large longitudinal studies, suggest that
marijuana use can cause functional impairment in cognitive abilities but that
the degree and/or duration of the impairment depends on the age when a person
began using and how much and how long he or she used.41

Among nearly 4,000 young adults in the Coronary Artery Risk Development in
Young Adults study tracked over a 25-year period until mid-adulthood,
cumulative lifetime exposure to marijuana was associated with lower scores on
a test of verbal memory but did not affect other cognitive abilities such as
processing speed or executive function. The effect was sizeable and
significant even after eliminating those involved with current use and after
adjusting for confounding factors such as demographic factors, other drug and
alcohol use, and other psychiatric conditions such as depression.42

A large longitudinal study in New Zealand found that persistent marijuana use
disorder with frequent use starting in adolescence was associated with a loss
of an average of 6 or up to 8 IQ points measured in mid-adulthood.43
Significantly, in that study, those who used marijuana heavily as teenagers
and quit using as adults did not recover the lost IQ points. People who only
began using marijuana heavily in adulthood did not lose IQ points. These
results suggest that marijuana has its strongest long-term impact on young
people whose brains are still busy building new connections and maturing in
other ways. The endocannabinoid system is known to play an important role in
the proper formation of synapses (the connections between neurons) during
early brain development, and a similar role has been proposed for the
refinement of neural connections during adolescence. If the long-term effects
of marijuana use on cognitive functioning or IQ are upheld by future research,
this may be one avenue by which marijuana use during adolescence produces its
long-term effects.44

However, recent results from two prospective longitudinal twin studies did not
support a causal relationship between marijuana use and IQ loss. Those who
used marijuana did show a significant decline in verbal ability (equivalent to
4 IQ points) and in general knowledge between the preteen years (ages 9 to 12,
before use) and late adolescence/early adulthood (ages 17 to 20). However, at
the start of the study, those who would use in the future already had lower
scores on these measures than those who would not use in the future, and no
predictable difference was found between twins when one used marijuana and one
did not. This suggests that observed IQ declines, at least across adolescence,
may be caused by shared familial factors (e.g., genetics, family environment),
not by marijuana use itself.45 It should be noted, though, that these studies
were shorter in duration than the New Zealand study and did not explore the
impact of the dose of marijuana (i.e., heavy use) or the development of a
cannabis use disorder; this may have masked a dose- or diagnosis-dependent
effect.

The ability to draw definitive conclusions about marijuana's long-term impact
on the human brain from past studies is often limited by the fact that study
participants use multiple substances, and there is often limited data about
the participants' health or mental functioning prior to the study. Over the
next decade, the National Institutes of Health is funding the Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development (ABCD) study--a major longitudinal study that will track
a large sample of young Americans from late childhood (before first use of
drugs) to early adulthood. The study will use neuroimaging and other advanced
tools to clarify precisely how and to what extent marijuana and other
substances, alone and in combination, affect adolescent brain development.

## Marijuana, Memory, and the Hippocampus

![This is an image of a rat brain with the different parts of the brain

labeled.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/hippocampus.jpg)Image
by the NIDA

Distribution of cannabinoid receptors in the rat brain. Brain image reveals
high levels (shown in orange and yellow) of cannabinoid receptors in many
areas, including the cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, and nucleus accumbens
(ventral striatum).

Memory impairment from marijuana use occurs because THC alters how the
hippocampus, a brain area responsible for memory formation, processes
information. Most of the evidence supporting this assertion comes from animal
studies. For example, rats exposed to THC _in utero_ , soon after birth, or
during adolescence, show notable problems with specific learning/memory tasks
later in life. Moreover, cognitive impairment in adult rats is associated with
structural and functional changes in the hippocampus from THC exposure during
adolescence.

As people age, they lose neurons in the hippocampus, which decreases their
ability to learn new information. Chronic THC exposure may hasten age-related
loss of hippocampal neurons. In one study, rats exposed to THC every day for 8
months (approximately 30 percent of their lifespan) showed a level of nerve
cell loss at 11 to 12 months of age that equaled that of unexposed animals
twice their age.

Prev Index Next

This page was last updated June 2018

![What are marijuana's long-term effects on the

brain?](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/rr-

marijunana-cover-thumb_1.jpg)

## Contents

  * Letter From the Director
  * What is marijuana? 
  * What is the scope of marijuana use in the United States?
  * What are marijuana effects?
  * How does marijuana produce its effects?
  * Does marijuana use affect driving?
  * Is marijuana addictive?
  * What are marijuana's long-term effects on the brain?
  * Is marijuana a gateway drug?
  * How does marijuana use affect school, work, and social life?
  * Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?
  * What are marijuana's effects on lung health?
  * What are marijuana’s effects on other aspects of physical health?
  * Is marijuana safe and effective as medicine?
  * What are the effects of secondhand exposure to marijuana smoke?
  * Can marijuana use during and after pregnancy harm the baby?
  * Available Treatments for Marijuana Use Disorders
  * Where can I get further information about marijuana?
  * References

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (782KB)
  * ePub (298KB)
  * Kindle (706KB)
  * Online Only

## Ordering Publications

Call **1-877-643-2644** or:  
![NIDA Drug

Pubs](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/feat_drug_pubs%281%29.png)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 25). Marijuana. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana

NIDA. "Marijuana." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 25 Jun. 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana.

NIDA. Marijuana. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana. June 25,
2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Featured Publications

![Cover art for Opioid Facts for

Teens](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/opioidsforteenscover.jpg?itok=j4M3QgvB)

Opioid Facts for Teens

![Science of Addiction

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/soa_cover_2018_0.gif?itok=ZFYtyFxC)

Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction

![](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/pinkandblue_pr_1.jpg?itok=y-uXmu4a)

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...

![Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to

Know](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/parents_mj_facts_cover.png?itok=doAsxOEp)

Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## ​Research Reports

This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the
educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The
series reports on research findings of national interest.

View all ​Research Reports

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

