

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

# Child prostitution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Prostitution of
children![photograph](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e1/The_White_Slave_statue.jpg/275px-

The_White_Slave_statue.jpg)

Statue of a young 19th-century prostituted child  
_The White Slave_ by Abastenia St. Leger Eberle (1878–1942)

* * *

Areas practiced| Worldwide  
Number affected| Up to 10 million[1]  
Legal status| Illegal under international law and national laws

**Child prostitution** is prostitution involving a child, and it is a form of
commercial sexual exploitation of children. The term normally refers to
prostitution of a minor, or person under the legal age of consent. In most
jurisdictions, child prostitution is illegal as part of general prohibition on
prostitution.

Child prostitution usually manifests in the form of sex trafficking, in which
a child is kidnapped or tricked into becoming involved in the sex trade, or
survival sex, in which the child engages in sexual activities to procure basic
essentials such as food and shelter. Prostitution of children is commonly
associated with child pornography, and they often overlap. Some people travel
to foreign countries to engage in child sex tourism. Research suggests that
there may be as many as 10 million children involved in prostitution
worldwide.[1] The practice is most widespread in South America and Asia, but
prostitution of children exists globally,[2] in undeveloped countries as well
as developed.[3] Most of the children involved with prostitution are girls,
despite an increase in the number of young boys in the trade.

All member countries of the United Nations have committed to prohibiting child
prostitution, either under the Convention on the Rights of the Child or the
Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography. Various campaigns and organizations have been created to try to
stop the practice.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
  * 2 Causes and types
    * 2.1 Human trafficking
    * 2.2 Survival sex
  * 3 Consequences
    * 3.1 Treatment of prostituted children
    * 3.2 Physical and psychological effects
  * 4 Prohibition
  * 5 Prevalence
    * 5.1 Statistical summary
    * 5.2 Africa
    * 5.2.1 Tanzania
    * 5.3 Americas
    * 5.3.1 Argentina
    * 5.3.2 Brazil
    * 5.3.3 El Salvador
    * 5.3.4 United States
    * 5.4 Asia Pacific
    * 5.4.1 Bangladesh
    * 5.4.2 India
    * 5.4.3 Nepal
    * 5.4.4 Philippines
    * 5.4.5 Sri Lanka
    * 5.4.6 Thailand
    * 5.4.7 Vietnam
  * 6 Demographics
  * 7 Views
    * 7.1 Public perception
    * 7.2 Opposition
  * 8 History
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 Bibliography
  * 12 External links

## Definitions

## Sex and the law

![Scale of justice

2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/100px-

Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png)  
Social issues

  * Age of consent
  * Antisexualism
  * Censorship
  * Circumcision
  * Deviant sexual intercourse
  * Ethics
  * Homophobia
  * Intersex
  * Miscegenation (interracial relations)
  * Norms
  * Objectification
  * Pornography
  * Public morality
  * Red-light district
  * Reproductive rights
  * Same-sex marriage
  * Survival sex

Specific offences  
( _Varies byjurisdiction_ )

  * Adultery
  * Bestiality
  * Buggery
  * Child grooming
  * Child pornography
  * Child prostitution
  * Criminal transmission of HIV
  * Female genital mutilation
  * Fornication
  * Incest
  * Pimping
  * Prostitution
    * forced
    * procuring
  * Public indecency
  * Rape
    * statutory
    * marital
  * Seduction
  * Sexting
  * Sexual abuse
    * child
  * Sexual assault
  * Sexual harassment
  * Slavery
  * Sodomy
  * UK Section 63 (2008)
  * Violence
  * Trafficking
  * Voyeurism

Sex offender registration

  * Sex offender registry
  * Sex offender registries in the United States

Portals

  * Sexuality
  * Criminal justice
  * Law

  * v

  * t
  * e

Several definitions have been proposed for prostitution of children. The
United Nations defines it as "the act of engaging or offering the services of
a child to perform sexual acts for money or other consideration with that
person or any other person".[4] The Convention on the Rights of the Child's
Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child
Pornography defines the practice as "the act of obtaining, procuring or
offering the services of a child or inducing a child to perform sexual acts
for any form of compensation or reward". Both emphasize that the child is a
victim of exploitation, even if apparent consent is given.[5] The Worst Forms
of Child Labour Convention, 1999, (Convention No 182) of the International
Labour Organization (ILO) describes it as the "use, procuring or offering of a
child for prostitution".[6]

According to the International Labour Office in Geneva, prostitution of
children and child pornography are two primary forms of child sexual
exploitation, which often overlap.[2] The former is sometimes used to describe
the wider concept of commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC). It
excludes other identifiable manifestations of CSEC, such as commercial sexual
exploitation through child marriage, domestic child labor, and the trafficking
of children for sexual purposes.[7]

The terminology applied to the practice is a subject of dispute. The United
States Department of Justice states, "The term itself implies the idea of
choice, when in fact that is not the case."[8] Groups that oppose the practice
believe that the terms _child prostitution_ and _child prostitute_ carry
problematic connotations because children are generally not expected to be
able to make informed decisions about prostitution. As an alternative, they
use the terms _prostituted children_ and _the commercial sexual exploitation
of children_.[9] Other groups use the term _child sex worker_ to imply that
the children are not always "passive victims".[9]

## Causes and types

Children are often forced by social structures and individual agents into
situations in which adults take advantage of their vulnerability and sexually
exploit and abuse them by selling them or selling their bodies. Structure and
agency commonly combine to force a child into commercial sex: for example, the
prostitution of a child frequently follows from prior sexual abuse, often in
the child's home.[10] Many believe that the majority of prostituted children
are from Southeast Asia and the majority of their clients are Western sex
tourists, but sociologist Louise Brown argues that, while Westerners
contribute to the growth of the industry, most of the children's customers are
Asian locals.[11]

Prostitution of children usually occurs in environments such as brothels, bars
and clubs, homes, or particular streets and areas (usually in socially run
down places). According to one study, only about 10% of prostituted children
have a pimp and over 45% entered the business through friends. Maureen Jaffe
and Sonia Rosen from the International Child Labor Study Office write that
cases vary widely: "Some victims are runaways from home or State institutions,
others are sold by their parents or forced or tricked into prostitution, and
others are street children. Some are amateurs and others professionals.
Although one tends to think first and foremost of young girls in the trade,
there is an increase in the number of young boys involved in prostitution. The
most disquieting cases are those children who are forced into the trade and
then incarcerated. These children run the possible further risk of torture and
subsequent death."[3]

Deputy Attorney General James Cole, of the United States Department of
Justice, stated, "Most of the victimized children who face prostitution are
vulnerable children who are exploited. Many predators target runaways, sexual
assault victims, and children who have been harshly neglected by their
biological parents. Not only have they faced traumatic violence that affects
their physical being, but become intertwined into the violent life of
prostitution."[12]

### Human trafficking

Human trafficking is defined by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) as "the recruitment, transport, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a
person by such means as threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of
abduction, of fraud or deception for the purpose of exploitation".[13] The
UNODC approximates the number of victims worldwide to be around 2.5
million.[13] UNICEF reports that since 1982 about 30 million children have
been trafficked.[14] Trafficking for sexual slavery accounts for 79% of cases,
with the majority of victims being female, of which an estimated 20% are
children. Women are also often perpetrators as well.[15]

In 2007 the UN founded United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human
Trafficking (UN.GIFT). In cooperation with UNICEF, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) the United Nations took a grant from the United Arab
Emirates to establish UN.GIFT. UN.GIFT aims to fight human trafficking through
a mutual support from its stakeholders which includes governments, businesses,
and other large global actors. Their first initiative is to spread the word
that human trafficking is immoral and has become a growing problem that it
will take a global cooperation to cease its continuation. UN.GIFT strives to
lower the demand for this exploitation and create a safe environment for
potential victims.[16]

In some cases, victims of sex trafficking are kidnapped by strangers, either
by force or by being tricked into becoming involved through lies and false
promises.[17] In other cases, the children's families allow or force them to
enter the industry as a result of severe poverty.[18] In cases where they are
taken out of the country, traffickers prey on the fact that the children are
often unable to understand the language of their new location and are unaware
of their legal rights.[17]

Research indicates that traffickers have a preference for females age 12 and
under because young children are more easily molded into the role assigned to
them and because they are assumed to be virgins, which is valuable to
consumers. The girls are then made to appear older, and documents are forged
as protection against law enforcement.[17] Victims tend to share similar
backgrounds, often coming from communities with high crime rates and lack of
access to education. However, victimology is not limited to this, and males
and females coming from various backgrounds have become involved in sex
trafficking.[17]

Psychotherapist Mary De Chesnay identifies five stages in the process of sex
trafficking: vulnerability, recruitment, transportation, exploitation, and
liberation.[19] The final stage, De Chesnay writes, is rarely completed.
Murder and accidental death rates are high, as are suicides, and very few
trafficking victims are rescued or escape.[20]

### Survival sex

See also: Survival sex

The other primary form of prostitution of children is "survival sex". The US
Department of Justice states:

> "Survival sex" occurs when a child engages in sex acts in order to obtain
money, food, shelter, clothing, or other items needed in order to survive. In
these situations, the transaction typically only involves the child and the
customer; children engaged in survival sex are usually not controlled or
directed by pimps, madams, or other traffickers. Any individual who pays for
sex with a child, whether the child is controlled by a pimp or is engaged in
survival sex, can be prosecuted.[21]

A study commissioned by UNICEF and Save the Children and headed by sociologist
Annjanette Rosga conducted research on prostitution of children in post-war
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Rosga reported that poverty was a strong contributing
factor. She stated, "The global sex trade is as much a product of everyday
people struggling to survive in dire economic straits as it is an organized
crime problem. Attacking the crime and not the poverty is treating the symptom
but not the disease...It's not uncommon for girls to know what they're
entering into, and to enter voluntarily to some degree. Maybe they think
they'll be different and able to escape, or maybe they'd rather take the risk
than feel powerless staying at home in poverty."[18] Jaffe and Rosen disagree
and argue that poverty alone does not often force children into prostitution,
as it does not exist in a large scale in several impoverished societies.
Rather, a number of external influences, such as poor family situations and
domestic violence, factor into the problem.[22]

Prostitution of children in the form of survival sex occurs in both
undeveloped and developed countries. In Asia, underage girls sometimes work in
brothels to support their families. In Sri Lanka, parents will more often have
their sons prostitute themselves rather than their daughters, as the society
places more weight on sexual purity among females than males.[23] Jaffe and
Rosen write that prostitution of children in North America often results from
"economic considerations, domestic violence and abuse, family disintegration
and drug addiction".[24] In Canada, a young man was convicted of charges
relating to the prostitution of a 15-year-old girl online in 2012; he had
encouraged her to prostitute herself as a means of making money, kept all of
her earnings, and threatened her with violence if she did not continue.[25]

## Consequences

### Treatment of prostituted children

Prostituted children are often forced to work in hazardous environments
without proper hygiene.[26] They face threats of violence and are sometimes
raped and beaten. Researchers Robin E. Clark, Judith Freeman Clark, and
Christine A. Adamec write that they "suffer a great deal of abuse,
unhappiness, and poor health" in general.[27] For example, Derrick Jensen
reports that female sex trafficking victims from Nepal are "'broken in'
through a process of rapes and beatings, and then rented out up to thirty-five
times per night for one to two dollars per man".[28] Another example involved
mostly Nepalese boys who were lured to India and sold to brothels in Mumbai,
Hyderabad, New Delhi, Lucknow, and Gorakhpur. One victim left Nepal at the age
of 14 and was sold into slavery, locked up, beaten, starved, and forcibly
circumcised. He reported that he was held in a brothel with 40 to 50 other
boys, many of whom were castrated, before escaping and returning to Nepal.[29]

Criminologist Ronald Flowers writes that prostitution of children and child
pornography are closely linked; up to one in three prostituted children have
been involved in pornography, often through films or literature. Runaway
teenagers, he states, are frequently used for "porn flicks" and
photographs.[30] In addition to pornography, Flowers writes that, "Children
caught up in this dual world of sexual exploitation are often victims of
sexual assaults, sexual perversions, sexually transmitted diseases, and
inescapable memories of sexual misuse and bodies that have been compromised,
brutalized, and left forever tarnished."[31]

### Physical and psychological effects

According to Humanium, an NGO that opposes the prostitution of children, the
practice causes injuries such as "vaginal tearing, physical after-effects of
torture, pain, infection, or unwanted pregnancy".[32] As clients seldom take
precautions against the spread of HIV,[32] prostituted children face a high
risk of contracting the disease, and the majority of them in certain locations
contract it. Other sexually transmitted diseases pose a threat as well, such
as syphilis and herpes. High levels of tuberculosis have also been found among
prostituted children.[27] These illnesses are often fatal.[1]

Former prostituted children often deal with psychological trauma, including
depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).[27] Other psychological
effects include anger, insomnia, sexual and personality confusion, inability
to trust adults, and loss of confidence. Drug-related health problems included
dental problems, hepatitis B and C, and serious liver and kidney problems.
Other medical complications included reproductive problems and injuries from
sexual assaults; physical and neurological problems from violent physical
attacks; and other general health issues including respiratory problems and
joint pains.[32][33]

## Prohibition

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9f/FBI_arrest_Innocence_lost_high2.jpg/220px-

FBI_arrest_Innocence_lost_high2.jpg)

An FBI agent leading away an adult suspect arrested in the Operation Cross
Country II,[34] when 105 children were rescued from forced prostitution in
October 2008

Prostitution of children is illegal under international law, and the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 34, states, "the State
shall protect children from sexual exploitation and abuse, including
prostitution and involvement in pornography."[35] The convention was first
held in 1989 and has been ratified by 193 countries. In 1990, the United
Nations appointed a Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution, and child pornography.[36] Over at least the last decade, the
international community has increasingly acknowledged the importance of
addressing problems posed by the trafficking of children, child prostitution,
and child pornography; activities that undermine the rights of children and
are frequently linked to organized crime.[37] While the legality of adult
prostitution varies between different parts of the world, the prostitution of
minors is illegal in most countries, and all countries have some form of
restrictions against it.[3]

There is a dispute surrounding what constitutes a prostituted child.
International law defines a child as any individual below the age of 18,[38]
but a number of countries legally recognize lower ages of consent and
adulthood, usually ranging from 13 to 17 years of age.[3] Thus, law
enforcement officers are sometimes hesitant to investigate cases because of
the differences in age of consent.[3] The laws of some countries do, however,
distinguish between prostituted teenagers and prostituted children. For
example, the Japanese government defines the category as referring to minors
between 13 and 18.[39]

Consequences for offenders vary from country to country. In the People's
Republic of China, all forms of prostitution are illegal, but having sexual
contact with anyone under the age of 14, regardless of consent, will result in
a more serious punishment than raping an adult.[40] In the United States, the
legal penalty for participating in the prostitution of children includes five
to twenty years in prison.[41] The FBI established "Innocence Lost", a new
department working to free children from prostitution, in response to the
strong public reaction across the country to the news of Operation Stormy
Nights, in which 23 minors were released from forced prostitution.[42]

## Prevalence

### Statistical summary

Prostitution of children exists in every country, though the problem is most
severe in South America and Asia.[22] The number of prostituted children is
rising in other parts of the world, including North America, Africa, and
Europe.[22] Exact statistics are difficult to obtain,[43] but it is estimated
that there are around 10 million children involved in prostitution
worldwide.[1]

    
    
    _Note: this is a list of examples; it does not cover every country where child prostitution exists._
    

Country/location | Number of children involved in prostitution | Notes |
Ref(s)  
---|---|---|---  
Worldwide | Up to 10,000,000 | | [1]  
Australia | 4,000 | | [44]  
Bangladesh | 10,000 – 29,000 | | [45]  
Brazil | 250,000 – 500,000 | Brazil is considered to have the worst levels of
child sex trafficking after Thailand. | [46]  
Cambodia | 30,000 | | [47][48]  
Chile | 3,700 | The number of children involved in prostitution is believed to
be on the decline. | [49]  
Colombia | 35,000 | Between 5,000 and 10,000 are on the streets of Bogotá. |
[50]  
Dominican Republic | 30,000 | | [51]  
Ecuador | 5,200 | | [52]  
Estonia | 1,200 | | [53]  
Greece | 2,900 | Over 200 are believed to be below the age of 12. | [54]  
Hungary | 500 | | [55]  
India | 1,200,000 | In India, children account for 40% of people engaged in
prostitution. | [56]  
Indonesia | 40,000 – 70,000 | UNICEF states that 30% of the females in
prostitution are below 18. | [57][58]  
Malaysia | 43,000 – 142,000 | | [59]  
Mexico | 16,000 – 20,000 | Out of Mexico City’s 13,000 street children, 95%
have already had at least one sexual encounter with an adult (many of them
through prostitution).

Main article: Child prostitution in Mexico

| [60]  
Nepal | 200,000 | | [28]  
New Zealand | 210 | | [61]  
Peru | 500,000 | | [62]  
Philippines | 60,000 – 100,000 | | [63]  
Sri Lanka | 40,000 | UNICEF states that 30% of the females in prostitution are
below 18. | [64]  
Taiwan | 100,000 | | [62]  
Thailand | 200,000 – 800,000 |

Main article: Child prostitution in Thailand

| [59]  
United States | 100,000 | | [65][66]  
Zambia | 70,000 | | [67]

### Africa

Sex Trafficking occurs heavily in Southern Africa. Females are typically
exploited for sexual purposes while males are used for labor of all kinds.
Women and young girls being exploited and used in sex trafficking are often
transferred and sold in South Africa. On rare occasions females can be
trafficked into Europe.

#### Tanzania

Some 84% of girls in prostitution interviewed in Tanzania reported having been
battered, raped or tortured by police officers and sungu sungu (local
community guards). At least 60% had no permanent place to live. Some of these
girls started out as child domestic workers.

### Americas

#### Argentina

By 1999, it was reported that in Argentina prostitution of children was
increasing at an alarming rate and that the average age was decreasing. The
Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW) fact book says Argentina is one
of the favored destinations of pedophile sex tourists from Europe and the
United States.[68] Argentina's Criminal Code criminalizes the prostitution of
minors of eighteen years of age or younger,[69] but it only sanctions those
who "promote or facilitate" prostitution, not the client who exploits the
minor.[70]

#### Brazil

In Brazil, UNICEF estimates that there are 250,000 children working in the
child prostitution industry, according to BBC (2010).[71]

#### El Salvador

In El Salvador, one-third of the sexually exploited children between 14 and 17
years of age are boys. The median age for entering into prostitution among all
children interviewed was 13 years. They worked on average five days per week,
although nearly 10% reported that they worked seven days a week.

#### United States

See also: Sex trafficking in the United States § Commercial sexual
exploitation of children

In 2001, the University of Pennsylvania School of Social Work released a study
on CSEC conducted in 17 cities across the United States. While they did not
interview any of the adolescent subjects of the inquiry, they estimated
through secondary response that as many as 300,000 American youth may be at
risk of commercial sexual exploitation at any time.[72] However, the actual
number of children involved in prostitution is likely to be much smaller: over
10 years only 827 cases a year had been reported to police departments.[73]
The Center for Court Innovation in New York City had used Respondent Driven
Sampling (RDS), Social Network Analysis, capture/recapture, and Markov based
probability estimates in 2008 to generate a prevalence estimate for New York
City that suggested far fewer commercially sexually exploited children than
the 300,000 and far more than the 827 suggested by these two most widely read
sources.[74]

Especially vulnerable are homeless and runaways. The National Runaway
Switchboard said in 2009 that one-third of runaway youths in America will be
lured into prostitution within 48 hours on the streets.[75] This view of
adolescent prostitution in the United States as primarily driven by pimp-
exploiters and other "sex traffickers" was challenged by SNRG-NYC in their
2008 New York City study which interviewed over 300 under-age prostitutes and
found that only 10% reported having pimps. A 2012 study done in Atlantic City,
New Jersey, by the same group incorporated an extended qualitative
ethnographic component that looked specifically at the relationship between
pimps and adolescents engaged with street based sex markets.[76][77] This
study found the percentage of adolescents who had pimps to be only 14% and
that those relationships were typically far more complex, mutual, and
companionate than has been reported by social service providers, not-for-
profits, and much of the news media.[78]

The New York State Office of Children and Family Services estimated in 2007
that New York City is home to more than 2,000 sexually exploited children
under 18. At least 85 percent of these youths statewide have had some contact
with the child welfare system, mostly through abuse or neglect proceedings. In
New York City, 75 percent have been in foster care.[79] Mishi Faruqee, who is
in charge of juvenile justice issues for the Correctional Association of New
York, questioned the reliability of the estimate. “We believe that number is
really an undercount."[80] This is confirmed by SNRG-NYC's New York City
population estimate of 2008 which was 3,946. The SNRG-NYC New York City study
found that out of 249 underage prostitutes (48% female and 45% male) who
constituted the final statistical sample, the average age of entry into the
market was 15.29.

In 2013, the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children documented over
10,000 reports of child sex trafficking. They say that this only represents a
"tiny percentage" of the actual child sex trafficking.[81] They say that
websites such as Backpage.com encourage dissemination of child sex trafficking
content on its website. On average, Backpage.com sends NCMEC 300 ads a month
that it believes involves children, which the NCMEC calls inadequate.[82]

### Asia Pacific

Past surveys indicate that 30 to 35 percent of all prostitutes in the Mekong
sub-region of Southeast Asia are between 12 and 17 years of age.[83]

#### Bangladesh

See also: Prostitution in Bangladesh

In Bangladesh, child prostitutes are known to take the drug Oradexon, an over-
the-counter steroid, usually used by farmers to fatten cattle, to make child
prostitutes look larger and older. Charities say that 90% of prostitutes in
the country’s legalized brothels use the drug. According to social activists,
the steroid can cause diabetes, high blood pressure and is highly
addictive.[84][85][86]

#### India

In what is termed 'caste slavery', an estimated 100,000 lower caste women and
girls are groomed into prostitution as a family trade. They are groomed by
their own families into prostitution often from birth, sometimes with younger
girls stowed under beds to observe others at work. While boys are often
preferred to girls in the country, with sex-selective abortions causing a
skewed gender ratio, the birth of girls among some low caste villages built
around caste slavery is celebrated as future breadwinners.[87]

#### Nepal

An estimated 12,000 - 15,000 Nepalese children are trafficked for sexual
commercial exploitation each year, mainly to brothels in India and other
countries.[88]

#### Philippines

UNICEF estimates that there are 60,000 child prostitutes in the Philippines
and many of the 200 brothels in the notorious Angeles City offer children for
sex.[89]

#### Sri Lanka

In Sri Lanka, children often become the prey of sexual exploiters through
friends and relatives. The prevalence of boys in prostitution here is strongly
related to foreign tourism.[90]

#### Thailand

Main article: Child prostitution in Thailand

Thailand’s Health System Research Institute reports that children in
prostitution make up 40% of prostitutes in Thailand.[91]

#### Vietnam

In Vietnam, family poverty, low family education and family dysfunction were
found to be primary causes for CSEC. Sixteen per cent of the children
interviewed were illiterate, 38% had only primary-level schooling. Sixty-six
per cent said that tuition and school fees were beyond the means of their
families.[90]

## Demographics

The people who buy sex from minors are most often men who try to "rationalize
their sexual involvement with children."[92]

Though most child prostitutes are girls, advocates point out that boys are
also exploited, and that this is often overlook and more strongly stigmatized.
An ECPAT-USA study found that though gay, bisexual, and questioning boys were
represented at higher percentage than the general population, the majority of
boys in prostitution were heterosexual in sexual orientation despite typically
performing homosexual acts.[93]

## Views

### Public perception

Anthropologist Heather Montgomery writes that society has a largely negative
perception of prostitution of children, in part because the children are often
viewed as having been abandoned or sold by their parents and families.[94] The
International Labour Organization includes the prostitution of children in its
list of the "worst forms of child labour".[95] At the 1996 World Congress
Against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children it was called "a crime
against humanity", "torture", and "slavery".[96] Virginia Kendall, a district
judge and expert on child exploitation and human trafficking, and T. Markus
Funk, an attorney and law professor, write that the subject is an emotional
one and that there are various perspectives about its prevention:

> The topic of proscribing and punishing child exploitation triggers intense
emotions. While there is general consensus that child sexual exploitation,
whether through the Internet, forced prostitution, the international or
domestic trafficking of children for sex, or molestation, is on the rise,
observers in the United States and elsewhere find little common ground on the
questions of how serious such conduct is, or what, if anything, must be done
to address it.[97]

Investigative journalist Julian Sher states that widespread stereotypes about
the prostitution of children continued into the 1990s, when the first
organized opposition arose and police officers began working to dispel common
misconceptions.[98] Criminologist Roger Matthews writes that concerns over
pedophilia and child sexual abuse, as well as shifting perceptions of youth,
led the public to see a sharp difference between prostitution of children and
adult prostitution. While the latter is generally frowned upon, the former is
seen as intolerable.[99] Additionally, he states, children are increasingly
viewed as "innocent" and "pure" and their prostitution as paramount to
slavery.[99] Through the shift in attitude, the public began to see minors
involved in the sex trade as victims rather than as perpetrators of a crime,
needing rehabilitation rather than punishment.[100]

### Opposition

Though campaigns against prostitution of children originated in the
1800s,[101] the first mass protests against the practice occurred in the 1990s
in the United States, led largely by ECPAT (End Child Prostitution in Asian
Tourism). The group, which historian Junius P. Rodriguez describes as "the
most significant of the campaigning groups against child prostitution",
originally focused on the issue of children being exploited in Southeast Asia
by Western tourists.[102] Women's rights groups and anti-tourism groups joined
to protest the practice of sex tourism in Bangkok, Thailand. The opposition to
sex tourism was spurred on by an image of a Thai youth in prostitution,
published in _Time_ and by the publication of a dictionary in the United
Kingdom describing Bangkok as "a place where there are a lot of
prostitutes".[103] Cultural anthropologists Susan Dewey and Patty Kelly write
that though they were unable to inhibit sex tourism and rates of prostitution
of children continued to rise, the groups "galvanized public opinion
nationally and internationally" and succeeded in getting the media to cover
the topic extensively for the first time.[103] ECPAT later expanded its focus
to protest child prostitution globally.[102]

The late 1990s and early 2000s also saw the creation of a number of shelters
and rehabilitation programs for prostituted children, and the police began to
actively investigate the issue.[98] The National Human Trafficking Resource
Center (NHTRC) was later established by the Polaris Project as a national,
toll-free hotline, available to answer calls from anywhere in the United
States, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, every day of the year. Operated by
Polaris Project,[104] the hotline was designed to allow callers to report tips
and receive information on human trafficking.[105]

The opposition to prostitution of children and sexual slavery spread to Europe
and elsewhere, and organizations pushed for prostituted children to be
recognized as victims rather than offenders.[99] The issue remained prominent
in the following years, and various campaigns and organizations continued into
the 2000s and 2010s.[99]

## History

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/87/Stead_1881.jpg/170px-

Stead_1881.jpg)

William Thomas Stead in 1881.

Prostitution of children dates to antiquity. Prepubescent boys were commonly
prostituted in brothels in ancient Greece and Rome.[106] According to Ronald
Flowers, the "most beautiful and highest born Egyptian maidens were forced
into prostitution...and they continued as prostitutes until their first
menstruation." Chinese and Indian children were commonly sold by their parents
into prostitution.[107] Parents in India sometimes dedicated their female
children to the Hindu temples, where they became "devadasis". Traditionally a
high status in society, the devadasis were originally tasked with maintaining
and cleaning the temples of the Hindu deity to which they were assigned
(usually the goddess Renuka) and learning skills such as music and dancing.
However, as the system evolved, their role became that of a temple prostitute,
and the girls, who were "dedicated" before puberty, were required to
prostitute themselves to upper class men.[108][109] The practice has since
been outlawed but still exists.[109]

In Europe, child prostitution flourished until the late 1800s;[107] minors
accounted for 50% of individuals involved in prostitution in Paris.[110] A
scandal in 19th-century England caused the government there to raise the age
of consent.[111] In July 1885, William Thomas Stead, editor of _The Pall Mall
Gazette_ , published "The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon", four articles
describing an extensive underground sex trafficking ring that reportedly sold
children to adults. Stead's reports focused on a 13-year-old girl, Eliza
Armstrong, who was sold for £5 (the equivalent of around £500 in 2012), then
taken to a midwife to have her virginity verified. The age of consent was
raised from 13 to 16 within a week of publication.[112] During this period,
the term _white slavery_ came to be used throughout Europe and the United
States to describe prostituted children.[107][113]

## See also

  * International instruments relevant to prostitution of children
  * OneChild
  * Prostitution in Sweden ("Swedish model" that criminalizes buying sex but not selling it)
  * Honor killing § Victims of rape

  * v

  * t
  * e

Child prostitution by country

* * *

  * Bangladesh
  * Bolivia
  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Costa Rica
  * Democratic Republic of the Congo
  * Ecuador
  * Eritrea
  * Guinea-Bissau
  * India
  * Madagascar
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Philippines
  * South Sudan
  * Thailand
  * Ukraine
  * United States 

## References

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Willis, Brian M.; Levy, Barry S. (April 20, 2002). "Child prostitution: global health burden, research needs, and interventions". _Lancet_. **359** (9315): 1417–22. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08355-1. PMID 11978356.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lim 1998, p. 171.
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Jaffe  & Rosen 1997, p. 10.
  4. **^** Lim 1998, p. 170.
  5. **^** Lim 1998, p. 170-171.
  6. **^** "C182 – Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182)". International Labour Organization. June 17, 1999. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  7. **^** Narayan 2005, p. 138.
  8. **^** "Child Exploitation and Obscenity". United States Department of Justice. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rodriguez 2011, p. 187.
  10. **^** Bagley  & King 2004, p. 124.
  11. **^** Brown 2001, p. 1-3.
  12. **^** "The Prostitution of Children". U.S. Department of Justice. Archived from the original on February 14, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Human Trafficking FAQs". United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  14. **^** "Who are the Victims?". End Human Trafficking Now. 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  15. **^** "UNODC report on human trafficking exposes modern form of slavery". United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  16. **^** "About UN.GIFT". Ungift.org. Archived from the original on 2015-08-04. Retrieved 2015-08-18.
  17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Kendall  & Funk 2012, p. 31.
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Child sex-trafficking study in Bosnia reveals misperceptions". _Medical News Today_. March 1, 2005. Retrieved September 28, 2013.
  19. **^** De Chesnay 2013, p. 3.
  20. **^** De Chesnay 2013, p. 4.
  21. **^** "Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for: Prostitution of Children". United States Department of Justice. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Jaffe  & Rosen 1997, p. 11.
  23. **^** Rodriguez 2011, p. 188-189.
  24. **^** Jaffe  & Rosen 1997, p. 26.
  25. **^** Louise Dickson (May 30, 2012). "Pimp who sold girl, 15, for sex gets three years". _Times Colonist_. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2012.
  26. **^** Madsen  & Strong 2009, p. 293.
  27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Clark, Freeman Clark  & Adamec 2007, p. 68.
  28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jensen 2004, p. 41.
  29. **^** "Former sex worker's tale spurs rescue mission". _Gulf Times_. Gulf-Times.com. 10 April 2005. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2010. "“I spent seven years in hell,” says Raju, now 21, trying hard not to cry. Thapa Magar took him to Rani Haveli, a brothel in Mumbai that specialised in male sex workers and sold him for Nepali Rs 85,000. A Muslim man ran the flesh trade there in young boys and girls, most of them lured from Nepal. For two years, Raju was kept locked up, taught to dress as a girl and circumcised. Many of the other boys there were castrated. Beatings and starvation became a part of his life. “There were 40 to 50 boys in the place,” a gaunt, brooding Raju recalls. “Most of them were Nepalese.”"
  30. **^** Flowers 1998, p. 123.
  31. **^** Flowers 1998, p. 124.
  32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Child Prostitution". Humanium. Retrieved September 28, 2013.
  33. **^** Du Mont  & McGregor, 2004: Edinburgh, Saewye, Thao, & Levitt, 2006; Farley et al., 2003; Hoot et al., 2006; Izugbara, 2005; Nixon et al., 2002; Potter, Martin, & Romans,1999; Pyett & Warr, 1977
  34. **^** "FBI — Operation Cross Country II". Fbi.gov. Retrieved 2013-07-30.
  35. **^** Rodriguez 2011, p. 189.
  36. **^** "Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography". United Nations Human Rights. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  37. **^** Buck, Trevor (2008-05-01). "'International Criminalisation and Child Welfare Protection': the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child". _Children & Society_. **22** (3): 167–178. doi:10.1111/j.1099-0860.2008.00148.x. ISSN 1099-0860.
  38. **^** Jaffe  & Rosen 1997, p. 9.
  39. **^** Chan 2004, p. 66.
  40. **^** Note 19, Article 360, at 187.
  41. **^** O'Connor et al. 2007, p. 264.
  42. **^** C.G. Niebank (September 7, 2011). "Human network". _Oklahoma Gazette_. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013.
  43. **^** Jaffe  & Rosen 1997, p. 10-11.
  44. **^** "Link to High Beam Research Site". Highbeam.com. Retrieved September 15, 2012.[ _dead link_ ]
  45. **^** "2008 Human Rights Report: Bangladesh". _United States Department of State_. Archived from the original on February 26, 2009. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  46. **^** "Highway of hell: Brazil's child prostitution scandal". news.com.au. November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013.
  47. **^** Bramham, Daphne (March 23, 2012). "In Cambodia, there's a price on childhood". _Vancouver Sun_. Retrieved November 30, 2013.
  48. **^** "Child Prostitution". Children of Cambodia. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  49. **^** "Bureau of International Labor Affairs – Chile". Dol.gov. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  50. **^** "Soaring child prostitution in Colombia". _BBC Online_. January 27, 2001. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  51. **^** "Worst Forms of Child Labour Data – Dominican Republic". International Labour Organization. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
  52. **^** "Report". State.gov. March 8, 2006. Retrieved September 15, 2012.
  53. **^** "Worst Forms of Child Labour Data – Estonia". International Labour Organization. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
  54. **^** "Worst Forms of Child Labour Data – Greece". International Labour Organization. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved October 12, 2013.
  55. **^** "Worst Forms of Child Labour Data – Hungary". International Labour Organization. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
  56. **^** "Official: More than 1M child prostitutes in India". _CNN_. May 11, 2009. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  57. **^** "Indonesia". United States Department of Labor. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  58. **^** "Indonesia". HumanTrafficking.org. Archived from the original on September 16, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lim 1998, p. 7.
  60. **^** "16,000 Victims of Child Sexual Exploitation". Ipsnews.net. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2012.
  61. **^** Press Release: ECPAT (April 21, 2005). "Under Age Prostitution". Scoop. Retrieved September 15, 2012.
  62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Child prostitution becomes global problem, with Russia no exception". _Pravda_. Pravda.Ru. November 10, 2006. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  63. **^** "Factsheet: Child Trafficking in the Philippines" (PDF). UNICEF. Retrieved November 30, 2013.
  64. **^** "40,000 child prostitutes in Sri Lanka, says Child Rights Group". _TamilNet_. December 6, 2006. Retrieved September 27, 2013.
  65. **^** Regehr, Roberts  & Wolbert Burgess 2012, p. 230.
  66. **^** 100,000 Children Are Forced Into Prostitution Each Year
  67. **^** "Worst Forms of Child Labour Data – Zambia". International Labour Organization. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
  68. **^** "ECPAT International, A Step Forward". Gvnet.com. 1999.
  69. **^** 1 Codigo Penal y Leyes Complementarias, art. 125 bis (6th ed., Editorial Astrea, Buenos Aires, 2007).
  70. **^** "Children\'s Rights: Argentina | Law Library of Congress". Loc.gov. April 2012. Retrieved 2012-09-15.
  71. **^** "Brazil's sex tourism boom". _BBC News_. 2010-07-30.
  72. **^** "SP2.upenn.edu" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-10-02. Retrieved 2014-03-22.
  73. **^** Kristen Hinman (2011-06-29). "Real Men Get Their Facts Straight - Page 1". Village Voice. Retrieved 2014-03-22.
  74. **^** Curtis, R., Terry, K., Dank, M., Dombrowski, K., Khan, B., Muslim, A., Labriola, M. and Rempel, M. _The Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in New York City: Volume One: The CSEC Population in New York City: Size, Characteristics, and Needs_. National Institute of Justice, United States Department of Justice. September 2008.
  75. **^** Washington DC: A Sexual Playground for Pimps and Johns: Exposing child prostitution rings in DC, by Aisha Ali, Examiner.com Mar. 17, 2009; retrieved 12/27/2014
  76. **^** Marcus, A. Riggs, R. et al, "Is Child to Adult as Victim is to Criminal? Social Policy and Street Based Sex Work in the USA" in Sexuality Research and Social Policy [1]
  77. **^** "Working Papers". Snrg-nyc.org. 2012-07-12. Retrieved 2014-03-22.
  78. **^** Marcus, Anthony, et al. "Conflict and Agency among Sex Workers and Pimps: A Closer Look at Domestic Minor Sex Trafficking". The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science May 2014 vol. 653 no. 1 225-246. doi:10.1177/0002716214521993.
  79. **^** Feldman, Cassi (2007-04-24). "Report Finds 2,000 of State's Children Are Sexually Exploited, Many in New York City". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 2010-04-30.
  80. **^** Clyde Haberman (2007-06-12). "The Sexually Exploited Ask for Change: Help, Not Jail". _The New York Times_.
  81. **^** "Amicus Curiae Brief of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-04-27. Retrieved 2019-03-31.
  82. **^** The fishy claim that ‘100,000 children’ in the United States are in the sex trade
  83. **^** Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting, Deena Guzder, "UNICEF: Protecting Children from Commercial Sexual Exploitation" pulitzercenter.typepad.com Archived July 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
  84. **^** "Bangladesh's teenage brothels hold dark steroid secret". reuters.com. 2012-03-19. Retrieved 2012-03-20.
  85. **^** "A new danger for sex workers in Bangladesh". guardian.com. 2010-04-05. Retrieved 2012-03-20.
  86. **^** "Bangladesh's dark brothel steroid secret". bbcnews.com. 2010-05-30. Retrieved 2012-03-20.
  87. **^** Safi, Michael (14 January 2019). "The Indian village where child sexual exploitation is the norm". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 27 May 2019.
  88. **^** Jones, Sam (25 October 2015). "Nepal earthquakes leave bitter legacy as children become quarry for traffickers". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 7 April 2019.
  89. **^** "BBC Politics 97". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2014-03-22.
  90. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Facts on commercial sexual exploitation of children" (PDF). _ILO_. 2004.
  91. **^** UNICRI.it Archived July 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  92. **^** Herrmann, Kenneth J., and Michael Jupp. "International Child Sex Trade." The Sexual Trafficking in Children: An Investigation of the Child Sex Trade. By Daniel S. Campagna and Donald L. Poffenberger. Dover, MA: Auburn House Pub., 1988. 140-57. Print.
  93. **^** "And Boys Too" (PDF). ECPAT-USA. 2013.
  94. **^** Panter-Brick  & Smith 2000, p. 182.
  95. **^** "The worst forms of child labour". International Labour Organization. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
  96. **^** Cowan  & Wilson 2001, p. 86.
  97. **^** Kendall  & Funk 2012, p. 9.
  98. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sher 2011, p. 35.
  99. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Matthews 2008, p. 17.
  100. **^** Sher 2011, p. 35-36.
  101. **^** Matthews 2008, p. 15.
  102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rodriguez 2011, p. 190.
  103. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dewey  & Kelly 2011, p. 148.
  104. **^** "Combating Human Trafficking and Modern-day Slavery". Polaris Project. Retrieved September 28, 2013.
  105. **^** "National Human Trafficking Resource Center | Polaris Project | Combating Human Trafficking and Modern-day Slavery". Polaris Project. Retrieved September 28, 2013.
  106. **^** Clark, Freeman Clark  & Adamec 2007, p. 68-69.
  107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Flowers 1994, p. 81.
  108. **^** Institute of Social Sciences (New Delhi, India)  & National Human Rights Commission 2005, p. 504.
  109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Penn 2003, p. 49.
  110. **^** Cossins 2000, p. 7.
  111. **^** Clark, Freeman Clark  & Adamec 2007, p. 69.
  112. **^** Hogenboom, Melissa (November 1, 2013). "Child prostitutes: How the age of consent was raised to 16". BBC News. Retrieved November 30, 2013.
  113. **^** Fine  & Ellis 2011, pp. 83–85.

## Bibliography

  * Bagley, Christopher; King, Kathleen (2004). _Child Sexual Abuse: The Search for Healing_. Routledge. ISBN 978-0203392591.
  * Brown, Louise (2001). _Sex Slaves: The Trafficking of Women in Asia_. Virago Press. ISBN 978-1860499036.
  * Chan, Jennifer (2004). _Gender and Human Rights Politics in Japan: Global Norms and Domestic Networks_. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804750226.
  * Clark, Robin; Freeman Clark, Judith; Adamec, Christine A. (2007). _The Encyclopedia of Child Abuse_. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0788146060.
  * Cossins, Anne (2000). _Masculinities, Sexualities and Child Sexual Abuse_. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-9041113559.
  * Cowan, Jane K.; Wilson, Richard J. (2001). _Culture and Rights: Anthropological Perspectives_. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521797351.
  * De Chesnay, Mary (2013). _Sex Trafficking: A Clinical Guide for Nurses_. Springer Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0826171160.
  * Dewey, Susan; Kelly, Patty (2011). _Policing Pleasure: Sex Work, Policy, and the State in Global Perspective_. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521797351.
  * Fine, Gary Alan; Ellis, Bill (2011). _The Global Grapevine: Why Rumors of Terrorism, Immigration, and Trade Matter_. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0814785119.
  * Flowers, Ronald (1998). _The Prostitution of Women and Girls_. McFarland. ISBN 978-0786404902.
  * Flowers, Ronald (1994). _The Victimization and Exploitation of Women and Children: A Study of Physical, Mental and Sexual Maltreatment in the United States_. McFarland. ISBN 978-0899509785.
  * Institute of Social Sciences (New Delhi, India); National Human Rights Commission (2005). _Trafficking in Women and Children in India_. Orient Blackswan. ISBN 978-8125028451.
  * Jaffe, Maureen; Rosen, Sonia (1997). _Forced Labor: The Prostitution of Children: Symposium Proceedings_. Diane Publishing. ISBN 978-0788146060.
  * Jensen, Derrick (2004). _The Culture of Make Believe_. Chelsea Green Publishing. ISBN 978-1603581837.
  * Kendall, Virginia M.; Funk, Markus T. (2012). _Child Exploitation and Trafficking: Examining the Global Challenges and U.S Responses_. Rowman  & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1442209800.
  * Lim, Lin Lean (1998). _The Sex Sector: The Economic and Social Bases of Prostitution in Southeast Asia_. International Labour Organization. ISBN 978-9221095224.
  * Madsen, Richard; Strong, Tracy B. (2009). _The Many and the One: Religious and Secular Perspectives on Ethical Pluralism in the Modern World_. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1400825592.
  * Matthews, Roger (2008). _Prostitution, Politics & Policy_. Routledge. ISBN 978-0203930878.
  * Narayan, O.P. (2005). _Harnessing Child Development: Children and the culture of human_. Gyan Publishing House. ISBN 978-8182053007.
  * O'Connor, Vivienne M.; Rausch, Colette; Klemenčič, Goran; Albrecht, Hans-Jörg (2007). _Model Codes for Post-conflict Criminal Justice: Model criminal code_. US Institute of Peace Press. ISBN 978-1601270122.
  * Panter-Brick, Catherine; Smith, Malcolm T. (2000). _Abandoned Children_. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521775557.
  * Penn, Michael L. (2003). _Overcoming Violence Against Women and Girls: The International Campaign to Eradicate a Worldwide Problem_. Rowman  & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0742525009.
  * Regehr, Cheryl; Roberts, Albert R.; Wolbert Burgess, Ann (2012). _Victimology: Theories and Applications_. Jones  & Bartlett Publishers. ISBN 978-1449665333.
  * Rodriguez, Junius P. (2011). _Slavery in the Modern World: A History of Political, Social, and Economic Oppression_. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1851097883.
  * Sher, Julian (2011). _Somebody's Daughter: The Hidden Story of America's Prostituted Children and the Battle to Save Them_. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1569768334.
  * Whetsell-Mitchell, Juliann (1995). _Rape of the Innocent: Understanding and Preventing Child Sexual Abuse_. Taylor and Francis. ISBN 978-1560323945.

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Child
prostitution**_.  
---|--- 

  * "NOW on PBS: Fighting Child Prostitution"
  * What’s Wrong with Calling a Child a Prostitute?

  * v

  * t
  * e

Sexual ethics

* * *

Human sexuality|

  * Adolescent sexuality
    * Rainbow party
  * Adultery
  * Education
  * Fetishism
  * Incest
    * law
  * Miscegenation
  * Objectification
  * Orientation
  * Pregnancy
    * Abortion
  * Prostitution
    * law
  * Survival sex

Child sexuality|

  * Child marriage
  * Child pornography
    * law
  * Child prostitution
  * Child sex tourism

Sexual abuse|

  * Child-on-child sexual abuse
  * Child sexual abuse
    * law
  * Harassment
  * Rape
    * law

Age of consent (reform)|

  * Africa
  * Asia
  * Europe
  * North America
    * United States
  * Oceania
  * South America

  * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Topical outline

  * v

  * t
  * e

Pedophilia and child sexual abuse

* * *

Associated chronophilias|

  * Hebephilia
  * Ephebophilia

Behavior and legal aspects|

  * Child pornography
    * Hurtcore
    * Child erotica
    * Simulated
    * Legality
    * Legal status of drawn pornography depicting minors
  * Child grooming
  * Causes of clerical child abuse
  * Age of consent
  * Commercial sexual exploitation of children
    * Child prostitution
    * Child sex tourism
    * Child trafficking
  * Child marriage
    * Marriageable age

By country|

  * Afghanistan
  * Australia
  * Egypt
  * Nigeria
  * United Kingdom

Treatment methods|

  * Chemical castration
  * Castration
  * Cognitive behavioral therapy

Research and support groups|

  * Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers
  * Circles of Support and Accountability
  * Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests
  * Virtuous Pedophiles

Prevention organizations|

  * Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers
  * Child Exploitation and Online Protection Command
  * Prevention Project Dunkelfeld
  * Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography

Social views|

  * Anti-pedophile activism
  * Pedophile advocacy groups
  * _Are All Men Pedophiles?_
  * Pedophile press

Related|

  * Catholic Church sexual abuse cases

**Psychology portal**

  * ![Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg/24px-Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg.png) Law portal
  * ![HumanRightsLogo.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/HumanRightsLogo.svg/20px-HumanRightsLogo.svg.png)Human Rights portal

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * NDL: 01167463

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Child_prostitution&oldid=898996635"

Categories:

  * Child prostitution
  * Child sexual abuse
  * Forced prostitution
  * Human trafficking
  * Debt bondage
  * Organized crime activity
  * Children's rights
  * Human rights abuses
  * Sex crimes

Hidden categories:

  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from February 2019
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Good articles
  * Commons category link is on Wikidata
  * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Čeština
  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Frysk
  * 한국어
  * Հայերեն
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * नेपाली
  * 日本語
  * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Српски / srpski
  * ไทย
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 27 May 2019, at 06:45 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

