

![Capson Logo.png](https://www.capson.com/hs-

fs/hubfs/assets/Capson%20Logo.png?width=1090&name=Capson%20Logo.png)

  * ABOUT
    * PHYSICIAN ADVISORY BOARD
    * STRATEGIC INVESTORS
    * REINSURANCE PARTNERS
    * BLOG
  * WHO WE SERVE
    * PHYSICIANS
    * SURGEONS
    * GROUP PRACTICES
    * OB/GYNs
  * CAPSON VALUE
    * PREDICT PREVENT PROTECT
    * LOWER YOUR PREMIUM
    * COVERAGE IN MINUTES
    * REDUCE YOUR RISK
    * RESOLVE CLAIMS QUICKLY
    * CONTINUING MEDICAL EDUCATION
  * GET COVERAGE
    * GETTING STARTED
    * FAQs
    * STATES WE SERVE
    * DEFENSE COUNSEL
    * GET A QUICK QUOTE
    * POLICY FORMS
  * RESOURCES
    * COST OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE
    * MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE BY STATE
    * MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE BY SPECIALTY
    * TYPES OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE
    * TYPES OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE CASES
    * MALPRACTICE DEFINITIONS
    * MEDICAL RESIDENCY - ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW
  * CONTACT
    * REPORT A CLAIM
  * 512.609.7900
  * GET A QUOTE

![burger-menu-phone.svg](https://www.capson.com/hubfs/assets_apr_2018/burger-

menu-phone.svg)

![patient-satisfaction-banner.jpg](https://www.capson.com/hs-

fs/hubfs/April_2016_Images/patient-satisfaction-

banner.jpg?width=1600&name=patient-satisfaction-banner.jpg)

#

# Average cost of medical malpractice insurance

###

###

COST FACTORS, STATISTICS, AND INSIGHTS

According to the Houston Chronicle, “Your physician spends 10 cents on
malpractice insurance from every dollar you pay for health care, according to
Diana Furchtgott-Roth, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute. Furchgott-
Roth notes that premiums vary from $20,000 annually in low-cost states to
$200,000 annually in high-cost states.”

**How much does medical malpractice insurance cost?**

It’s complicated. First, are physicians legally required to hold medical
malpractice insurance? In Colorado, Connecticut, Kansas, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, Rhode Island and Wisconsin, physicians must have minimum coverage,
according to the American Medical Association. States including Indiana,
Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, Pennsylvania and Wyoming have requirements to
be eligible for state liability reforms. So while legal requirements for
having medical malpractice coverage is somewhat flexible, not protecting your
assets is, well, a terrible idea.

Because laws and requirements vary from state to state, the price of medical
malpractice insurance widely varies as well. Even within states, premiums can
differ greatly from county to county-- particularly coverage in urban and
suburban areas vs. rural areas. It’s all about location and the density of the
physician population in any given area, among other factors.

Interestingly, medical malpractice insurance rates have recently decreased
across the board, according to Medical Liability Monitor’s 2017 Annual Rate
Survey. “For the overwhelming majority (74.2 percent) of insurers
participating in this year’s Annual Rate Survey, rates remained flat between
2016 and 2017, very similar to the percentage with no manual change shown
between 2015 and 2016 (75.2 percent). The next largest segment of rate change
was increased within the 0.1 percent to 9.9 percent (13.3 percent).”

That being said, the **average cost** of medical malpractice insurance for an
individual physician is about **$7,500 per year**. Howmuch.com breaks it down
like this: General medical personnel may expect to pay between **$4,000** and
**$12,000** a year. But surgeons can pay somewhere between **$30,000** and
**$50,000** a year.

To get a sense of how medical liability premiums are priced, here are a few
contributing factors:

  * Claims History
  * Location
  * Specialization Area

###

COST FACTORS & OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

**Claims History** : Like car insurance, if one or more claims have already
been made against a physician, this will either increase the premium costs, or
make it difficult to find an affordable policy altogether.

**Location** : Premiums can be dictated by the state, county or even city in
which a doctor practices. EP Monthly, a trade publication geared towards
emergency physicians, has some ideas about why the cost of medical malpractice
insurance varies so widely. Greg Roslund, MD, writes, “Each state’s medical
liability system represents a delicate and convoluted interplay between
physicians, lawmakers, and patients. Additional factors include supply and
demand (how many attorneys are in the state? How easy is it to recruit doctors
to the state?), political history (red vs. blue), and the litigiousness of the
populace (is suing a physician viewed as a sacrosanct right?). And of course,
in the end, it’s all about money.”

**Specialization Area** : If a physician practices in a high-risk specialty
like general surgery, neurosurgery, obstetrics/gynecology, orthopedic surgery,
and radiology, premiums will be higher. According to Advisory.com, OB/GYNs are
sued at a rate of 85%; General Surgeons, at 83%; and Orthopedists, at 79%.

In addition to these factors, the competitive landscape in the medical
malpractice space may also play into the price of a med mal policy, as well as
whether or not a physician is full-time (more than 20 hours per week) or part-
time (less than 20 hours per week).

So what are some other aspects to consider when getting insurance quotes for
medical professionals

**Tail Coverage** : Tail coverage provides insurance protection for claims
reported after a claims-made insurance policy has expired. Insured physicians
can get tail coverage if they do not obtain “nose” coverage, otherwise known
as “prior acts” or retroactive period, from a new insurance carrier.

Claims-made policies are the most common type of professional liability
insurance for physicians. They cover claims brought against a physician
resulting from services rendered on or after the retroactive date, and before
the expiration date of the policy.

**Deductibles** : Two different deductible options are typically part of a med
mal policy: “Indemnity-Only (Loss-Only)” deductibles are paid when a payment
of indemnity needs to be made by the insured; insureds pay an “Indemnity and
Expense” deductible even if an indemnity payment is not required. This
deductible covers legal fees incurred when a claim is filed.

It’s a reality of the medical profession: Most physicians will get sued at
least once during their careers. And finding out the cost for medical
malpractice insurance is a primary way to protect a practice, a career, a
reputation.

According to a January 2016 New England Journal of Medicine study, three out
of every four physicians 65 years old or younger will be sued for medical
malpractice. And almost 20% will have made an indemnity payment. The stakes
are even greater for physicians in high risk specialties like neurosurgery or
obstetrics/gynecology. Of those specialties, a whopping 99% of physicians will
have been sued before age 65, and 71% percent will have lost.

So, yes, physicians need sufficient medical malpractice insurance.

The cost of medical malpractice insurance is as complex and personal as any
other form of insurance. It must be suited to the exact needs of the insured
individual. There are, of course, ranges of pricing for professional liability
coverage for doctors. The best way to determine costs is to get direct quotes
from medical malpractice carriers based on specialty, location and
professional history. Another key point to measure against when selecting a
provider is to make sure they have In-House Attorneys. This is especially true
if you’re a solo or small practice physician.

## GET A QUICK QUOTE

###

### ABOUT CAPSON

  * PHYSICIAN ADVISORY BOARD
  * STRATEGIC INVESTORS
  * REINSURANCE PARTNERS
  * MEDIA ROOM
  * CAREERS

### WHO WE SERVE

  * INDIVIDUAL PHYSICIANS
  * INDIVIDUAL SURGEONS
  * GROUP PRACTICES
  * OB/GYNS

### GET COVERED

  * COVERAGE TUTORIAL
  * FAQs
  * STATES WE SERVE
  * GET A QUICK QUOTE
  * APPLICATIONS AND POLICY FORMS
  * MED-MAL DEFINITIONS
  * LEGAL NOTICE

### CAPSON VALUE

  * LOWER YOUR PREMIUM
  * COVERAGE IN MINUTES
  * REDUCE YOUR RISK
  * RESOLVE CLAIMS QUICKLY

Capson Physicians Insurance Company | Admitted in 25 States

![Beazly_Logo.png](https://www.capson.com/hs-

fs/hubfs/Beazly_Logo.png?width=512&name=Beazly_Logo.png)

![BlueCross.png](https://www.capson.com/hs-

fs/hubfs/BlueCross.png?width=512&name=BlueCross.png)

![NortonSecured.png](https://www.capson.com/hs-

fs/hubfs/NortonSecured.png?width=242&name=NortonSecured.png)

* * *

© 2019 Capson Physicians Insurance Company

  * Press Room
  * Privacy
  * Legal

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

