

The Balance

Health Care Costs Facts

Menu Search

Go

Go

  * Investing
    * Basics 
    * Stocks 
    * Real Estate 
    * Value Investing 
    * View All 
  * Credit & Debt
    * Building Credit 
    * Credit Card Basics 
    * Reducing Debt 
    * Reports & Scores 
    * View All 
  * Retirement Planning
    * Basics 
    * 401(k) Plans 
    * IRAs 
    * Social Security 
    * View All 
  * Banking & Loans
    * Basics 
    * Best Savings Account Rates 
    * Getting a Loan 
    * Online Banking 
    * View All 

visit our other sites

Hot Topics

  * Obamacare
  * Financial Crisis
  * Subprime Crisis

Hot Topics Obamacare

# Health Care Costs Facts

Sponsored by

  * Share 
  * Pin 
  * Email 

![healthcare costs lead to

bankruptcies](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/e8KCsYSjoVGNT6ynHsfcSTHUokg=/300x200/filters:saturation\(0.2\):brightness\(10\):contrast\(5\):no_upscale\(\)/GettyImages-175139357-579097463df78c09e902c5ff.jpg)

••• Photo: Sam Edwards/Getty Images

By Kimberly Amadeo

Updated March 21, 2019

In 2013, 56 million people struggled to pay health care related costs. That's
one out of five American adults. Of those, 10 million had health insurance to
cover most of the costs. But they couldn't meet the deductibles that average
between $5,000 and $10,000 a year. That's because the average household income
is $59,019.

Most people paid the bills as they could, over time. But 16.5 percent took
longer than a year to pay them off. Another 8.9 percent just couldn’t pay them
at all.

### Consequences of High Health Care Costs

Of those who had trouble paying their medical bills, 73 percent skimped on
groceries, clothing or rent. Sixty percent used up their savings. More than 40
percent took on extra work to pay the bills.

Almost one in four cut back on taking their prescription medications. For
example, one person couldn't pay the $1,200 a month for her insulin. She
reduced the dose, and her diabetes got worse. About 30 percent postponed
getting follow-up care. That leads to further health problems down the road.

Rising health care costs forced 34 percent to rack up high-interest credit
card debt. Fifteen percent took out other loans, while 13 percent borrowed
from a payday lender.

These families were not the poor, who are usually well-covered by Medicaid.
Instead, two-thirds were homeowners and three-fifths were college graduates.
They were middle-class Americans who got hit with massive, and unexpected,
out-of-pocket medical expenses. Those with private insurance saw an average of
$17,749 per family. Those who lost insurance during the process faced $22,658
in bills. Those without insurance obviously were hit with the most, at $26,971
per family.

### No. 1 Cause of Bankruptcy?

In 2015, the Kaiser Family Foundation found that there were 1 million adults
who declared medical bankruptcy. That is more than those going bankrupt for
unpaid credit card debt or mortgage defaults. A 2013 Nerdwallet study found
that almost 30 percent maxed out their credit cards, while 8 percent were
forced into bankruptcy because the illness cost them their jobs.

Even more disturbing was that 78 percent of them _had_health insurance that
failed to cover all their bills. Sixty percent were let down by private
insurance, not Medicare or Medicaid. Ten million of them will incur medical
costs they can't pay off each year, thanks to high-deductible plans.

How did those with insurance wind up with so many bills? Before the ACA, many
were sunk by annual and lifetime limits. Others were stuck when insurance
companies denied claims or just canceled the policy once they got sick.

But even after Obamacare, many weren't prepared for high deductibles and co-
insurance payments. In 2017, 31 percent of the insured found it difficult to
afford copays. That's up from 24 percent in 2015, according to a Kaiser Family
Foundation study. Similarly, 43 percent found deductibles too high, compared
to 34 percent in 2015.

### Waste

Thirty percent of health care spending goes to waste. Unnecessary services,
such as overprescribing antibiotics, wastes $210 billion each year.
Administrative costs for paperwork adds $190 billion. The billing staff must
process different claims for each of the hundreds of different insurance
plans.

Some of this is improper payments from Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children's
Health Insurance Program. Although huge amounts, they are small percentages of
the programs' budgets.

Program | Amount (2014) | Percent of Budget  
---|---|---  
Medicare | $60.0 billion | 9.9%  
Medicaid | $17.5 billion | 6.7%  
CHIP | $600 million | 6.5%

Fraud costs as much as $200 billion a year. This includes abuse of
prescription painkillers. The U.S. Center for Disease Control estimates that
12 million adults used prescription drugs for nonmedical reasons in 2010. Of
these, there were 170,000 seniors who "doctor shopped," getting prescriptions
from at least five doctors for controlled substances.

### Heavy Use of Emergency Rooms by the Poor

In 2001, emergency room doctors spent half of their time on patients without
insurance. These patients were covered by Medicaid, thanks to the EMTALA. But
Medicaid limits its payments. As a result, hospitals provided $46.4 billion in
care that had to be written off as bad debt.

### Medical Errors

The Institute of Medicine found that between 210,000 and 440,000 patients died
annually from medical errors in hospitals. That's equivalent to 10 jumbo jets
crashes a year.

### Most Expensive Diseases

The most expensive diseases were diabetes, at $26,971 per family, and
neurological disorders like multiple sclerosis, which cost $34,167 on average.

The biggest expense was hospitalization, which caused half of the
bankruptcies.

### A Small Percent of the Population Contribute Most of the Costs

One percent of the population incurs 20 percent of health care costs. In 2009,
about 3 million people spent more than $90,000 each. Older people spend that
amount year after year. That compares to 50 percent of the population who
spent just $236 per person.

Two-thirds of these high spenders are at least 55 years old. Almost 25 percent
are age 75 or older. Many have lost the ability to take care of themselves.

Over 90 percent of high spenders have chronic illnesses. The most common
illnesses are high blood pressure, diabetes, and high cholesterol. The
prevalence of these diseases is increasing. That's one of the four reasons why
health care needs to be reformed.

### Prescription Drug Costs

Out of all the players in the health care industry, prescription drug
manufacturers make the most profit. Doctor and hospital profit margins are
just 3.7 percent. Health plans pocket slightly less, at 3.2 percent. That's
partly because they are required to form separate companies for each state.
They don't have enough bargaining power against national equipment and drug
companies.

As a result, medical equipment manufacturers keep 9.5 percent of their income.
Medical instrument and supply company profits are 12.5 percent. Drug companies
make 20.8 percent. They say that's because they have to do so much research
over years to develop an effective pharmaceutical.

### Fraud

Health care fraud is a huge drain on the economy. The health care industry
loses between $60-$200 billion each year to fraud. That's 3-10 percent of the
total health care industry.

Health care fraud is an economic drain for three reasons:

  1. It raises costs for insurance companies, which increases the premiums for everyone.
  2. It increases health care costs. Most people don't look at their itemized bills since the insurance company pays for it. Since there isn't price competition, medical providers can charge high prices for tests and other procedures. Often, doctors don't even know how much a procedure they are prescribing costs.
  3. When the costs of fraud are passed onto Medicare and Medicaid, it then creates an additional budget deficit. Fraud alone could add $14 billion to 30 billion to the deficit.

A small group of doctors and patients create most of the fraud. They bill you
for a service you didn't receive. They overcharge you for a service you did
receive. They also rename a procedure so that insurance covers it. Others give
you a test you don't need, just to receive more from the insurance.

Patients perpetrate health insurance fraud as well. Patients can file false
claims for services or medications they didn't receive. They can alter bills
or even outright forge them. Finally, it is fraud if they file a false claim
to someone else's insurance.

A large cause of fraud is the rising costs of health care itself. Patients who
can't afford a life-saving procedure may be desperate enough to use a friend's
insurance. Doctors who receive a small reimbursement from the health insurance
company may tack on an additional procedure to cover their costs.
Unfortunately, it's a vicious cycle. High health care costs lead to fraud
which leads to even higher costs for everyone.

### U.S. Health Care Rank

The World Health Organization said the United States has the 37th best health
care in the world. It has the 34th highest life expectancy. But U.S. infant
mortality is 47th. Medicaid pays for half of all births.

### How It Affects You

It's helpful to have adequate insurance. In 2001, before the Obamacare
exchanges opened, 21.3 percent of households reported having problems paying
medical bills. In 2016, that had dropped to 16.2 percent. That's 13 million
fewer Americans.

This study points out why it's important for you to look at health insurance
like any other form of insurance. It's there to protect your financial assets.
Therefore, look carefully at the deductibles, co-payments and out-of-pocket
costs in addition to your monthly premium payments. Compare your existing
plan, if you have one, to what you could otherwise get on the health care
exchanges. If you don't have insurance, be sure to do the same when shopping
for new insurance.

If you can easily afford a $5,000 or $10,000 deductible, then it makes sense
to go for a lower premium payment. If that high deductible level will wipe you
out, then paying more each month is worth it - even though it takes a bigger
bite out of your cash flow.

Continue Reading

+

  * ![](//:0)

#### 4 Reasons Why We Need Healthcare Reform

  * ![African American medical professional holding baby](//:0)

#### How Does Health Insurance Work?

  * ![emergency room professionals](//:0)

#### See for Yourself If Obamacare Increased Health Care Costs

  * ![pregnancy was a pre-existing condition](//:0)

#### How Obamacare Protects Those With Pre-Existing Conditions

  * ![](//:0)

#### Why America Is the Only Rich Country Without Universal Health Care

  * ![Obamacare explained](//:0)

#### Obamacare: Simple Enough to Explain to Your Kids

  * ![Baby getting temperature taken under armpit](//:0)

#### How the Affordable Health Care Act Affects You

  * ![family-with-wheelchair](//:0)

#### What You Will and Won't Lose If Obamacare Is Replaced

  * ![Man paying for health care](//:0)

#### How Health Care Inequality Increases Costs for Everyone

  * ![Entrepreneur working in creative office space](//:0)

#### How to Pay Your Medical Bills With No Health Insurance

  * ![emergency room](//:0)

#### Do Medical Bills Really Bankrupt America's Families?

  * ![obamacare helps newborn baby](//:0)

#### 10 Surprising Changes in the Affordable Care Act Itself

  * ![](//:0)

#### Average Cost of an ER Visit

  * ![essential health benefits](//:0)

#### 10 Essential Benefits Your Health Plan Must Have

  * ![Obama Healthcare Reform](//:0)

#### How Insurance Companies Changed Obama's Healthcare Reform Plan

  * ![](//:0)

#### How Trump's Health Care Policies Will Raise Premium Prices for You

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

  * Investing
  * Credit & Debt
  * Retirement Planning
  * Banking & Loans

  * About Us

  * Advertise
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * Careers
  * Contact
  * Editorial Guidelines

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

  * Lifewire
  * ThoughtCo
  * TripSavvy
  * The Spruce
  * and more

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

