

![](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/AJMC_logo.png)

Managed Markets Network®

Login

Register

News

Newsroom

Press Releases

In Focus Blog

Contributor

VBID Newsletter

Journals

About

The American Journal of Managed Care

The American Journal of Accountable Care

Evidence-Based Oncology

Evidence-Based Diabetes Management

Supplements

Events

AJMC Events

Conferences

Compendia

Alternative Payment Models

Bone Health

Cardiovascular

Clinical Pathways

COPD

Diabetes

Diagnostics

Employers

Glucose Monitoring

Hematology

Hepatitis C

HIV

Immuno-Oncology

Migraine

Multiple Sclerosis

Neutropenia

Oncology

Pain Management

Parkinson Disease

Precision Oncology

Rare Disease

Respiratory

Women's Health

Media

Insights

Interviews

News Network

Panel Discussion

Peer Exchange

Post-Conference Perspectives

Podcast

Webinars/Webcasts

Continuing Education

Formulary Central

Currently Viewing:  
Contributor

Strengthening Intergenerational Patient-Provider Relationships

December 12, 2017

The Role of Consultants in United States Healthcare

March 28, 2017

The Quantified Healthy Self

October 03, 2016

Medicaid Expansion Hasn't Driven Up Demand for Emergency Care

August 23, 2016

Health Data and Its Implications in Managing Chronic Disease

August 06, 2016

How Policy Impacts Health Outcomes: A Look at Youth Concussion Laws

June 09, 2016

Telemedicine: A Game Changer for Senior Healthcare

April 24, 2016

The Importance of Medical Social Workers

March 03, 2016

Currently Reading

The Quality of US Healthcare Compared With the World

February 11, 2016

Evidence for Causal Association Between Zika and Microcephaly

February 03, 2016

The Economic Implications of Aging

January 19, 2016

__

__

__

__

__

Contributor > Julie Potyraj > > - Published on: February 11, 2016

# The Quality of US Healthcare Compared With the World

Julie Potyraj is the community manager for MHA@GW and MPH@GW, both offered by
the Milken Institute School of Public Health at the George Washington
University. For several years, she served as a community development
specialist in Zambia coordinating youth empowerment programs and reproductive
health education. She is currently an MPH@GW student focusing on global health
and health communications.

Although the United States is often viewed as having some of the best
healthcare in the world, the validity of this assertion has been called into
question for a number of years. A 2009 analysis from the Urban Institute found
that the quality of healthcare in America at that time was a bit of a "mixed
bag"--faring relatively well in areas such as cancer care, but lagging in
mortality rates from treatable and preventable diseases.

A 2014 report from the Commonwealth Fund revealed continued trends that were
along the same lines--despite the implementation of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) in the interim. In the report, the US "ranked last overall among 11
industrialized countries on measures of health system quality, efficiency,
access to care, equity and healthy lives." Significantly, the US was noted to
have the highest costs while also displaying the lowest performance.

To explore these issues further, MHA@GW--the online Executive Master of Health
Administration program at George Washington University--produced an
infographic comparing US healthcare to 16 other Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) nations. The following provides an overview
of factors that affect the quality of healthcare in the US and a comparison of
how other countries spend their healthcare dollars.

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/ajmc/_contributor/333980/info1.jpg)

**Factors Affecting Healthcare Quality**

Around the world, factors that impact the quality of healthcare include not
only health service availability, but also usage rates. To quantify these
indicators, the infographic employs immunization coverage rates for 1-year-old
children. The highest ranked country was China, and the US came in a distant
12th among the nations listed.

To reflect risk factors, the graphic compares the use of improved drinking
water sources across the countries listed. In this category, the US was number
8--at the 99th percentile--with the 7 nations in the lead all reporting that
100% of their populations were using improved sources.

Adequate health system infrastructure is a key factor that impacts healthcare
quality. To quantify it, the density of the physician workforce is measured in
an aggregation of data from 2007 to 2013. In this category, Germany ranked
highest--with 38.9 physicians per 10,000 individuals in the population.
Meanwhile, the US ranked sixth, with 24.5 physicians per 10,000. In comparison
to the OECD average of 3.2 practicing physicians per 1000 people, the US has
2.5--as well as a lower relative number of hospital beds.

**The Impact of Per Person Spending**

With such less-than-stellar rankings, one may expect per person healthcare
spending in the US to be partly to blame. However, the US has the highest
healthcare costs in the world--spending 54% more on healthcare per person than
most developed nations across the globe.

Other countries are doing better within the context of life expectancy and
mortality rates, and Singapore is the big winner here. The same eight
countries occupy the top eight spots in both per person spending and life
expectancy rates. However, Singapore ranks eighth in spending, and second in
life expectancy.

Overall, healthcare spending in the US is reportedly on the decline--however,
CMS expects it to increase heading toward 2024. Whether or not this holds
true, the key for improving healthcare in our country must include an upward
trend in the quality of care, as well.

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/ajmc/_contributor/333980/info2.jpg)

View the full infographic.

Next Up

![](https://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/AJMC_Logo.png)

![Like Us On

Facebook](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/1707_social_icon_facebook.png)

![Follow Us On

Twitter](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/1707_social_icon_twitter.png)

![Check us out on

LinkedIn](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/1707_social_icon_linkedin.png)

![Follow us on

Instagram](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/1707_social_icon_instag.png)

![Subscribe us on

YouTube](http://ajmc.s3.amazonaws.com/_media/_core/1707_social_icon_youtube.png)

Careers  
Contact Us  
Privacy Policy  
Terms & Conditions

Copyright AJMC 2006-2019 Clinical Care Targeted Communications Group, LLC. All
Rights Reserved.

x

Welcome the the new and improved AJMC.com, the premier managed market network.
Tell us about yourself so that we can serve you better.

Sign Up

×

## Sign In

Email Address Password Forgot Password?

**Not a member?** Sign up now!

# Registration

*Required Fields

×

### Login Information

Email

Password

Retype Password

### Email Sign Up

Managed Care Minute: Daily eNewsletter

Oncology News Updates

Accountable Care Updates: Monthly eNewsletter

AJMC® Events: Invites, Meeting Coverage & More

### General Information

First Name

Last Name

Country Country*AfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican
SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntarcticaAntigua and
BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosnia
and HerzegovinaBotswanaBouvet IslandBrazilBritish Indian Ocean TerritoryBrunei
DarussalamBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape VerdeCayman
IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChinaChristmas IslandCocos (Keeling)
IslandsColombiaComorosCongoCongo, the Democratic Republic of theCook
IslandsCosta RicaCote D'IvoireCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech
RepublicDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl
SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFalkland Islands
(Malvinas)Faroe IslandsFijiFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench
Southern
TerritoriesGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuineaGuinea-
BissauGuyanaHaitiHeard Island and Mcdonald IslandsHoly See (Vatican City
State)HondurasHong KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIran, Islamic Republic
ofIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKorea,
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea, Republic ofKuwaitKyrgyzstanLao People's
Democratic RepublicLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyan Arab
JamahiriyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacaoMacedonia, the Former Yugoslav
Republic ofMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall
IslandsMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMicronesia, Federated States
ofMoldova, Republic
ofMonacoMongoliaMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands
AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNiueNorfolk
IslandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorwayOmanPakistanPalauPalestinian Territory,
OccupiedPanamaPapua New
GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPitcairnPolandPortugalPuerto
RicoQatarReunionRomaniaRussian FederationRwandaSaint HelenaSaint Kitts and
NevisSaint LuciaSaint Pierre and MiquelonSaint Vincent and the
GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome and PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbia and
MontenegroSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon
IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsSpainSri
LankaSudanSurinameSvalbard and Jan MayenSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyrian Arab
RepublicTaiwan, Province of ChinaTajikistanTanzania, United Republic
ofThailandTimor-LesteTogoTokelauTongaTrinidad and
TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks and Caicos
IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited
StatesUnited States Minor Outlying
IslandsUruguayUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaViet NamVirgin Islands, BritishVirgin
Islands, U.s.Wallis and FutunaWestern SaharaYemenZambiaZimbabwe

State
State/Region*AlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew
HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth
DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth
DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWashington D.C.West
VirginiaWisconsinWyoming State

Company

Title Title*Medical DirectorPharmacy DirectorFormulary DirectorManaged Care
DirectorMedicare/Medicaid DirectorQuality Assurance DirectorUtilization Review
DirectorPhysicianPharmacistOutcomes ResearcherDirector of
NursingPresident/CEO/ExecutiveChief Financial Officer/FinanceCOO/Operations
DirectorMIS DirectorCase ManagerAdministratorBenefits
ManagerMarketing/Publications DirectorOther

Market Segment Market Segment*HMO, PPO, IHOGroup Medical
PracticePBMPharmacyHospitalLong Term CareHome Health (VNA,
Hospice)EmployerGovernment (VA, DOD, etc.)Pharmaceutical CompanyOther

  * Do you make formulary decisions?

YesNo

### Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions

By registering, you agree to AJMC®'s Terms and Conditions, Privacy Policy and
understand that you will be receiving email communications *

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/842772104/?guid=ON&script=0)

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1444927712255475&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=99082&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

