

The Balance

Tax Planning Basics

Menu Search

Go

Go

  * Investing
    * Basics 
    * Stocks 
    * Real Estate 
    * Value Investing 
    * View All 
  * Credit & Debt
    * Building Credit 
    * Credit Card Basics 
    * Reducing Debt 
    * Reports & Scores 
    * View All 
  * Retirement Planning
    * Basics 
    * 401(k) Plans 
    * IRAs 
    * Social Security 
    * View All 
  * Banking & Loans
    * Basics 
    * Best Savings Account Rates 
    * Getting a Loan 
    * Online Banking 
    * View All 

visit our other sites

Taxes

  * Tax Filing Basics
  * The Ultimate Guide to Doing Your Taxes
  * Filing Your Taxes
  * Taxable Income
  * Tax Tools & Technology
  * State Taxes
  * Income Tax Credits
  * Solving Tax Issues
  * All Taxes

Taxes Tax Filing Basics

# Tax Planning Basics

  * Share 
  * Pin 
  * Email 

![Two women reviewing

paperwork](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/g2vBTFVRulBHrcOjy3pAfSPYwLo=/300x200/filters:saturation\(0.2\):brightness\(10\):contrast\(5\):no_upscale\(\)/503041399-56a9387a3df78cf772a4e3ee.jpg)

••• PeopleImages.com/Digital Vision/Getty Images

By William Perez

Updated November 07, 2018

The goal of tax planning is to arrange your financial affairs so as to
minimize your taxes. There are three basic ways to reduce your taxes, and each
basic method might have several variations. You can reduce your income,
increase your deductions, and take advantage of tax credits.

### Reducing Income

Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) is a key element in determining your taxes. Lots
of other things depend on your AGI (or modifications to your AGI)-- such as
your tax rate and various tax credits. AGI even impacts your financial life
outside of taxes: banks, mortgage lenders, and college financial aid programs
all routinely ask for your adjusted gross income. This is a key measure of
your finances.

Because your adjusted gross income is so important, you may want to begin your
tax planning here. What goes into your adjusted gross income? AGI is your
income from all sources minus any adjustments to your income. The higher your
total income, the higher your adjusted gross income.

As you can guess, the more money you make, the more taxes you will pay.
Conversely, the less money you make, the less taxes you will pay. The number
one way to reduce taxes is to reduce your income. And the best way to reduce
your income is to contribute money to a 401(k) or similar retirement plan at
work. Your contribution reduces your wages and lowers your tax bill.

You can also reduce your Adjusted Gross Income through various adjustments to
income. Adjustments are deductions, but you don't have to itemize them on the
Schedule A. Instead, you take them on page 1 of your 1040 and they reduce your
Adjusted Gross Income.

Adjustments include contributions to a traditional IRA, student loan interest
paid, alimony paid, and classroom-related expenses. A full list of adjustments
are found on Form 1040, page 1, lines 23 through 34. The best way to boost
your adjustments is to contribute to a traditional IRA.

As you can see, two of the best ways to reduce your taxes is to save for
retirement, either through a 401(k) at work or through a traditional IRA plan.
Contributions to these retirement plans will lower your taxable income, and
lower your taxes.

### Increase Your Tax Deductions

Taxable income is another key element in your overall tax situation. Taxable
income is what's left over after you have reduced your AGI by your deductions
and exemptions. Almost everyone can take a standard deduction, and some people
are able to itemize their deductions.

Itemized deductions include expenses for health care, state and local taxes,
personal property taxes (such as car registration fees), mortgage interest,
gifts to charity, job-related expenses, tax preparation fees, and investment-
related expenses.

One key tax planning strategy is to keep track of your itemized expenses
throughout the year using a spreadsheet or personal finance program. You can
then quickly compare your itemized expenses with your standard deduction. You
should always take the higher of your standard deduction or your itemized
deduction.

Your standard deduction and personal exemptions depend on your filing status
and how many dependents you have. You can increase your standard deduction and
personal exemptions by getting married or having more dependents.

The best strategies for reducing your taxable income is to itemize your
deductions, and the three biggest deductions are mortgage interest, state
taxes, and gifts to charity.

### Take Advantage of Tax Credits

Once we've tweaked our taxable income, we are ready to focus our attention on
various tax credits. Tax credits reduce your tax. There are tax credits for
college expenses, for saving for retirement, and for adopting children.

The best tax credits are for adoption and college expenses. Not everyone is in
a position to adopt a child, but everyone could take some college classes.
There are two education-related tax credits. The Hope Credit is for students
in their first two years of college. The Lifetime Learning Credit is for
anyone taking college classes. The classes do not have to be related to your
career.

You may also want to avoid additional taxes. If at all possible, avoid early
withdrawals from an IRA or 401(k) retirement plan. The amount you withdraw
will become part of your taxable income, and on top of that, there will be
additional taxes to pay for the early withdrawal.

One of the best and most abused tax credit is the Earned Income Credit (EIC).
Unlike other tax credits, the EIC is credited to your account as a payment.
And that means the EIC often results in a tax refund even if the total tax has
been reduced to zero. You may be eligible to claim the earned income credit if
you earn less than a certain amount.

### Increase Your Withholding

You can avoid owing at the end of the year by increasing your withholding.
More money will be taken out of your paycheck throughout the year, but you
will get a bigger refund when you file your taxes.

Continue Reading

+

  * ![1099 tax form and golden egg in a nest](//:0)

#### How to Save on Taxes With Deductions and Tax Credits

  * #### Tax Deductions That Save You Money and Help Fund Your Retirement

  * ![a woman's hand working with calculator](//:0)

#### Most Commonly Claimed Tax Deductions and Adjusted Gross Income

  * ![Taxes](//:0)

#### Should You Take the 1040 Standard Deduction or Itemize?

  * ![Writing out a check for payment.](//:0)

#### Tax Liabilities: What They Are and How They Affect You

  * ![Business Tax Deductions and Credits](//:0)

#### Above-the-Line Tax Deductions for a Larger Return on Your Taxes

  * ![Welcome to Illinois sign](//:0)

#### Understanding the Illinois Flat Rate State Income Tax

  * ![](//:0)

#### Avoid These Retirement Planning Mistakes During Tax Season

  * ![78532484_2014TaxBrackets.jpg](//:0)

#### The New Tax Brackets and Inflation Adjustments for 2019

  * ![](//:0)

#### Retirement Saver's Credit for Tax Year 2018

  * ![](//:0)

#### The Easy Way to Calculate Your Modified Adjusted Gross Income

  * ![Form 1040EZ](//:0)

#### Here Are Some Tips for Preparing Form 1040EZ

  * ![Tax Refund Gift Card](//:0)

#### Surprised That You Didn't Get a Bigger Tax Refund? Here's Why

  * ![](//:0)

#### Your Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) Can Limit Your Tax Breaks

  * ![Professionals dealing with taxes and markets](//:0)

#### 2017 Tax Rates for Retirement Planning

  * ![Aerial of New York city and Brooklyn bridge at dusk](//:0)

#### What Every New Yorker Should Know About Paying Income Tax

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

  * Investing
  * Credit & Debt
  * Retirement Planning
  * Banking & Loans

  * About Us

  * Advertise
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * Careers
  * Contact
  * Editorial Guidelines

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

  * Lifewire
  * ThoughtCo
  * TripSavvy
  * The Spruce
  * and more

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

