

![Des Moines Register](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/sites/desmoinesregister/images/site-masthead-logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWfor full access

  * ![Des Moines Register](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/desmoinesregister/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
  * Home
  * News
  * Sports
  * Things to Do
  * Opinion
  * Business
  * Communities
  * Media
  * USA TODAY
  * Jobs
  * Autos
  * Archives
  * Obituaries
  * Business Directory
  * Public Notices
  * Advertise with Us
  * More

    * Home
    * News
    * Sports
    * Things to Do
    * Opinion
    * Business
    * Communities
    * Media
    * USA TODAY
    * Jobs
    * Autos
    * Archives
    * Obituaries
    * Business Directory
    * Public Notices
    * Advertise with Us
  * Search

  *     * Subscribe
  * salutation

    * Manage Account
    * Access e-Edition
    * Newsletters
    * Pay Bill
    * Report Delivery Issues
    * Pause Delivery
    * Subscriber Guide
    * Help Center
    * Sign Out

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### The science is conclusive: That fetus is a baby

"In other words, you and I begin our lives not when we're born, but when we're
conceived."

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/desmoinesregister/uscp-web-

static-4510.11.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

The science is conclusive: That fetus is a baby "In other words, you and I
begin our lives not when we're born, but when we're conceived." Check out this
story on desmoinesregister.com:
https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/iowa-
view/2018/12/12/science-conclusive-fetus-baby-iowa-fetal-heartbeat-law-
abortion/2286938002/

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

OPINION

# The science is conclusive: That fetus is a baby

Drew Zahn, Iowa View contributor Published 6:02 a.m. CT Dec. 12, 2018

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/desmoinesregister/uscp-web-

static-4510.11.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

![636609511874202955-ultrasound.JPG](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/9746b2033f13c1f9dd29895f4f3fd0979811ab99/c=260-0-5240-3744/local/-/media/2018/05/03/IAGroup/DesMoines/636609511874202955-ultrasound.JPG?width=534&height=401&fit=crop)Buy
Photo

An ultrasound is performed at Blank Children's Hospital in Des Moines.(Photo:
Des Moines Register file photo)Buy Photo

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

The Register's Rekha Basu argues in a recent column that calling a fetus a
"baby" is somehow a construct of religion and rhetoric, rather than
"established science."

The scientific evidence, however, overwhelmingly concludes just the opposite:
The preborn child in her mother's womb — she's not just a "fetus," she's a
baby.

Many Iowans like me learned middle-school science through textbooks from
publishers like McGraw-Hill. Today, those same science textbooks reveal near
universal agreement that our human lives begin long before we're born, even
before we're considered "viable" to survive outside the womb.

In McGraw-Hill's textbook, "Patten's Foundations of Embryology, 6th ed.," for
example, biology professor Bruce M. Carlson of the University of Michigan,
writes, "The time of fertilization represents the starting point in the life
history, or ontogeny, of the individual."

In other words, you and I begin our lives not when we're born, but when we're
conceived.

Another textbook, "Human Embryology and Teratology, 3rd ed.," from publisher
Wiley-Liss, asserts that fertilization is the "critical landmark" when a new,
genetically distinct human organism is formed. Yet, the text explains, "life
is a continuous process" throughout the pregnancy.

As Harvard University Medical School professor Micheline Matthews-Ross
testified before a 1981 U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, "It is scientifically
correct to say that an individual human life begins at conception … and that
this developing human always is a member of our species in all stages of life"
(New York Times, April 26, 1981).

In other words, Matthews-Ross was saying, a baby is a baby — from
fertilization, to heartbeat, to birth. Yes, the baby of five weeks in the womb
differs from the newborn, but so does the toddler differ from the teen.
Scientifically, we pass through different stages as we grow, but we don't pass
from person to non-person, or vice versa.

At that same 1981 government hearing, Dr. Watson A. Bowes of the University of
Colorado Medical School asserted: "The beginning of a single human life is
from a biological point of view a simple and straightforward matter — the
beginning is conception. This straightforward biological fact should not be
distorted to serve sociological, political or economic goals."

After examining the evidence, the Senate subcommittee reported: "Physicians,
biologists and other scientists agree that conception marks the beginning of
the life of a human being — a being that is alive and is a member of the human
species. There is overwhelming agreement on this point in countless medical,
biological and scientific writings." (Subcommittee on Separation of Powers to
Senate Judiciary Committee S-158, Report, 97th Congress, 1st Session, 1981)

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

The 37 years of scientific advancement since that subcommittee hearing have
only confirmed its findings. Children survive premature birth today at younger
and younger ages, demonstrating how arbitrary it is to argue life doesn't
begin until a baby is "viable." And today's 3-D ultrasounds give us
astonishing, heartwarming pictures, revealing that the little child in her
mother's womb — she's a baby.

"[It] is no longer a matter of taste or opinion," testified professor Jerome
LeJuene of the University of Descartes. "It is plain experimental evidence."

Even many abortion advocates have come to grips with this scientific reality.
Naomi Wolf, a Clinton advisor and abortion supporter, wrote in The New
Republic: "Clinging to a rhetoric about abortion in which there is no life and
no death, we entangle our beliefs in a series of self-delusions, fibs and
evasions. … The death of a fetus is a real death."

Dr. Bernard Nathanson, who co-founded the abortion advocacy group NARAL and
personally presided over 60,000 abortions, later confessed in the film "The
Silent Scream" that "Modern technologies have convinced us that beyond
question the unborn child is simply another human being, another member of the
human community, indistinguishable in every way from any of us."

And at a 2014 panel discussion presented by the National Abortion Federation,
Dr. Lisa Harris of Planned Parenthood of Mid and South Michigan put it even
more plainly: "[Mothers] are not stupid. They know what’s in there. … It's
violence. It's a person. It's killing."

Basu's column ignores this scientific reality, instead raising the tired,
misleading straw man that the pro-life argument is inherently religious
instead of scientific. But Iowa's Coalition of Pro-Life Leaders includes
Catholics, Protestants, agnostics, evangelicals and more — people who would
deeply disagree on religion. Yet there's one scientific premise we all agree
upon: The unborn child in her mother's womb — she's a baby.

In his Roe v. Wade ruling in 1973, Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun also
ignored the science, stating, "We need not resolve the difficult question of
when life begins. … The judiciary, at this point in the development of man's
knowledge, is not in a position to speculate."

The scientific community, however, is at virtual consensus as to when life
begins. And it's precisely because Blackmun dodged that question in his 1973
Roe ruling that we're still arguing about abortion today.

You and I have heard all the arguments by now. But there's one fact —
"established science" — that can't be argued away: That little child in her
mother's womb — she's not just a "fetus," she's a baby.

_Drew Zahn is director of communications for The Family Leader._

![Drew Zahn](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/presto/2018/12/12/PDEM/18eae1c4-01d2-49da-8340-ab8642ac5537-Drew_Zahn.jpg?width=180&height=240&fit=bounds&auto=webp)

Drew Zahn (Photo: Special to the Register)

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story:
https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/iowa-
view/2018/12/12/science-conclusive-fetus-baby-iowa-fetal-heartbeat-law-
abortion/2286938002/

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

###### More Stories

  * ![Stories from Iowa women remind us why Roe v. Wade has saved lives](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/05/21/PDEM/5883e095-a1e2-4ee2-94d4-c880a90c2a78-0521_AbortionRally_FOR_PRINT_001.JPG?crop=2040,2000,x599,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Iowa women know safe, legal abortion saves lives

May 30, 2019, 5:31 p.m.

  * ![Iowa City mom alleges her boss spied on her as she pumped breast milk](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/05/29/PDEM/cfbae63c-201f-4c6b-b8de-cbc71fcdd1ff-spy_pen_1.jpg?crop=481,477,x68,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Suit alleges boss spied on breastfeeding mother

May 30, 2019, 11:22 a.m.

  * ![Planned Parenthood's sex education doesn't reduce unplanned pregnancy](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/01cec6af4595d6c6967139db4ac1fc4d695b7261/c=354-0-1768-1414/local/-/media/2018/03/16/INGroup/Evansville/636568059166363873-GettyImages-687010732.jpg?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)

###### Planned Parenthood's sex education didn't work

May 30, 2019, 11:28 a.m.

  * ![I was a substitute teacher until I told students their grammar was unacceptable](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/d5987912e1cafadfb936ed02754b674458efede9/c=1093-0-5093-4000/local/-/media/2017/09/22/OHGroup/Mansfield/636416924811050899-classrooms.jpg?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)

###### I was fired for correcting students' grammar

May 30, 2019, 7:06 a.m.

  * ![No one knows better than a doctor that abortion must be safe and legal](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/05/21/PDEM/d860d098-cc7b-41f4-b55c-b8566566c4a9-0521_AbortionRally_005.JPG?crop=2010,1999,x449,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Iowa doctor knows why abortion must be legal

May 31, 2019, 12:49 p.m.

  * ![Universal basic income disrespects the nobility of work](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/affd4a75bb791e361b83947a0a8ab9697927be3b/c=648-0-4488-3840/local/-/media/2016/06/05/USATODAY/USATODAY/636007302006360082-AP-Switzerland-Basic-Income.jpg?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)

###### Universal basic income disrespects work

May 30, 2019, 1:39 p.m.

![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/gannett-

web/properties/desmoinesregister/logos-and-branding/logo-default-light.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

