

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Abortion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Intentionally ending pregnancy

For other uses, see Abortion (disambiguation).

## Abortion

Other names| Induced miscarriage, termination of pregnancy  
Specialty| Obstetrics and gynecology  
ICD-10-PCS| O04  
ICD-9-CM| 779.6  
MeSH| D000028  
MedlinePlus| 007382

[edit on Wikidata]

**Abortion** is the ending of a pregnancy by removal or expulsion of an embryo
or fetus before it can survive outside the uterus.[note 1] An abortion that
occurs without intervention is known as a miscarriage or spontaneous abortion.
When deliberate steps are taken to end a pregnancy, it is called an induced
abortion, or less frequently "induced miscarriage". The unmodified word
_abortion_ generally refers to an induced abortion.[1][2] A similar procedure
after the fetus has potential to survive outside the womb is known as a "late
termination of pregnancy" or less accurately as a "late term abortion".[3]

When allowed by law and performed by trained personnel, abortion is one of the
safest procedures in medicine.[4][5] It is safer than carrying a pregnancy to
term, which has a 14 times higher risk of death in the United States.[6][7]
Modern methods use medication or surgery for abortions.[8] The drug
mifepristone in combination with prostaglandin appears to be as safe and
effective as surgery during the first and second trimester of pregnancy.[8][9]
The most common surgical technique involves dilating the cervix and using a
suction device.[10] Birth control, such as the pill or intrauterine devices,
can be used immediately following abortion.[9] When performed legally and
safely on a woman who desires it, induced abortions do not increase the risk
of long-term mental or physical problems.[11] In contrast, unsafe abortions
(those performed by unskilled individuals, with hazardous equipment, or in
unsanitary facilities) cause 47,000 deaths and 5 million hospital admissions
each year.[11][12] The World Health Organization recommends safe and legal
abortions be available to all women.[13]

Around 56 million abortions are performed each year in the world,[14] with
about 45% done unsafely.[15] Abortion rates changed little between 2003 and
2008,[16] before which they decreased for at least two decades as access to
family planning and birth control increased.[17] As of 2008[update], 40% of
the world's women had access to legal abortions without limits as to
reason.[18] Countries that permit abortions have different limits on how late
in pregnancy abortion is allowed.[18]

Historically, abortions have been attempted using herbal medicines, sharp
tools, forceful massage, or through other traditional methods.[19] Abortion
laws and cultural or religious views of abortions are different around the
world. In some areas abortion is legal only in specific cases such as rape,
problems with the fetus, poverty, risk to a woman's health, or incest.[20]
There is debate over the moral, ethical, and legal issues of abortion.[21][22]
Those who oppose abortion often argue that an embryo or fetus is a human with
a right to life, and so they may compare abortion to murder.[23][24] Those who
favor the legality of abortion often hold that it is part of a woman's right
to make decisions about her own body.[25] Others favor legal and accessible
abortion as a public health measure.[26]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Types
            * 1.1 Induced
            * 1.2 Spontaneous
          * 2 Methods
            * 2.1 Medical
            * 2.2 Surgical
            * 2.3 Labor induction abortion
            * 2.4 Other methods
          * 3 Safety
            * 3.1 Mental health
            * 3.2 Unsafe abortion
            * 3.3 Live birth
          * 4 Incidence
            * 4.1 Gestational age and method
          * 5 Motivation
            * 5.1 Personal
            * 5.2 Societal
            * 5.3 Maternal and fetal health
              * 5.3.1 Cancer
          * 6 History and religion
          * 7 Society and culture
            * 7.1 Abortion debate
            * 7.2 Modern abortion law
            * 7.3 Sex-selective abortion
            * 7.4 Anti-abortion violence
          * 8 Other animals
          * 9 Notes
          * 10 References
          * 11 Bibliography
          * 12 External links
        

## Types

### Induced

An induced abortion may be classified as _therapeutic_ (done in response to a
health condition of the women or fetus) or _elective_ (chosen for other
reasons).[27]

Approximately 205 million pregnancies occur each year worldwide. Over a third
are unintended and about a fifth end in induced abortion.[16][28] Most
abortions result from unintended pregnancies.[29][30] In the United Kingdom, 1
to 2% of abortions are done due to genetic problems in the fetus.[11] A
pregnancy can be intentionally aborted in several ways. The manner selected
often depends upon the gestational age of the embryo or fetus, which increases
in size as the pregnancy progresses.[31][32] Specific procedures may also be
selected due to legality, regional availability, and doctor or a woman's
personal preference.

Reasons for procuring induced abortions are typically characterized as either
therapeutic or elective. An abortion is medically referred to as a therapeutic
abortion when it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman; to
prevent harm to the woman's physical or mental health; to terminate a
pregnancy where indications are that the child will have a significantly
increased chance of mortality or morbidity; or to selectively reduce the
number of fetuses to lessen health risks associated with multiple
pregnancy.[33][34] An abortion is referred to as an elective or voluntary
abortion when it is performed at the request of the woman for non-medical
reasons.[34] Confusion sometimes arises over the term "elective" because
"elective surgery" generally refers to all scheduled surgery, whether
medically necessary or not.[35]

### Spontaneous

Main article: Miscarriage

Miscarriage, also known as spontaneous abortion, is the unintentional
expulsion of an embryo or fetus before the 24th week of gestation.[36] A
pregnancy that ends before 37 weeks of gestation resulting in a live-born
infant is a "premature birth" or a "preterm birth".[37] When a fetus dies in
utero after viability, or during delivery, it is usually termed
"stillborn".[38] Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered
to be miscarriages although usage of these terms can sometimes overlap.[39]

Only 30% to 50% of conceptions progress past the first trimester.[40] The vast
majority of those that do not progress are lost before the woman is aware of
the conception,[34] and many pregnancies are lost before medical practitioners
can detect an embryo.[41] Between 15% and 30% of known pregnancies end in
clinically apparent miscarriage, depending upon the age and health of the
pregnant woman.[42] 80% of these spontaneous abortions happen in the first
trimester.[43]

The most common cause of spontaneous abortion during the first trimester is
chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo or fetus,[34][44] accounting for at
least 50% of sampled early pregnancy losses.[45] Other causes include vascular
disease (such as lupus), diabetes, other hormonal problems, infection, and
abnormalities of the uterus.[44] Advancing maternal age and a woman's history
of previous spontaneous abortions are the two leading factors associated with
a greater risk of spontaneous abortion.[45] A spontaneous abortion can also be
caused by accidental trauma; intentional trauma or stress to cause miscarriage
is considered induced abortion or feticide.[46]

## Methods

Practice of Induced Abortion Methods

MVA

D&E

EVA

Hyst.

D&C

Intact D&X

Mifepr.

Induced Miscarr.

0–12 wks

12–28 weeks

28–40 wks

Gestational age may determine which abortion methods are practiced.

### Medical

Main article: Medical abortion

Medical abortions are those induced by abortifacient pharmaceuticals. Medical
abortion became an alternative method of abortion with the availability of
prostaglandin analogs in the 1970s and the antiprogestogen mifepristone (also
known as RU-486) in the 1980s.[8][9][47][48][49]

The most common early first-trimester medical abortion regimens use
mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog (misoprostol or
gemeprost) up to 9 weeks gestational age, methotrexate in combination with a
prostaglandin analog up to 7 weeks gestation, or a prostaglandin analog
alone.[47] Mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimens work faster and are
more effective at later gestational ages than methotrexate–misoprostol
combination regimens, and combination regimens are more effective than
misoprostol alone.[48] This regime is effective in the second trimester.[50]
Medical abortion regiments involving mifepristone followed by misoprostol in
the cheek between 24 and 48 hours later are effective when performed before 63
days' gestation.[51]

In very early abortions, up to 7 weeks gestation, medical abortion using a
mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimen is considered to be more
effective than surgical abortion (vacuum aspiration), especially when clinical
practice does not include detailed inspection of aspirated tissue.[52] Early
medical abortion regimens using mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by
buccal or vaginal misoprostol are 98% effective up to 9 weeks gestational
age.[53] If medical abortion fails, surgical abortion must be used to complete
the procedure.[54]

Early medical abortions account for the majority of abortions before 9 weeks
gestation in Britain,[55][56] France,[57] Switzerland,[58] and the Nordic
countries.[59] In the United States, the percentage of early medical abortions
performed in non-hospital facilities is 31% as of 2014[update].[60]

Medical abortion regimens using mifepristone in combination with a
prostaglandin analog are the most common methods used for second-trimester
abortions in Canada, most of Europe, China and India,[49] in contrast to the
United States where 96% of second-trimester abortions are performed surgically
by dilation and evacuation.[61]

### Surgical

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/25/Vacuum-

aspiration_%28single%29.svg/220px-Vacuum-aspiration_%28single%29.svg.png)

A vacuum aspiration abortion at eight weeks gestational age (six weeks after
fertilization).  
**1:** Amniotic sac  
**2:** Embryo  
**3:** Uterine lining  
**4:** Speculum  
**5:** Vacurette  
**6:** Attached to a suction pump

Up to 15 weeks' gestation, suction-aspiration or vacuum aspiration are the
most common surgical methods of induced abortion.[62] _Manual vacuum
aspiration_ (MVA) consists of removing the fetus or embryo, placenta, and
membranes by suction using a manual syringe, while _electric vacuum
aspiration_ (EVA) uses an electric pump. These techniques differ in the
mechanism used to apply suction, in how early in pregnancy they can be used,
and in whether cervical dilation is necessary.

MVA, also known as "mini-suction" and "menstrual extraction", can be used in
very early pregnancy, and does not require cervical dilation. Dilation and
curettage (D&C), the second most common method of surgical abortion, is a
standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons, including
examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy, investigation of
abnormal bleeding, and abortion. Curettage refers to cleaning the walls of the
uterus with a curette. The World Health Organization recommends this
procedure, also called _sharp curettage,_ only when MVA is unavailable.[63]

From the 15th week of gestation until approximately the 26th, other techniques
must be used. Dilation and evacuation (D&E) consists of opening the cervix of
the uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction. After the
16th week of gestation, abortions can also be induced by intact dilation and
extraction (IDX) (also called intrauterine cranial decompression), which
requires surgical decompression of the fetus's head before evacuation. IDX is
sometimes called "partial-birth abortion", which has been federally banned in
the United States.

In the third trimester of pregnancy, induced abortion may be performed
surgically by intact dilation and extraction or by hysterotomy. Hysterotomy
abortion is a procedure similar to a caesarean section and is performed under
general anesthesia. It requires a smaller incision than a caesarean section
and is used during later stages of pregnancy.[64]

First-trimester procedures can generally be performed using local anesthesia,
while second-trimester methods may require deep sedation or general
anesthesia.[65]

### Labor induction abortion

In places lacking the necessary medical skill for dilation and extraction, or
where preferred by practitioners, an abortion can be induced by first inducing
labor and then inducing fetal demise if necessary.[66] This is sometimes
called "induced miscarriage". This procedure may be performed from 13 weeks
gestation to the third trimester. Although it is very uncommon in the United
States, more than 80% of induced abortions throughout the second trimester are
labor-induced abortions in Sweden and other nearby countries.[67]

Only limited data are available comparing this method with dilation and
extraction.[67] Unlike D&E, labor-induced abortions after 18 weeks may be
complicated by the occurrence of brief fetal survival, which may be legally
characterized as live birth. For this reason, labor-induced abortion is
legally risky in the United States.[67][68]

### Other methods

Historically, a number of herbs reputed to possess abortifacient properties
have been used in folk medicine. Among these are: tansy, pennyroyal, black
cohosh, and the now-extinct silphium.[69]:44–47, 62–63, 154–55, 230–31

In 1978 one woman in Colorado died and another was seriously injured when they
attempted to procure an abortion by taking pennyroyal oil.[70] Because the
indiscriminant use of herbs as abortifacients can cause serious—even
lethal—side effects, such as multiple organ failure,[71] such use is not
recommended by physicians.

Abortion is sometimes attempted by causing trauma to the abdomen. The degree
of force, if severe, can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily
succeeding in inducing miscarriage.[72] In Southeast Asia, there is an ancient
tradition of attempting abortion through forceful abdominal massage.[73] One
of the bas reliefs decorating the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia depicts a
demon performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the
underworld.[73]

Reported methods of unsafe, self-induced abortion include misuse of
misoprostol and insertion of non-surgical implements such as knitting needles
and clothes hangers into the uterus. These and other methods to terminate
pregnancy may be called "induced miscarriage". Such methods are rarely used in
countries where surgical abortion is legal and available.[74]

## Safety

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c5/Abortion_Quick_%26_Pain_Free_sign%2C_Joe_Slovo_Park%2C_Cape_Town%2C_South_Africa-3869.jpg/220px-

Abortion_Quick_%26_Pain_Free_sign%2C_Joe_Slovo_Park%2C_Cape_Town%2C_South_Africa-3869.jpg)

An abortion flyer in South Africa

The health risks of abortion depend principally upon whether the procedure is
performed safely or unsafely. The World Health Organization defines unsafe
abortions as those performed by unskilled individuals, with hazardous
equipment, or in unsanitary facilities.[75] Legal abortions performed in the
developed world are among the safest procedures in medicine.[4][76] In the
United States, abortion is estimated to be about 14 times safer for women than
carrying a pregnancy to term.[7] CDC estimated in 2019 that US pregnancy-
related mortality was 17.2 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births,[77] while
the US abortion mortality rate is 0.7 maternal deaths per 100,000
procedures.[5][78] In the US from 2000 to 2009, abortion had a lower mortality
rate than plastic surgery, and a similar or lower mortality rate than running
a marathon.[79] The risk of abortion-related mortality increases with
gestational age, but remains lower than that of childbirth through at least 21
weeks' gestation.[80][81][82] Outpatient abortion is as safe and effective
from 64 to 70 days' gestation as it is from 57 to 63 days.[83] Medical
abortion is safe and effective for pregnancies earlier than 6 weeks'
gestation.[84]

Vacuum aspiration in the first trimester is the safest method of surgical
abortion, and can be performed in a primary care office, abortion clinic, or
hospital. Complications, which are rare, can include uterine perforation,
pelvic infection, and retained products of conception requiring a second
procedure to evacuate.[85] Infections account for one-third of abortion-
related deaths in the United States.[86] The rate of complications of vacuum
aspiration abortion in the first trimester is similar regardless of whether
the procedure is performed in a hospital, surgical center, or office.[87]
Preventive antibiotics (such as doxycycline or metronidazole) are typically
given before elective abortion,[88] as they are believed to substantially
reduce the risk of postoperative uterine infection.[65][89] The rate of failed
procedures does not appear to vary significantly depending on whether the
abortion is performed by a doctor or a mid-level practitioner.[90]
Complications after second-trimester abortion are similar to those after
first-trimester abortion, and depend somewhat on the method chosen. Second-
trimester abortions are generally well-tolerated.[91]

There is little difference in terms of safety and efficacy between medical
abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol and surgical
abortion (vacuum aspiration) in early first trimester abortions up to 9 weeks
gestation.[52] Medical abortion using the prostaglandin analog misoprostol
alone is less effective and more painful than medical abortion using a
combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol or surgical abortion.[92][93]

Some purported risks of abortion are promoted primarily by anti-abortion
groups,[94][95] but lack scientific support.[94] For example, the question of
a link between induced abortion and breast cancer has been investigated
extensively. Major medical and scientific bodies (including the World Health
Organization, National Cancer Institute, American Cancer Society, Royal
College of OBGYN and American Congress of OBGYN) have concluded that abortion
does not cause breast cancer.[96]

In the past even illegality has not automatically meant that the abortions
were unsafe. Referring to the U.S., historian Linda Gordon states: "In fact,
illegal abortions in this country have an impressive safety record."[97]:25
According to Rickie Solinger,

> A related myth, promulgated by a broad spectrum of people concerned about
abortion and public policy, is that before legalization abortionists were
dirty and dangerous back-alley butchers.... [T]he historical evidence does not
support such claims.[98]:4

Authors Jerome Bates and Edward Zawadzki describe the case of an illegal
abortionist in the eastern U.S. in the early 20th century who was proud of
having successfully completed 13,844 abortions without any fatality.[99]:59 In
1870s New York City the famous abortionist/midwife Madame Restell (Anna Trow
Lohman) appears to have lost very few women among her more than 100,000
patients[100]—a lower mortality rate than the childbirth mortality rate at the
time. In 1936 the prominent professor of obstetrics and gynecology Frederick
J. Taussig wrote that a cause of increasing mortality during the years of
illegality in the U.S. was that

> With each decade of the past fifty years the actual and proportionate
frequency of this accident [perforation of the uterus] has increased, due,
first, to the increase in the number of instrumentally induced abortions;
second, to the proportionate increase in abortions handled by doctors as
against those handled by midwives; and, third, to the prevailing tendency to
use instruments instead of the finger in emptying the uterus.

>

> [101]:223

### Mental health

Main article: Abortion and mental health

Current evidence finds no relationship between most induced abortions and
mental-health problems[11][102] other than those expected for any unwanted
pregnancy.[103] A report by the American Psychological Association concluded
that a woman's first abortion is not a threat to mental health when carried
out in the first trimester, with such women no more likely to have mental-
health problems than those carrying an unwanted pregnancy to term; the mental-
health outcome of a woman's second or greater abortion is less
certain.[103][104] Some older reviews concluded that abortion was associated
with an increased risk of psychological problems;[105] however, they did not
use an appropriate control group.[102]

Although some studies show negative mental-health outcomes in women who choose
abortions after the first trimester because of fetal abnormalities,[106] more
rigorous research would be needed to show this conclusively.[107] Some
proposed negative psychological effects of abortion have been referred to by
anti-abortion advocates as a separate condition called "post-abortion
syndrome", but this is not recognized by medical or psychological
professionals in the United States.[108]

### Unsafe abortion

Main article: Unsafe abortion

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5e/RussianAbortionPoster.jpg/220px-

RussianAbortionPoster.jpg)

Soviet poster circa 1925, warning against midwives performing abortions. Title
translation: "Abortions performed by either trained or self-taught midwives
not only maim the woman, they also often lead to death."

Women seeking an abortion may use unsafe methods, especially when abortion is
legally restricted. They may attempt self-induced abortion or seek the help of
a person without proper medical training or facilities. This can lead to
severe complications, such as incomplete abortion, sepsis, hemorrhage, and
damage to internal organs.[109]

Unsafe abortions are a major cause of injury and death among women worldwide.
Although data are imprecise, it is estimated that approximately 20 million
unsafe abortions are performed annually, with 97% taking place in developing
countries.[4] Unsafe abortions are believed to result in millions of
injuries.[4][110] Estimates of deaths vary according to methodology, and have
ranged from 37,000 to 70,000 in the past decade;[4][12][111] deaths from
unsafe abortion account for around 13% of all maternal deaths.[112] The World
Health Organization believes that mortality has fallen since the 1990s.[113]
To reduce the number of unsafe abortions, public health organizations have
generally advocated emphasizing the legalization of abortion, training of
medical personnel, and ensuring access to reproductive-health services.[114]
In response, opponents of abortion point out that abortion bans in no way
affect prenatal care for women who choose to carry their fetus to term. The
Dublin Declaration on Maternal Health, signed in 2012, notes, "the prohibition
of abortion does not affect, in any way, the availability of optimal care to
pregnant women."[115]

A major factor in whether abortions are performed safely or not is the legal
standing of abortion. Countries with restrictive abortion laws have higher
rates of unsafe abortion and similar overall abortion rates compared to those
where abortion is legal and available.[12][16][114][116][117][118][119] For
example, the 1996 legalization of abortion in South Africa had an immediate
positive impact on the frequency of abortion-related complications,[120] with
abortion-related deaths dropping by more than 90%.[121] Similar reductions in
maternal mortality have been observed after other countries have liberalized
their abortion laws, such as Romania and Nepal.[122] A 2011 study concluded
that in the United States, some state-level anti-abortion laws are correlated
with lower rates of abortion in that state.[123] The analysis, however, did
not take into account travel to other states without such laws to obtain an
abortion.[124] In addition, a lack of access to effective contraception
contributes to unsafe abortion. It has been estimated that the incidence of
unsafe abortion could be reduced by up to 75% (from 20 million to 5 million
annually) if modern family planning and maternal health services were readily
available globally.[125] Rates of such abortions may be difficult to measure
because they can be reported variously as miscarriage, "induced miscarriage",
"menstrual regulation", "mini-abortion", and "regulation of a
delayed/suspended menstruation".[126][127]

Forty percent of the world's women are able to access therapeutic and elective
abortions within gestational limits,[18] while an additional 35 percent have
access to legal abortion if they meet certain physical, mental, or
socioeconomic criteria.[20] While maternal mortality seldom results from safe
abortions, unsafe abortions result in 70,000 deaths and 5 million disabilities
per year.[12] Complications of unsafe abortion account for approximately an
eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide,[128] though this varies by
region.[129] Secondary infertility caused by an unsafe abortion affects an
estimated 24 million women.[117] The rate of unsafe abortions has increased
from 44% to 49% between 1995 and 2008.[16] Health education, access to family
planning, and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been
proposed to address this phenomenon.[130]

### Live birth

Although it is very uncommon, women undergoing surgical abortion after 18
weeks gestation sometimes give birth to a fetus that may survive
briefly.[131][132][133] Long-term survival is possible after 22 weeks.[134]

If medical staff observe signs of life, they may be required to provide care:
emergency medical care if the child has a good chance of survival and
palliative care if not.[135][136][137] Induced fetal demise before termination
of pregnancy after 20–21 weeks gestation is recommended to avoid
this.[138][139][140][141][142]

Death following live birth caused by abortion is given the ICD-10 underlying
cause description code of P96.4; data are identified as either fetus or
newborn. Between 1999 and 2013, in the U.S., the CDC recorded 531 such deaths
for newborns,[143] approximately 4 per 100,000 abortions.[144]

## Incidence

There are two commonly used methods of measuring the incidence of abortion:

        
                  * Abortion rate – number of abortions per 1000 women between 15 and 44 years of age
          * Abortion percentage – number of abortions out of 100 known pregnancies (pregnancies include live births, abortions and miscarriages)
        

In many places, where abortion is illegal or carries a heavy social stigma,
medical reporting of abortion is not reliable.[116] For this reason, estimates
of the incidence of abortion must be made without determining certainty
related to standard error.[16]

The number of abortions performed worldwide seems to have remained stable in
recent years, with 41.6 million having been performed in 2003 and 43.8 million
having been performed in 2008.[16] The abortion rate worldwide was 28 per 1000
women, though it was 24 per 1000 women for developed countries and 29 per 1000
women for developing countries.[16] The same 2012 study indicated that in
2008, the estimated abortion percentage of known pregnancies was at 21%
worldwide, with 26% in developed countries and 20% in developing
countries.[16]

On average, the incidence of abortion is similar in countries with restrictive
abortion laws and those with more liberal access to abortion. However,
restrictive abortion laws are associated with increases in the percentage of
abortions performed unsafely.[18][145][146] The unsafe abortion rate in
developing countries is partly attributable to lack of access to modern
contraceptives; according to the Guttmacher Institute, providing access to
contraceptives would result in about 14.5 million fewer unsafe abortions and
38,000 fewer deaths from unsafe abortion annually worldwide.[147]

The rate of legal, induced abortion varies extensively worldwide. According to
the report of employees of Guttmacher Institute it ranged from 7 per 1000
women (Germany and Switzerland) to 30 per 1000 women (Estonia) in countries
with complete statistics in 2008. The proportion of pregnancies that ended in
induced abortion ranged from about 10% (Israel, the Netherlands and
Switzerland) to 30% (Estonia) in the same group, though it might be as high as
36% in Hungary and Romania, whose statistics were deemed incomplete.[148][149]

An American study in 2002 concluded that about half of women having abortions
were using a form of contraception at the time of becoming pregnant.
Inconsistent use was reported by half of those using condoms and three-
quarters of those using the birth control pill; 42% of those using condoms
reported failure through slipping or breakage.[150] The Guttmacher Institute
estimated that "most abortions in the United States are obtained by minority
women" because minority women "have much higher rates of unintended
pregnancy".[151]

The abortion rate may also be expressed as the average number of abortions a
woman has during her reproductive years; this is referred to as _total
abortion rate_ (TAR).

### Gestational age and method

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/UK_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg/200px-

UK_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg.png)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/US_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg/200px-

US_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg.png)

Histogram of abortions by gestational age in England and Wales during 2004.
(left) Abortion in the United States by gestational age, 2004. (right)

Abortion rates also vary depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method
practiced. In 2003, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
reported that 26% of reported legal induced abortions in the United States
were known to have been obtained at less than 6 weeks' gestation, 18% at 7
weeks, 15% at 8 weeks, 18% at 9 through 10 weeks, 10% at 11 through 12 weeks,
6% at 13 through 15 weeks, 4% at 16 through 20 weeks and 1% at more than 21
weeks. 91% of these were classified as having been done by "curettage"
(suction-aspiration, dilation and curettage, dilation and evacuation), 8% by
"medical" means (mifepristone), >1% by "intrauterine instillation" (saline or
prostaglandin), and 1% by "other" (including hysterotomy and
hysterectomy).[152] According to the CDC, due to data collection difficulties
the data must be viewed as tentative and some fetal deaths reported beyond 20
weeks may be natural deaths erroneously classified as abortions if the removal
of the dead fetus is accomplished by the same procedure as an induced
abortion.[153]

The Guttmacher Institute estimated there were 2,200 intact dilation and
extraction procedures in the US during 2000; this accounts for <0.2% of the
total number of abortions performed that year.[154] Similarly, in England and
Wales in 2006, 89% of terminations occurred at or under 12 weeks, 9% between
13 and 19 weeks, and 2% at or over 20 weeks. 64% of those reported were by
vacuum aspiration, 6% by D&E, and 30% were medical.[155] There are more second
trimester abortions in developing countries such as China, India and Vietnam
than in developed countries.[156]

## Motivation

### Personal

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dd/AGIAbortionReasonsBarChart.png/330px-

AGIAbortionReasonsBarChart.png)

A bar chart depicting selected data from a 1998 AGI meta-study on the reasons
women stated for having an abortion.

The reasons why women have abortions are diverse and vary across the
world.[153][157]

Some of the most common reasons are to postpone childbearing to a more
suitable time or to focus energies and resources on existing children. Others
include being unable to afford a child either in terms of the direct costs of
raising a child or the loss of income while caring for the child, lack of
support from the father, inability to afford additional children, desire to
provide schooling for existing children, disruption of one's own education,
relationship problems with their partner, a perception of being too young to
have a child, unemployment, and not being willing to raise a child conceived
as a result of rape or incest, among others.[157][158]

### Societal

Some abortions are undergone as the result of societal pressures.[159] These
might include the preference for children of a specific sex or race,
disapproval of single or early motherhood, stigmatization of people with
disabilities, insufficient economic support for families, lack of access to or
rejection of contraceptive methods, or efforts toward population control (such
as China's one-child policy). These factors can sometimes result in compulsory
abortion or sex-selective abortion.[160]

### Maternal and fetal health

An additional factor is risk to maternal or fetal health, which was cited as
the primary reason for abortion in over a third of cases in some countries and
as a significant factor in only a single-digit percentage of abortions in
other countries.[153][157]

In the U.S., the Supreme Court decisions in _Roe v. Wade_ and _Doe v. Bolton_
: "ruled that the state's interest in the life of the fetus became compelling
only at the point of viability, defined as the point at which the fetus can
survive independently of its mother. Even after the point of viability, the
state cannot favor the life of the fetus over the life or health of the
pregnant woman. Under the right of privacy, physicians must be free to use
their "medical judgment for the preservation of the life or health of the
mother." On the same day that the Court decided Roe, it also decided Doe v.
Bolton, in which the Court defined health very broadly: "The medical judgment
may be exercised in the light of all factors—physical, emotional,
psychological, familial, and the woman's age—relevant to the well-being of the
patient. All these factors may relate to health. This allows the attending
physician the room he needs to make his best medical judgment."[161]:1200–01

Public opinion shifted in America following television personality Sherri
Finkbine's discovery during her fifth month of pregnancy that she had been
exposed to thalidomide. Unable to obtain a legal abortion in the United
States, she traveled to Sweden. From 1962 to 1965, an outbreak of German
measles left 15,000 babies with severe birth defects. In 1967, the American
Medical Association publicly supported liberalization of abortion laws. A
National Opinion Research Center poll in 1965 showed 73% supported abortion
when the mother's life was at risk, 57% when birth defects were present and
59% for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest.[162]

#### Cancer

The rate of cancer during pregnancy is 0.02–1%, and in many cases, cancer of
the mother leads to consideration of abortion to protect the life of the
mother, or in response to the potential damage that may occur to the fetus
during treatment. This is particularly true for cervical cancer, the most
common type of which occurs in 1 of every 2,000–13,000 pregnancies, for which
initiation of treatment "cannot co-exist with preservation of fetal life
(unless neoadjuvant chemotherapy is chosen)". Very early stage cervical
cancers (I and IIa) may be treated by radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph
node dissection, radiation therapy, or both, while later stages are treated by
radiotherapy. Chemotherapy may be used simultaneously. Treatment of breast
cancer during pregnancy also involves fetal considerations, because lumpectomy
is discouraged in favor of modified radical mastectomy unless late-term
pregnancy allows follow-up radiation therapy to be administered after the
birth.[163]

Exposure to a single chemotherapy drug is estimated to cause a 7.5–17% risk of
teratogenic effects on the fetus, with higher risks for multiple drug
treatments. Treatment with more than 40 Gy of radiation usually causes
spontaneous abortion. Exposure to much lower doses during the first trimester,
especially 8 to 15 weeks of development, can cause intellectual disability or
microcephaly, and exposure at this or subsequent stages can cause reduced
intrauterine growth and birth weight. Exposures above 0.005–0.025 Gy cause a
dose-dependent reduction in IQ.[163] It is possible to greatly reduce exposure
to radiation with abdominal shielding, depending on how far the area to be
irradiated is from the fetus.[164][165]

The process of birth itself may also put the mother at risk. "Vaginal delivery
may result in dissemination of neoplastic cells into lymphovascular channels,
haemorrhage, cervical laceration and implantation of malignant cells in the
episiotomy site, while abdominal delivery may delay the initiation of non-
surgical treatment."[166]

## History and religion

Main articles: History of abortion and Religion and abortion

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8f/AngkorWatAbortionAD1150.JPG/220px-

AngkorWatAbortionAD1150.JPG)

Bas-relief at Angkor Wat, Cambodia, c. 1150, depicting a demon inducing an
abortion by pounding the abdomen of a pregnant woman with a pestle.[73][167]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/FrenchPeriodicalPills-

January61845%2CBostonDailyTimes.jpg/220px-FrenchPeriodicalPills-

January61845%2CBostonDailyTimes.jpg)

"French Periodical Pills". An example of a clandestine advertisement published
in a January 1845 edition of the _Boston Daily Times_.

Since ancient times abortions have been done using herbal medicines, sharp
tools, with force, or through other traditional methods.[19] Induced abortion
has long history and can be traced back to civilizations as varied as China
under Shennong (c. 2700 BCE), Ancient Egypt with its Ebers Papyrus (c. 1550
BCE), and the Roman Empire in the time of Juvenal (c. 200 CE).[19] There is
evidence to suggest that pregnancies were terminated through a number of
methods, including the administration of abortifacient herbs, the use of
sharpened implements, the application of abdominal pressure, and other
techniques. One of the earliest known artistic representations of abortion is
in a bas relief at Angkor Wat (c. 1150). Found in a series of friezes that
represent judgment after death in Hindu and Buddhist culture, it depicts the
technique of abdominal abortion.[73]

Some medical scholars and abortion opponents have suggested that the
Hippocratic Oath forbade Ancient Greek physicians from performing
abortions;[19] other scholars disagree with this interpretation,[19] and state
that the medical texts of Hippocratic Corpus contain descriptions of abortive
techniques right alongside the Oath.[168] The physician Scribonius Largus
wrote in 43 CE that the Hippocratic Oath prohibits abortion, as did Soranus,
although apparently not all doctors adhered to it strictly at the time.
According to Soranus' 1st or 2nd century CE work _Gynaecology_ , one party of
medical practitioners banished all abortives as required by the Hippocratic
Oath; the other party—to which he belonged—was willing to prescribe abortions,
but only for the sake of the mother's health.[169][170]

Aristotle, in his treatise on government _Politics_ (350 BCE), condemns
infanticide as a means of population control. He preferred abortion in such
cases, with the restriction[171] "[that it] must be practised on it before it
has developed sensation and life; for the line between lawful and unlawful
abortion will be marked by the fact of having sensation and being alive".[172]
In Christianity, Pope Sixtus V (1585–90) was the only Pope before 1869 to
declare that abortion is homicide regardless of the stage of pregnancy;[173]
and his pronouncement of 1588 was reversed three years later by his successor.
Through most of its history the Catholic Church was divided on whether it
believed that abortion was murder, and it did not begin vigorously opposing
abortion until the 19th century.[19] In fact, several historians have
written[174][175][176] that prior to the 19th century most Catholic authors
did not regard termination of pregnancy before "quickening" or "ensoulment" as
an abortion.

A 1995 survey reported that Catholic women are as likely as the general
population to terminate a pregnancy, Protestants are less likely to do so, and
Evangelical Christians are the least likely to do so.[153][157] Islamic
tradition has traditionally permitted abortion until a point in time when
Muslims believe the soul enters the fetus,[19] considered by various
theologians to be at conception, 40 days after conception, 120 days after
conception, or quickening.[177] However, abortion is largely heavily
restricted or forbidden in areas of high Islamic faith such as the Middle East
and North Africa.[178]

In Europe and North America, abortion techniques advanced starting in the 17th
century. However, conservatism by most physicians with regards to sexual
matters prevented the wide expansion of safe abortion techniques.[19] Other
medical practitioners in addition to some physicians advertised their
services, and they were not widely regulated until the 19th century, when the
practice (sometimes called _restellism_ )[179] was banned in both the United
States and the United Kingdom.[19] Church groups as well as physicians were
highly influential in anti-abortion movements.[19] In the US, according to
some sources, abortion was more dangerous than childbirth until about 1930
when incremental improvements in abortion procedures relative to childbirth
made abortion safer.[note 2] However, other sources maintain that in the 19th
century early abortions under the hygienic conditions in which midwives
usually worked were relatively safe.[180][181][182] In addition, some
commentators have written that, despite improved medical procedures, the
period from the 1930s until legalization also saw more zealous enforcement of
anti-abortion laws, and concomitantly an increasing control of abortion
providers by organized crime.[183][184][185][186][187]

Soviet Russia (1919), Iceland (1935) and Sweden (1938) were among the first
countries to legalize certain or all forms of abortion.[188] In 1935 Nazi
Germany, a law was passed permitting abortions for those deemed "hereditarily
ill", while women considered of German stock were specifically prohibited from
having abortions.[189] Beginning in the second half of the twentieth century,
abortion was legalized in a greater number of countries.[19]

## Society and culture

### Abortion debate

Main article: Abortion debate

Induced abortion has long been the source of considerable debate. Ethical,
moral, philosophical, biological, religious and legal issues surrounding
abortion are related to value systems. Opinions of abortion may be about fetal
rights, governmental authority, and women's rights.

In both public and private debate, arguments presented in favor of or against
abortion access focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced
abortion, or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion.[190]
The World Medical Association Declaration on Therapeutic Abortion notes,
"circumstances bringing the interests of a mother into conflict with the
interests of her unborn child create a dilemma and raise the question as to
whether or not the pregnancy should be deliberately terminated."[191] Abortion
debates, especially pertaining to abortion laws, are often spearheaded by
groups advocating one of these two positions. Anti-abortion groups who favor
greater legal restrictions on abortion, including complete prohibition, most
often describe themselves as "pro-life" while abortion rights groups who are
against such legal restrictions describe themselves as "pro-choice".[192]
Generally, the former position argues that a human fetus is a human person
with a right to live, making abortion morally the same as murder. The latter
position argues that a woman has certain reproductive rights, especially the
right to decide whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term.

### Modern abortion law

Main article: Abortion law

See also: History of abortion law debate

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a5/Abortion_Laws.svg/330px-

Abortion_Laws.svg.png)

International status of abortion law

UN 2013 report on abortion law.[193]

Legal on request

Legal for maternal life, health, mental health, rape and/or fetal defects, and
also for socioeconomic factors

Illegal with exception for maternal life, health, mental health and/or rape,
and also for fetal defects

Illegal with exception for maternal life, health and/or mental health, and
also for rape

Illegal with exception for maternal life, health, and/or mental health

Illegal with exception for maternal life

Illegal with no exceptions

No information[194]

Current laws pertaining to abortion are diverse. Religious, moral, and
cultural factors continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world. The
right to life, the right to liberty, the right to security of person, and the
right to reproductive health are major issues of human rights that sometimes
constitute the basis for the existence or absence of abortion laws.

In jurisdictions where abortion is legal, certain requirements must often be
met before a woman may obtain a safe, legal abortion (an abortion performed
without the woman's consent is considered feticide). These requirements
usually depend on the age of the fetus, often using a trimester-based system
to regulate the window of legality, or as in the U.S., on a doctor's
evaluation of the fetus' viability. Some jurisdictions require a waiting
period before the procedure, prescribe the distribution of information on
fetal development, or require that parents be contacted if their minor
daughter requests an abortion.[195] Other jurisdictions may require that a
woman obtain the consent of the fetus' father before aborting the fetus, that
abortion providers inform women of health risks of the procedure—sometimes
including "risks" not supported by the medical literature—and that multiple
medical authorities certify that the abortion is either medically or socially
necessary. Many restrictions are waived in emergency situations. China, which
has ended their[196] one-child policy, and now has a two child
policy,[197][198] has at times incorporated mandatory abortions as part of
their population control strategy.[199]

Other jurisdictions ban abortion almost entirely. Many, but not all, of these
allow legal abortions in a variety of circumstances. These circumstances vary
based on jurisdiction, but may include whether the pregnancy is a result of
rape or incest, the fetus' development is impaired, the woman's physical or
mental well-being is endangered, or socioeconomic considerations make
childbirth a hardship.[20] In countries where abortion is banned entirely,
such as Nicaragua, medical authorities have recorded rises in maternal death
directly and indirectly due to pregnancy as well as deaths due to doctors'
fears of prosecution if they treat other gynecological emergencies.[200][201]
Some countries, such as Bangladesh, that nominally ban abortion, may also
support clinics that perform abortions under the guise of menstrual
hygiene.[202] This is also a terminology in traditional medicine.[203] In
places where abortion is illegal or carries heavy social stigma, pregnant
women may engage in medical tourism and travel to countries where they can
terminate their pregnancies.[204] Women without the means to travel can resort
to providers of illegal abortions or attempt to perform an abortion by
themselves.[205]

The organization Women on Waves, has been providing education about medical
abortions since 1999. The NGO created a mobile medical clinic inside a
shipping container, which then travels on rented ships to countries with
restrictive abortion laws. Because the ships are registered in the
Netherlands, Dutch law prevails when the ship is in international waters.
While in port, the organization provides free workshops and education; while
in international waters, medical personnel are legally able to prescribe
medical abortion drugs and counseling.[206][207][208]

### Sex-selective abortion

Main article: Sex-selective abortion

Sonography and amniocentesis allow parents to determine sex before childbirth.
The development of this technology has led to sex-selective abortion, or the
termination of a fetus based on sex. The selective termination of a female
fetus is most common.

Sex-selective abortion is partially responsible for the noticeable disparities
between the birth rates of male and female children in some countries. The
preference for male children is reported in many areas of Asia, and abortion
used to limit female births has been reported in Taiwan, South Korea, India,
and China.[209] This deviation from the standard birth rates of males and
females occurs despite the fact that the country in question may have
officially banned sex-selective abortion or even sex-
screening.[210][211][212][213] In China, a historical preference for a male
child has been exacerbated by the one-child policy, which was enacted in
1979.[214]

Many countries have taken legislative steps to reduce the incidence of sex-
selective abortion. At the International Conference on Population and
Development in 1994 over 180 states agreed to eliminate "all forms of
discrimination against the girl child and the root causes of son
preference",[215] conditions also condemned by a PACE resolution in 2011.[216]
The World Health Organization and UNICEF, along with other United Nations
agencies, have found that measures to reduce access to abortion are much less
effective at reducing sex-selective abortions than measures to reduce gender
inequality.[215]

### Anti-abortion violence

Main article: Anti-abortion violence

In a number of cases, abortion providers and these facilities have been
subjected to various forms of violence, including murder, attempted murder,
kidnapping, stalking, assault, arson, and bombing. Anti-abortion violence is
classified by both governmental and scholarly sources as terrorism.[217][218]
In the U.S. and Canada, over 8,000 incidents of violence, trespassing, and
death threats have been recorded by providers since 1977, including over 200
bombings/arsons and hundreds of assaults.[219] The majority of abortion
opponents have not been involved in violent acts.

In the United States, four physicians who performed abortions have been
murdered: David Gunn (1993), John Britton (1994), Barnett Slepian (1998), and
George Tiller (2009). Also murdered, in the U.S. and Australia, have been
other personnel at abortion clinics, including receptionists and security
guards such as James Barrett, Shannon Lowney, Lee Ann Nichols, and Robert
Sanderson. Woundings (e.g., Garson Romalis) and attempted murders have also
taken place in the United States and Canada. Hundreds of bombings, arsons,
acid attacks, invasions, and incidents of vandalism against abortion providers
have occurred.[220][221] Notable perpetrators of anti-abortion violence
include Eric Robert Rudolph, Scott Roeder, Shelley Shannon, and Paul Jennings
Hill, the first person to be executed in the United States for murdering an
abortion provider.[222]

Legal protection of access to abortion has been brought into some countries
where abortion is legal. These laws typically seek to protect abortion clinics
from obstruction, vandalism, picketing, and other actions, or to protect women
and employees of such facilities from threats and harassment.

Far more common than physical violence is psychological pressure. In 2003,
Chris Danze organized pro-life organizations throughout Texas to prevent the
construction of a Planned Parenthood facility in Austin. The organizations
released the personal information online, of those involved with construction,
sending them up to 1200 phone calls a day and contacting their churches.[223]
Some protestors record women entering clinics on camera.[223]

## Other animals

Further information: Miscarriage

Spontaneous abortion occurs in various animals. For example, in sheep it may
be caused by stress or physical exertion, such as crowding through doors or
being chased by dogs.[224] In cows, abortion may be caused by contagious
disease, such as brucellosis or _Campylobacter_ , but can often be controlled
by vaccination.[225] Eating pine needles can also induce abortions in
cows.[226][227] Several plants, including broomweed, skunk cabbage, poison
hemlock, and tree tobacco, are known to cause fetal deformities and abortion
in cattle[228]:45–46 and in sheep and goats.[228]:77–80 In horses, a fetus may
be aborted or resorbed if it has lethal white syndrome (congenital intestinal
aganglionosis). Foal embryos that are homozygous for the dominant white gene
(WW) are theorized to also be aborted or resorbed before birth.[229] In many
species of sharks and rays, stress-induced abortions occur frequently on
capture.[230]

Viral infection can cause abortion in dogs.[231] Cats can experience
spontaneous abortion for many reasons, including hormonal imbalance. A
combined abortion and spaying is performed on pregnant cats, especially in
Trap-Neuter-Return programs, to prevent unwanted kittens from being
born.[232][233][234] Female rodents may terminate a pregnancy when exposed to
the smell of a male not responsible for the pregnancy, known as the Bruce
effect.[235]

Abortion may also be induced in animals, in the context of animal husbandry.
For example, abortion may be induced in mares that have been mated improperly,
or that have been purchased by owners who did not realize the mares were
pregnant, or that are pregnant with twin foals.[236] Feticide can occur in
horses and zebras due to male harassment of pregnant mares or forced
copulation,[237][238][239] although the frequency in the wild has been
questioned.[240] Male gray langur monkeys may attack females following male
takeover, causing miscarriage.[241]

## Notes

        
                  1. **^** Definitions of abortion, as with many words, vary from source to source. Language used to define abortion often reflects societal and political opinions (not only scientific knowledge). For a list of definitions as stated by obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN) textbooks, dictionaries, and other sources, please see Definitions of abortion.
          2. **^** By 1930, medical procedures in the US had improved for both childbirth and abortion but not equally, and induced abortion in the first trimester had become safer than childbirth. In 1973, _Roe v. Wade_ acknowledged that abortion in the first trimester was safer than childbirth: 
            * "The 1970s". _Time communication 1940–1989: retrospective_. Time Inc. 1989. " Blackmun was also swayed by the fact that most abortion prohibitions were enacted in the 19th century when the procedure was more dangerous than now."
            * Will, George (1990). _Suddenly: the American idea abroad and at home, 1986–1990_. Free Press. p. 312. ISBN 0-02-934435-2.
            * Lewis, J.; Shimabukuro, Jon O. (28 January 2001). "Abortion Law Development: A Brief Overview". Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2011.
        

*Schultz, David Andrew (2002). _Encyclopedia of American law_. Infobase Publishing. p. 1. ISBN 0-8160-4329-9. Archived from the original on 9 December 2015. * Lahey, Joanna N. (24 September 2009). "Birthing a Nation: Fertility Control Access and the 19th Century Demographic Transition" (PDF; preliminary version). _Colloquium_. Pomona College. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 January 2012.

## References

        
                  1. **^** "Home : Oxford English Dictionary". _www.oed.com_.
          2. **^** "Abortion (noun)". Oxford Living Dictionaries. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018. Retrieved  8 June 2018. "_[mass noun]_ The deliberate termination of a human pregnancy, most often performed during the first 28 weeks of pregnancy"
          3. **^** Grimes, DA; Stuart, G (2010). "Abortion jabberwocky: the need for better terminology". _Contraception_. **81** (2): 93–96. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2009.09.005. PMID 20103443.
          4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Grimes, DA; Benson, J; Singh, S; Romero, M; Ganatra, B; Okonofua, FE; Shah, IH (2006). "Unsafe abortion: The preventable pandemic" (PDF). _The Lancet_. **368** (9550): 1908–19. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69481-6. PMID 17126724. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2011.
          5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Raymond, EG; Grossman, D; Weaver, MA; Toti, S; Winikoff, B (November 2014). "Mortality of induced abortion, other outpatient surgical procedures and common activities in the United States". _Contraception_. **90** (5): 476–79. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2014.07.012. PMID 25152259.
          6. **^** Darney, Blair G.; Henderson, Jillian T. (May 2018). "Claims about abortion and clinical implications lack evidence". _Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology_. **32** (3): 305. doi:10.1111/ppe.12442. ISSN 1365-3016. PMID 29319905.
          7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Raymond, E.G.; Grimes, D.A. (2012). "The Comparative Safety of Legal Induced Abortion and Childbirth in the United States". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **119** (2, Part 1): 215–19. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823fe923. PMID 22270271.
          8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Kulier, R; Kapp, N; Gülmezoglu, AM; Hofmeyr, GJ; Cheng, L; Campana, A (9 November 2011). "Medical methods for first trimester abortion". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_ (11): CD002855. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002855.pub4. PMID 22071804.
          9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Kapp, N; Whyte, P; Tang, J; Jackson, E; Brahmi, D (September 2013). "A review of evidence for safe abortion care". _Contraception_. **88** (3): 350–63. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2012.10.027. PMID 23261233.
          10. **^** "Abortion – Women's Health Issues". _Merck Manuals Consumer Version_. Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved  12 July 2018.
          11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Lohr, PA; Fjerstad, M; Desilva, U; Lyus, R (2014). "Abortion". _BMJ_. **348** : f7553. doi:10.1136/bmj.f7553.
          12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Shah, I; Ahman, E (December 2009). "Unsafe abortion: global and regional incidence, trends, consequences, and challenges" (PDF). _Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada_. **31** (12): 1149–58. doi:10.1016/s1701-2163(16)34376-6. PMID 20085681. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2011.
          13. **^** World Health Organization (2012). _Safe abortion: technical and policy guidance for health systems_ (PDF) (2nd ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization. p. 8. ISBN 978-92-4-154843-4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 January 2015.
          14. **^** Sedgh, Gilda; Bearak, Jonathan; Singh, Susheela; Bankole, Akinrinola; Popinchalk, Anna; Ganatra, Bela; Rossier, Clémentine; Gerdts, Caitlin; Tunçalp, Özge; Johnson, Brooke Ronald; Johnston, Heidi Bart; Alkema, Leontine (May 2016). "Abortion incidence between 1990 and 2014: global, regional, and subregional levels and trends". _The Lancet_. **388** : 258–67. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30380-4. PMC 5498988. PMID 27179755.
          15. **^** "Worldwide, an estimated 25 million unsafe abortions occur each year". _World Health Organization_. 28 September 2017. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved  29 September 2017.
          16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ Sedgh, G.; Singh, S.; Shah, I.H.; Åhman, E.; Henshaw, S.K.; Bankole, A. (2012). "Induced abortion: Incidence and trends worldwide from 1995 to 2008" (PDF). _The Lancet_. **379** (9816): 625–32. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61786-8. PMID 22264435. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 February 2012. "Because few of the abortion estimates were based on studies of random samples of women, and because we did not use a model-based approach to estimate abortion incidence, it was not possible to compute confidence intervals based on standard errors around the estimates. Drawing on the information available on the accuracy and precision of abortion estimates that were used to develop the subregional, regional, and worldwide rates, we computed intervals of certainty around these rates (webappendix). We computed wider intervals for unsafe abortion rates than for safe abortion rates. The basis for these intervals included published and unpublished assessments of abortion reporting in countries with liberal laws, recently published studies of national unsafe abortion, and high and low estimates of the numbers of unsafe abortion developed by WHO."
          17. **^** Sedgh G, Henshaw SK, Singh S, Bankole A, Drescher J (September 2007). "Legal abortion worldwide: incidence and recent trends". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **33** (3): 106–16. doi:10.1363/ifpp.33.106.07. PMID 17938093. Archived from the original on 19 August 2009.
          18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Culwell KR, Vekemans M, de Silva U, Hurwitz M (July 2010). "Critical gaps in universal access to reproductive health: Contraception and prevention of unsafe abortion". _International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics_. **110** : S13–16. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2010.04.003. PMID 20451196.
          19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ Paul, M; Lichtenberg, ES; Borgatta, L; Grimes, DA; Stubblefield, PG; Creinin, MD; Joffe, Carole (2009). "1. Abortion and medicine: A sociopolitical history". _Management of Unintended and Abnormal Pregnancy_ (PDF) (1st ed.). Oxford: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-1293-5. OL 15895486W. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2011.
          20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Boland, R.; Katzive, L. (2008). "Developments in Laws on Induced Abortion: 1998–2007". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **34** (3): 110–20. doi:10.1363/ifpp.34.110.08. PMID 18957353. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011.
          21. **^** Paola, Adolf; Walker, Robert; LaCivita, Lois (2010). Nixon, Frederick (ed.). _Medical ethics and humanities_. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. p. 249. ISBN 978-0-7637-6063-2. OL 13764930W. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017.
          22. **^** Johnstone, Megan-Jane (2009). _Bioethics a nursing perspective_ (5th ed.). Sydney, NSW: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier. p. 228. ISBN 978-0-7295-7873-8. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. "Although abortion has been legal in many countries for several decades now, its moral permissibilities continues to be the subject of heated public debate."
          23. **^** Pastor Mark Driscoll (18 October 2013). "What do 55 million people have in common?". Fox News. Archived from the original on 31 August 2014. Retrieved 2 July 2014.
          24. **^** Hansen, Dale (18 March 2014). "Abortion: Murder, or Medical Procedure?". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 2 July 2014.
          25. **^** Sifris, Ronli Noa (2013). _Reproductive freedom, torture and international human rights: challenging the masculinisation of torture_. Hoboken, NJ: Taylor & Francis. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-135-11522-7. OCLC 869373168. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015.
          26. **^** Swett, C. (2007). _Unsafe abortion : global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2003_ (5th ed.). World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-159612-1. Archived from the original on 7 April 2018. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
          27. **^** "Abortion – medical". _US National Library of Medicine (Medline Plus)_. 9 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018.
          28. **^** Cheng L. (1 November 2008). "Surgical versus medical methods for second-trimester induced abortion". _The WHO Reproductive Health Library_. World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011. Retrieved  17 June 2011.
          29. **^** Bankole; et al. (1998). "Reasons Why Women Have Induced Abortions: Evidence from 27 Countries". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **24** (3): 117–27, 152. doi:10.2307/3038208. Archived from the original on 17 January 2006.
          30. **^** Finer, Lawrence B.; Frohwirth, Lori F.; Dauphinee, Lindsay A.; Singh, Susheela; Moore, Ann M. (2005). "Reasons U.S. Women Have Abortions: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **37** (3): 110–18. doi:10.1111/j.1931-2393.2005.tb00045.x. PMID 16150658. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2006.
          31. **^** Stubblefield, Phillip G. (2002). "10. Family Planning". In Berek, Jonathan S. (ed.). _Novak's Gynecology_ (13 ed.). Lippincott Williams  & Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-7817-3262-8.
          32. **^** Bartlett, LA; Berg, CJ; Shulman, HB; Zane, SB; Green, CA; Whitehead, S; Atrash, HK (2004), "Risk factors for legal induced abortion-related mortality in the United States", _Obstetrics & Gynecology_, **103** (4): 729–37, doi:10.1097/01.AOG.0000116260.81570.60, PMID 15051566
          33. **^** Roche, Natalie E. (28 September 2004). "Therapeutic Abortion". eMedicine. Archived from the original on 14 December 2004. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
          34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Schorge, John O.; Schaffer, Joseph I.; Halvorson, Lisa M.; Hoffman, Barbara L.; Bradshaw, Karen D.; Cunningham, F. Gary, eds. (2008). "6. First-Trimester Abortion". _Williams Gynecology_ (1 ed.). McGraw-Hill Medical. ISBN 978-0-07-147257-9.
          35. **^** "Elective surgery". Encyclopedia of Surgery. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved  17 December 2012. "An elective surgery is a planned, non-emergency surgical procedure. It may be either medically required (e.g., cataract surgery), or optional (e.g., breast augmentation or implant) surgery.
          36. **^** _Churchill Livingstone medical dictionary_. Edinburgh New York: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier. 2008. ISBN 978-0-443-10412-1. "The preferred term for unintentional loss of the product of conception prior to 24 weeks' gestation is miscarriage."
          37. **^** Annas, George J.; Elias, Sherman (2007). "51. Legal and Ethical Issues in Obstetric Practice". In Gabbe, Steven G.; Niebyl, Jennifer R.; Simpson, Joe Leigh (eds.). _Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies_ (5 ed.). Churchill Livingstone. p. 669. ISBN 978-0-443-06930-7. "A preterm birth is defined as one that occurs before the completion of 37 menstrual weeks of gestation, regardless of birth weight."
          38. **^** "Stillbirth". _Concise Medical Dictionary_. Oxford University Press. 2010. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. " birth of a fetus that shows no evidence of life (heartbeat, respiration, or independent movement) at any time later than 24 weeks after conception"
          39. **^** "7 FAM 1470 Documenting Stillbirth (Fetal Death)". United States Department of State. 18 February 2011. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved  12 January 2016.
          40. **^** Annas, George J.; Elias, Sherman (2007). "24. Pregnancy loss". In Gabbe, Steven G.; Niebyl, Jennifer R.; Simpson, Joe Leigh (eds.). _Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies_ (5 ed.). Churchill Livingstone. ISBN 978-0-443-06930-7.
          41. **^** Katz, Vern L. (2007). "16. Spontaneous and Recurrent Abortion – Etiology, Diagnosis, Treatment". In Katz, Vern L.; Lentz, Gretchen M.; Lobo, Rogerio A.; Gershenson, David M. (eds.). _Katz: Comprehensive Gynecology_ (5 ed.). Mosby. ISBN 978-0-323-02951-3.
          42. **^** Stovall, Thomas G. (2002). "17. Early Pregnancy Loss and Ectopic Pregnancy". In Berek, Jonathan S. (ed.). _Novak's Gynecology_ (13 ed.). Lippincott Williams  & Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-7817-3262-8.
          43. **^** Cunningham, F. Gary; Leveno, Kenneth J.; Bloom, Steven L.; Spong, Catherine Y.; Dashe, Jodi S.; Hoffman, Barbara L.; Casey, Brian M.; Sheffield, Jeanne S., eds. (2014). _Williams Obstetrics_ (24th ed.). McGraw Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07-179893-8.
          44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Stöppler, Melissa Conrad. Shiel, William C., Jr. (ed.). "Miscarriage (Spontaneous Abortion)". _MedicineNet.com_. WebMD. Archived from the original on 29 August 2004. Retrieved  7 April 2009.
          45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jauniaux E, Kaminopetros P, El-Rafaey H (1999). "Early pregnancy loss". In Whittle MJ, Rodeck CH (eds.). _Fetal medicine: basic science and clinical practice_. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. p. 837. ISBN 978-0-443-05357-3. OCLC 42792567.
          46. **^** "Fetal Homicide Laws". National Conference of State Legislatures. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved  7 April 2009.
          47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kulier R, Kapp N, Gülmezoglu AM, Hofmeyr GJ, Cheng L, Campana A (2011). "Medical methods for first trimester abortion". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_. **11** (11): CD002855. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002855.pub4. PMID 22071804.
          48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Creinin MD, Gemzell-Danielsson K (2009). "Medical abortion in early pregnancy". In Paul M, Lichtenberg ES, Borgatta L, Grimes DA, Stubblefield PG, Creinin MD (eds.). _Management of unintended and abnormal pregnancy: comprehensive abortion care_. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 111–34. ISBN 1-4051-7696-2.
          49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kapp N, von Hertzen H (2009). "Medical methods to induce abortion in the second trimester". In Paul M, Lichtenberg ES, Borgatta L, Grimes DA, Stubblefield PG, Creinin MD (eds.). _Management of unintended and abnormal pregnancy: comprehensive abortion care_. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 178–92. ISBN 1-4051-7696-2.
          50. **^** Wildschut, H; Both, MI; Medema, S; Thomee, E; Wildhagen, MF; Kapp, N (19 January 2011). "Medical methods for mid-trimester termination of pregnancy". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_ (1): CD005216. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005216.pub2. PMID 21249669.
          51. **^** Chen, MJ; Creinin, MD (July 2015). "Mifepristone With Buccal Misoprostol for Medical Abortion: A Systematic Review". _Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **126** (1): 12–21. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000000897. PMID 26241251.
          52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ WHO Department of Reproductive Health and Research (2006). _Frequently asked clinical questions about medical abortion_ (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 92-4-159484-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 December 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2011.(subscription required)
          53. **^** Fjerstad M, Sivin I, Lichtenberg ES, Trussell J, Cleland K, Cullins V (September 2009). "Effectiveness of medical abortion with mifepristone and buccal misoprostol through 59 gestational days". _Contraception_. **80** (3): 282–86. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2009.03.010. PMC 3766037. PMID 19698822. The regimen (200 mg of mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by 800 mcg of _vaginal_ misoprostol) _previously_ used by Planned Parenthood clinics in the United States from 2001 to March 2006 was 98.5% effective through 63 days gestation—with an ongoing pregnancy rate of about 0.5%, and an additional 1% of women having uterine evacuation for various reasons, including problematic bleeding, persistent gestational sac, clinician judgment or a woman's request. The regimen (200 mg of mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by 800 mcg of _buccal_ misoprostol) _currently_ used by Planned Parenthood clinics in the United States since April 2006 is 98% effective through 59 days gestation.
          54. **^** Holmquist S, Gilliam M (2008). "Induced abortion". In Gibbs RS, Karlan BY, Haney AF, Nygaard I (eds.). _Danforth's obstetrics and gynecology_ (10th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams  & Wilkins. pp. 586–603. ISBN 978-0-7817-6937-2.
          55. **^** "Abortion statistics, England and Wales: 2010" (PDF). London: Department of Health, United Kingdom. 24 May 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2011.
          56. **^** "Abortion statistics, year ending 31 December 2010" (PDF). Edinburgh: ISD, NHS Scotland. 31 May 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2011.
          57. **^** Vilain A, Mouquet MC (22 June 2011). "Voluntary terminations of pregnancies in 2008 and 2009" (PDF). Paris: DREES, Ministry of Health, France. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2011.
          58. **^** "Abortions in Switzerland 2010". Neuchâtel: Office of Federal Statistics, Switzerland. 5 July 2011. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved  22 November 2011.
          59. **^** Gissler M, Heino A (21 February 2011). "Induced abortions in the Nordic countries 2009" (PDF). Helsinki: National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 22 November 2011.
          60. **^** Jones, Rachel K.; Jerman, Jenna (17 January 2017). "Abortion incidence and service availability in the United States, 2014". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **49** (1): 17–27. doi:10.1363/psrh.12015. PMC 5487028. PMID 28094905. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved  23 July 2018.
        

96% of all abortions performed in nonhospital facilities × 31% early medical
abortions of all nonhospital abortions = 30% early medical abortions of all
abortions; 97% of nonhospital medical abortions used mifepristone and
misoprostol—3% used methotrexate and misoprostol, or misoprostol alone—in the
United States in 2014.

        
                  61. **^** Hammond C, Chasen ST (2009). "Dilation and evacuation". In Paul M, Lichtenberg ES, Borgatta L, Grimes DA, Stubblefield PG, Creinin MD (eds.). _Management of unintended and abnormal pregnancy: comprehensive abortion care_. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 178–92. ISBN 1-4051-7696-2.
          62. **^** Healthwise (2004). "Manual and vacuum aspiration for abortion". WebMD. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. Retrieved 5 December 2008.
          63. **^** World Health Organization (2003). "Dilatation and curettage". _Managing Complications in Pregnancy and Childbirth: A Guide for Midwives and Doctors_. Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-154587-7. OCLC 181845530. Retrieved 5 December 2008.
          64. **^** McGee, Glenn; Jon F. Mer. "Abortion". _Encarta_. Microsoft. Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. Retrieved  5 December 2008.
          65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Templeton, A.; Grimes, D.A. (2011). "A Request for Abortion". _New England Journal of Medicine_. **365** (23): 2198–2204. doi:10.1056/NEJMcp1103639. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012.
          66. **^** Borgatta, L (December 2014). "Labor Induction Termination of Pregnancy". _Global Library of Women's Medicine_. GLOWM.10444. doi:10.3843/GLOWM.10444. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved  25 September 2015.
          67. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Society of Family Planning (February 2011). "Clinical Guidelines, Labor induction abortion in the second trimester". _Contraception_. **84** (1): 4–18. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2011.02.005. Retrieved  25 September 2015. "10. What is the effect of feticide on labor induction abortion outcome? Deliberately causing demise of the fetus before labor induction abortion is performed primarily to avoid transient fetal survival after expulsion; this approach may be for the comfort of both the woman and the staff, to avoid futile resuscitation efforts. Some providers allege that feticide also facilitates delivery, although little data support this claim. Transient fetal survival is very unlikely after intraamniotic installation of saline or urea, which are directly feticidal. Transient survival with misoprostol for labor induction abortion at greater than 18 weeks ranges from 0% to 50% and has been observed in up to 13% of abortions performed with high-dose oxytocin. Factors associated with a higher likelihood of transient fetal survival with labor induction abortion include increasing gestational age, decreasing abortion interval and the use of nonfeticidal inductive agents such as the PGE1 analogues."
          68. **^** "2015 Clinical Policy Guidelines" (PDF). National Abortion Federation. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015. "Policy Statement: Medical induction abortion is a safe and effective method for termination of pregnancies beyond the first trimester when performed by trained clinicians in medical offices, freestanding clinics, ambulatory surgery centers, and hospitals. Feticidal agents may be particularly important when issues of viability arise."
          69. **^** Riddle, John M. (1997). _Eve's herbs: a history of contraception and abortion in the West_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-27024-4. OCLC 36126503.
          70. **^** Sullivan, John B.; Rumack, Barry H.; Thomas, Harold Jr; et al. (1979), "Pennyroyal oil poisoning and hepatoxicity", _Journal of the American Medical Association_ , **242** (26): 2873–24, doi:10.1001/jama.1979.03300260043027
          71. **^** Ciganda C, Laborde A (2003). "Herbal infusions used for induced abortion". _Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology_. **41** (3): 235–39. doi:10.1081/CLT-120021104. PMID 12807304.
          72. **^** Smith JP (1998). "Risky choices: The dangers of teens using self-induced abortion attempts". _Journal of Pediatric Health Care_. **12** (3): 147–51. doi:10.1016/S0891-5245(98)90245-0. PMID 9652283.
          73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Potts, M.; Graff, M.; Taing, J. (2007). "Thousand-year-old depictions of massage abortion". _Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care_. **33** (4): 233–34. doi:10.1783/147118907782101904. PMID 17925100.
          74. **^** Thapa, S.R.; Rimal, D.; Preston, J. (2006). "Self induction of abortion with instrumentation". _Australian Family Physician_. **35** (9): 697–98. PMID 16969439. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009.
          75. **^** "The Prevention and Management of Unsafe Abortion" (PDF). World Health Organization. April 1992. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 May 2010. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
          76. **^** Grimes, DA; Creinin, MD (2004). "Induced abortion: an overview for internists". _Annals of Internal Medicine_. **140** (8): 620–26. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-140-8-200404200-00009. PMID 15096333. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010.
          77. **^** Petersen, Emily E. (2019). "Vital Signs: Pregnancy-Related Deaths, United States, 2011–2015, and Strategies for Prevention, 13 States, 2013–2017". _MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_. **68**. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6818e1. ISSN 0149-2195.
          78. **^** _Read "The Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the United States" at NAP.edu_.
          79. **^** Raymond, EG; Grossman, D; Weaver, MA; Toti, S; Winikoff, B (November 2014). "Mortality of induced abortion, other outpatient surgical procedures and common activities in the United States". _Contraception_. **90** (5): 476–79. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2014.07.012. PMID 25152259.
          80. **^** Bartlett LA; Berg CJ; Shulman HB; et al. (April 2004). "Risk factors for legal induced abortion-related mortality in the United States". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **103** (4): 729–37. doi:10.1097/01.AOG.0000116260.81570.60. PMID 15051566.
          81. **^** Trupin, Suzanne (27 May 2010). "Elective Abortion". eMedicine. Archived from the original on 14 December 2004. Retrieved 1 June 2010. "At every gestational age, elective abortion is safer for the mother than carrying a pregnancy to term."
          82. **^** Pittman, Genevra (23 January 2012). "Abortion safer than giving birth: study". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012.
          83. **^** Abbas, D; Chong, E; Raymond, EG (September 2015). "Outpatient medical abortion is safe and effective through 70 days gestation". _Contraception_. **92** (3): 197–99. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2015.06.018. PMID 26118638.
          84. **^** Kapp, Nathalie; Baldwin, Maureen K.; Rodriguez, Maria Isabel (18 September 2017). "Efficacy of medical abortion prior to 6 gestational weeks: a systematic review". _Contraception_. **97** : 90–99. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2017.09.006. ISSN 1879-0518. PMID 28935220.
          85. **^** Westfall JM, Sophocles A, Burggraf H, Ellis S (1998). "Manual vacuum aspiration for first-trimester abortion". _Arch Fam Med_. **7** (6): 559–62. doi:10.1001/archfami.7.6.559. PMID 9821831. Archived from the original on 5 April 2005.
          86. **^** Dempsey, A (December 2012). "Serious infection associated with induced abortion in the United States". _Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **55** (4): 888–92. doi:10.1097/GRF.0b013e31826fd8f8. PMID 23090457.
          87. **^** White, Kari; Carroll, Erin; Grossman, Daniel (November 2015). "Complications from first-trimester aspiration abortion: a systematic review of the literature". _Contraception_. **92** (5): 422–38. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2015.07.013. PMID 26238336.
          88. **^** ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins – Gynecology (May 2009). "ACOG practice bulletin No. 104: antibiotic prophylaxis for gynecologic procedures". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **113** (5): 1180–89. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181a6d011. PMID 19384149.
          89. **^** Sawaya GF, Grady D, Kerlikowske K, Grimes DA (May 1996). "Antibiotics at the time of induced abortion: the case for universal prophylaxis based on a meta-analysis". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **87** (5 Pt 2): 884–90. PMID 8677129.
          90. **^** Barnard, S; Kim, C; Park, MH; Ngo, TD (27 July 2015). "Doctors or mid-level providers for abortion". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_ (7): CD011242. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011242.pub2. PMID 26214844.
          91. **^** Lerma, Klaira; Shaw, Kate A. (15 September 2017). "Update on second trimester medical abortion". _Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **29** : 413–18. doi:10.1097/GCO.0000000000000409. ISSN 1473-656X. PMID 28922193.
          92. **^** Grossman D (3 September 2004). "Medical methods for first trimester abortion: RHL commentary". _Reproductive Health Library_. Geneva: World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 28 October 2011. Retrieved  22 November 2011.
          93. **^** Chien P, Thomson M (15 December 2006). "Medical versus surgical methods for first trimester termination of pregnancy: RHL commentary". _Reproductive Health Library_. Geneva: World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 17 May 2010. Retrieved  1 June 2010.
          94. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jasen P (October 2005). "Breast cancer and the politics of abortion in the United States". _Medical History_. **49** (4): 423–44. doi:10.1017/S0025727300009145. PMC 1251638. PMID 16562329.
          95. **^** Schneider, A. Patrick II; Zainer, Christine; et al. (August 2014). "The breast cancer epidemic: 10 facts". _The Linacre Quarterly_. Catholic Medical Association. **81** (3): 244–77. doi:10.1179/2050854914Y.0000000027. PMC 4135458. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved  11 November 2015. "an association between [induced abortion] and breast cancer has been found by numerous Western and non-Western researchers from around the world. This is especially true in more recent reports that allow for a sufficient breast cancer latency period since an adoption of a Western life style in sexual and reproductive behavior."
          96. **^** Position statements of major medical bodies on abortion and breast cancer include: 
            * World Health Organization: "Induced abortion does not increase breast cancer risk (Fact sheet N°240)". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 13 February 2011. Retrieved 6 January 2011.
            * National Cancer Institute: "Abortion, Miscarriage, and Breast Cancer Risk". National Cancer Institute. Archived from the original on 21 December 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2011.
            * American Cancer Society: "Is Abortion Linked to Breast Cancer?". American Cancer Society. 23 September 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011. "At this time, the scientific evidence does not support the notion that abortion of any kind raises the risk of breast cancer."
            * Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: "The Care of Women Requesting Induced Abortion" (PDF). Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2008. "Induced abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk."
            * American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "ACOG Finds No Link Between Abortion and Breast Cancer Risk". American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 31 July 2003. Archived from the original on 2 January 2011. Retrieved 11 January 2011.
          97. **^** Gordon, Linda (2002). _The Moral Property of Women_. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02764-7.
          98. **^** Solinger, Rickie (1998), "Introduction", in Solinger, Rickie (ed.), _Abortion Wars: A Half Century of Struggle, 1950–2000_ , University of California Press, pp. 1–9, ISBN 978-0-520-20952-7
          99. **^** Bates, Jerome E.; Zawadzki, Edward S. (1964). _Criminal Abortion: A Study in Medical Sociology_. Charles C. Thomas. ISBN 978-0-398-00109-4.
          100. **^** Keller, Allan (1981). _Scandalous Lady: The Life and Times of Madame Restell_. Atheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-11213-3.
          101. **^** Taussig, Frederick J. (1936). _Abortion Spontaneous and Induced: Medical and Social Aspects_. C.V. Mosby.
          102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Horvath, S; Schreiber, CA (14 September 2017). "Unintended Pregnancy, Induced Abortion, and Mental Health". _Current Psychiatry Reports_. **19** (11): 77. doi:10.1007/s11920-017-0832-4. PMID 28905259.
          103. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "APA Task Force Finds Single Abortion Not a Threat to Women's Mental Health" (Press release). American Psychological Association. 12 August 2008. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011. Retrieved  7 September 2011.
          104. **^** "Report of the APA Task Force on Mental Health and Abortion" (PDF). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 13 August 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2010.
          105. **^** Coleman, PK (September 2011). "Abortion and mental health: quantitative synthesis and analysis of research published 1995–2009". _The British Journal of Psychiatry_. **199** (3): 180–86. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.110.077230. PMID 21881096.
          106. **^** "Mental Health and Abortion". American Psychological Association. 2008. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved  18 April 2012.
          107. **^** Steinberg, J.R. (2011). "Later Abortions and Mental Health: Psychological Experiences of Women Having Later Abortions – A Critical Review of Research". _Women's Health Issues_. **21** (3): S44–S48. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2011.02.002. PMID 21530839.
          108. **^** Kelly, Kimberly (February 2014). "The spread of 'Post Abortion Syndrome' as social diagnosis". _Social Science & Medicine_. **102** : 18–25. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.11.030.
          109. **^** Okonofua, F. (2006). "Abortion and maternal mortality in the developing world" (PDF). _Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada_. **28** (11): 974–79. PMID 17169222. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2012.
          110. **^** Haddad, LB; Nour, NM (2009). "Unsafe abortion: unnecessary maternal mortality". _Reviews in Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **2** (2): 122–26. PMC 2709326. PMID 19609407.
          111. **^** Lozano, R (15 December 2012). "Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010". _Lancet_. **380** (9859): 2095–128. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61728-0. hdl:10536/DRO/DU:30050819. PMID 23245604.
          112. **^** Darney, Leon Speroff, Philip D. (2010). _A clinical guide for contraception_ (5th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams  & Wilkins. p. 406. ISBN 1-60831-610-6.
          113. **^** World Health Organisation (2011). _Unsafe abortion: global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2008_ (PDF) (6th ed.). World Health Organisation. p. 27. ISBN 978-92-4-150111-8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 March 2014.
          114. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berer M (2000). "Making abortions safe: a matter of good public health policy and practice". _Bulletin of the World Health Organization_. **78** (5): 580–92. PMC 2560758. PMID 10859852.
          115. **^** "Translations". Dublin Declaration. Archived from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved  28 October 2015.
          116. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sedgh G, Henshaw S, Singh S, Ahman E, Shah IH (2007). "Induced abortion: estimated rates and trends worldwide". _Lancet_. **370** (9595): 1338–45. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.454.4197. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61575-X. PMID 17933648.
          117. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Unsafe abortion: Global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2003" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011.
          118. **^** Berer M (November 2004). "National laws and unsafe abortion: the parameters of change". _Reproductive Health Matters_. **12** (24 Suppl): 1–8. doi:10.1016/S0968-8080(04)24024-1. PMID 15938152.
          119. **^** Culwell, Kelly R.; Hurwitz, Manuelle (May 2013). "Addressing barriers to safe abortion". _International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics_. **121** : S16–S19. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2013.02.003.
          120. **^** Jewkes R, Rees H, Dickson K, Brown H, Levin J (March 2005). "The impact of age on the epidemiology of incomplete abortions in South Africa after legislative change". _BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology_. **112** (3): 355–59. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.2004.00422.x. PMID 15713153.
          121. **^** Bateman C (December 2007). "Maternal mortalities 90% down as legal TOPs more than triple". _South African Medical Journal_. **97** (12): 1238–42. PMID 18264602. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017.
          122. **^** Conti, Jennifer A.; Brant, Ashley R.; Shumaker, Heather D.; Reeves, Matthew F. (November 2016). "Update on abortion policy". _Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology_ : 1. doi:10.1097/GCO.0000000000000324.
          123. **^** New, M.J. (15 February 2011). "Analyzing the Effect of Anti-Abortion U.S. State Legislation in the Post-Casey Era". _State Politics & Policy Quarterly_. **11** (1): 28–47. doi:10.1177/1532440010387397.
          124. **^** Medoff, M.H.; Dennis, C. (21 July 2014). "Another Critical Review of New's Reanalysis of the Impact of Antiabortion Legislation". _State Politics & Policy Quarterly_. **14** (3): 269–76. doi:10.1177/1532440014535476.
          125. **^** "Facts on Investing in Family Planning and Maternal and Newborn Health" (PDF). Guttmacher Institute. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 24 May 2012.
          126. **^** Grimes, David A. "Unsafe Abortion – The Preventable Pandemic". Archived from the original on 5 March 2014. Retrieved 16 January 2010.
          127. **^** Nations, MK (1997). "Women's hidden transcripts about abortion in Brazil". _Social Science & Medicine_. **44** : 1833–45. doi:10.1016/s0277-9536(96)00293-6. PMID 9194245.
          128. **^** Maclean, Gaynor (2005). "XI. Dimension, Dynamics and Diversity: A 3D Approach to Appraising Global Maternal and Neonatal Health Initiatives". In Balin, Randell E. (ed.). _Trends in Midwifery Research_. Nova Publishers. pp. 299–300. ISBN 978-1-59454-477-4. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015.
          129. **^** Salter, C.; Johnson, H.B.; Hengen, N. (1997). "Care for Postabortion Complications: Saving Women's Lives". _Population Reports_. Johns Hopkins School of Public Health. **25** (1). Archived from the original on 7 December 2009.
          130. **^** UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO, World Bank (2010). "Packages of interventions: Family planning, safe abortion care, maternal, newborn and child health". Archived from the original on 9 November 2010. Retrieved 31 December 2010.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
          131. **^** "The Care of Women Requesting Induced Abortion. Evidence-Based Clinical Guideline no. 7" (PDF). _Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists_. November 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 31 October 2015. "Recommendation 6.21 Feticide should be performed before medical abortion after 21 weeks and 6 days of gestation to ensure that there is no risk of a live birth."
          132. **^** Society of Family Planning (February 2011). "Clinical Guidelines, Labor induction abortion in the second trimester". _Contraception_. **84** (1): 4–18. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2011.02.005. " Transient survival with misoprostol for labor induction abortion at greater than 18 weeks ranges from 0% to 50% and has been observed in up to 13% of abortions performed with high-dose oxytocin."
          133. **^** Fletcher; Isada; Johnson; Evans (August 1992). "Fetal intracardiac potassium chloride injection to avoid the hopeless resuscitation of an abnormal abortus: II. Ethical issues". _Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **80** (2): 310–13. PMID 1635751. " following later abortions at greater than 20 weeks, the rare but catastrophic occurrence of live births can lead to fractious controversy over neonatal management."
          134. **^** "Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal Abnormality" (PDF). _Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists_ : 29–31. May 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
          135. **^** Nuffield Council on Bioethics (2007). "Critical care decisions in fetal and neonatal medicine: a guide to the report" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "Under English law, fetuses have no independent legal status. Once born, babies have the same rights to life as other people."
          136. **^** Gerri R. Baer; Robert M. Nelson (2007). "Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevention. C: A Review of Ethical Issues Involved in Premature Birth". _Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring Healthy Outcomes_. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. " In 2002, the 107th U.S. Congress passed the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2001. This law established personhood for all infants who are born "at any stage of development" who breathe, have a heartbeat, or "definite movement of voluntary muscles", regardless of whether the birth was due to labor or induced abortion."
          137. **^** Chabot, Steve (5 August 2002). "H.R. 2175 (107th): Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002". _govtrack.us_. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved  30 October 2015. "The term "born alive" is defined as the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of that member, at any stage of development, who after such expulsion or extraction breathes or has a beating heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of the voluntary muscles, regardless of whether the umbilical cord has been cut, and regardless of whether the expulsion or extraction occurs as a result of natural or induced labor, cesarean section, or induced abortion."
          138. **^** "Practice Bulletin: Second-Trimester Abortion" (PDF). _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **121** (6): 1394–1406. June 2013. doi:10.1097/01.AOG.0000431056.79334.cc. PMID 23812485. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015. "With medical abortion after 20 weeks of gestation, induced fetal demise may be preferable to the woman or provider in order to avoid transient fetal survival after expulsion."
          139. **^** Higginbotham Susan (January 2010). "Clinical Guidelines: Induction of fetal demise before abortion" (PDF). _Contraception: a publication of Society of Family Planning_. **81** : 8. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2010.01.018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Inducing fetal demise before induction termination avoids signs of live birth that may have beneficial emotional, ethical and legal consequences."
          140. **^** Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women (November 2014). "Committee Opinion 613: Increasing Access to Abortion". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **124** : 1060–65. doi:10.1097/01.aog.0000456326.88857.31. Archived from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2015. ""Partial-birth" abortion bans – The federal Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 (upheld by the Supreme Court in 2007) makes it a federal crime to perform procedures that fall within the definition of so-called "partial-birth abortion" contained in the statute, with no exception for procedures necessary to preserve the health of the woman...physicians and lawyers have interpreted the banned procedures as including intact dilation and evacuation unless fetal demise occurs before surgery."
          141. **^** "2015 Clinical Policy Guidelines" (PDF). _National Abortion Federation_. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015. "Policy Statement: Medical induction abortion is a safe and effective method for termination of pregnancies beyond the first trimester when performed by trained clinicians in medical offices, freestanding clinics, ambulatory surgery centers, and hospitals. Feticidal agents may be particularly important when issues of viability arise."
          142. **^** Milliez Jacques (2008). "FIGO Committee Report: Ethical aspects concerning termination of pregnancy following prenatal diagnosis". _International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics_. **102** (1): 97–98. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2008.03.002. PMID 18423641. " Termination of pregnancy following prenatal diagnosis after 22 weeks must be preceded by a feticide."
          143. **^** "Underlying Cause of Death 1999–2013 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released 2015". _Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics_. Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999–2013, as compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved  12 November 2015.
          144. **^** Pazol, Karen; et al. (27 November 2009). "Abortion Surveillance – United States, 2006". _Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Surveillance Summaries_. **58** (SS08): 1–35. Archived from the original on 28 November 2015. Retrieved  12 November 2015.
          145. **^** Shah I, Ahman E (December 2009). "Unsafe abortion: global and regional incidence, trends, consequences, and challenges". _Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada_. **31** (12): 1149–58. doi:10.1016/s1701-2163(16)34376-6. PMID 20085681. " However, a woman's chance of having an abortion is similar whether she lives in a developed or a developing region: in 2003 the rates were 26 abortions per 1000 women aged 15 to 44 in developed areas and 29 per 1000 in developing areas. The main difference is in safety, with abortion being safe and easily accessible in developed countries and generally restricted and unsafe in most developing countries"
          146. **^** Rosenthal, Elizabeth (12 October 2007). "Legal or Not, Abortion Rates Compare". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved  18 July 2011.
          147. **^** "Facts on Investing in Family Planning and Maternal and Newborn Health" (PDF). Guttmacher Institute. November 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2011.
          148. **^** Sedgh, G.; Singh, S.; Henshaw, S.K.; Bankole, A. (2011). "Legal Abortion Worldwide in 2008: Levels and Recent Trends". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **43** (3): 188–98. doi:10.1363/4318811. PMID 21884387. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012.
          149. **^** National Institute of Statistics, Romanian Statistical Yearbook, chapter 2, page 62, 2011
          150. **^** Jones, R.K.; Darroch, J.E.; Henshaw, S.K. (2002). "Contraceptive Use Among U.S. Women Having Abortions in 2000–2001" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **34** (6): 294–303. doi:10.2307/3097748. PMID 12558092. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2006.
          151. **^** Cohen, SA (2008). "Abortion and Women of Color: The Bigger Picture". _Guttmacher Policy Review_. **11** (3). Archived from the original on 15 September 2008.
          152. **^** Strauss, L.T.; Gamble, S.B.; Parker, W.Y.; Cook, D.A.; Zane, S.B.; Hamdan, S.; Centers for Disease Control Prevention (2006). "Abortion surveillance – United States, 2003". _Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Surveillance Summaries_. **55** (SS11): 1–32. PMID 17119534. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017.
          153. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "The limitations of U.S. statistics on abortion". _Issues in Brief_. New York: The Guttmacher Institute. 1997. Archived from the original on 4 April 2012.
          154. **^** Finer, L.B.; Henshaw, S.K. (2003). "Abortion Incidence and Services in the United States in 2000". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **35** (1): 6–15. doi:10.1363/3500603. PMID 12602752. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016.
          155. **^** Department of Health (2007). "Abortion statistics, England and Wales: 2006". Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2007.
          156. **^** Cheng, Linan (1 November 2008). "Surgical versus medical methods for second-trimester induced abortion: RHL commentary". _The WHO Reproductive Health Library_. Geneva: World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved  10 February 2009. commentary on:
        

Lohr, Patricia A.; Hayes, Jennifer L.; Gemzell-Danielsson, Kristina (23
January 2008). "Surgical versus medical methods for second trimester
abortion". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_ (1): CD006714.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006714.pub2. PMID 18254113.

        
                  157. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Bankole, Akinrinola; Singh, Susheela; Haas, Taylor (1998). "Reasons Why Women Have Induced Abortions: Evidence from 27 Countries". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **24** (3): 117–27, 152. doi:10.2307/3038208. Archived from the original on 17 January 2006.
          158. **^** Finer, L.B.; Frohwirth, L.F.; Dauphinee, L.A.; Singh, S.; Moore, A. M. (2005). "Reasons U.S. Women Have Abortions: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **37** (3): 110–18. doi:10.1111/j.1931-2393.2005.tb00045.x. PMID 16150658. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012.
          159. **^** Copelon, Rhonda (1990). "From Privacy to Autonomy: The Conditions for Reproductive and Sexual Freedom". In Fried, Marlene Gerber (ed.). _From Abortion to Reproductive Freedom: Transforming a Movement_. South End Press. pp. 27–43. ISBN 9780896083875. "The prevalence of economically influenced abortions and the sterilization campaigns against poor, minority, and disabled women show us that autonomy is impossible without eradication of discrimination and poverty. Racism, sexism, and poverty can make the difference between abortions that reflect choice and those reflecting bitter necessity."
          160. **^** Oster, Emily (September 2005). "Explaining Asia's "Missing Women": A New Look at the Data". _Population and Development Review_. **31** (3): 529–535. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2005.00082.x. Archived from the original on 7 February 2019. Retrieved  5 February 2019. "Households have variously resorted to female infanticide and postnatal withholding of health care; and since the mid-1980s, when technology permitting fairly low-cost determination of the sex of fetuses became available, there has been a shift toward prenatal sex selection by means of induced abortion."
          161. **^** George J. Annas and Sherman Elias. "Legal and Ethical Issues in Obstetrical Practice". Chapter 54 in _Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies_ , 6th edition. Eds. Steven G. Gabbe, et al. 2012 Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier. ISBN 978-1-4377-1935-2
          162. **^** Doan 2007, p. 57.
          163. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Weisz, B; Schiff, E; Lishner, M (2001). "Cancer in pregnancy: maternal and fetal implications" (PDF). _Human Reproduction Update_. **7** (4): 384–393. doi:10.1093/humupd/7.4.384. PMID 11476351. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 October 2015.
          164. **^** Mayr, NA; Wen, BC; Saw, CB (1998). "Radiation therapy during pregnancy". _Obstetrics & Gynecology Clinics of North America_. **25** (2): 301–21. doi:10.1016/s0889-8545(05)70006-1. PMID 9629572.
          165. **^** Fenig E, Mishaeli M, Kalish Y, Lishner M (2001). "Pregnancy and radiation". _Cancer Treatment Reviews_. **27** (1): 1–7. doi:10.1053/ctrv.2000.0193. PMID 11237773.
          166. **^** Li WW, Yau TN, Leung CW, Pong WM, Chan MY (2009). "Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the uterine cervix complicating pregnancy". _Hong Kong Medical Journal_. **15** (1): 69–72. PMID 19197101.
          167. **^** Mould R (1996). _Mould's Medical Anecdotes_. CRC Press. p. 406. ISBN 978-0-85274-119-1.
          168. **^** Miles, Steven (2005). _The Hippocratic Oath and the Ethics of Medicine_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518820-2.
          169. **^** "Scribonius Largus and the Oath of Hippocrates". _penelope.uchicago.edu_.
          170. **^** Soranus, Owsei Temkin (1956). _Soranus' Gynecology_. JHU Press. p. I.19.60. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved  6 October 2015.
          171. **^** Carrick, Paul (2001). _Medical Ethics in the Ancient World_. Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-0-87840-849-8.
          172. **^** Rackham, H. (1944). "Aristotle, Politics". Harvard University Press. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2011.
          173. **^** Brind'Amour, Katherine (2007). "Effraenatam". _Embryo Project Encyclopedia_. Arizona State University. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012.
          174. **^** Joan Cadden, "Western medicine and natural philosophy," in Vern L. Bullough and James A. Brundage, eds., _Handbook of Medieval Sexuality_ , Garland, 1996, pp. 51–80.
          175. **^** Cyril C. Means, Jr., "A historian's view," in Robert E. Hall, ed., _Abortion in a Changing World_ , vol. 1, Columbia University Press, 1970, pp. 16–24.
          176. **^** John M. Riddle, "Contraception and early abortion in the Middle Ages," in Vern L. Bullough and James A. Brundage, eds., _Handbook of Medieval Sexuality_ , Garland, 1996, pp. 261–77, ISBN 978-0-8153-1287-1.
          177. **^** "Religions – Islam: Abortion". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Retrieved  10 December 2011.
          178. **^** Dabash, Rasha; Roudi-Fahimi, Farzaneh (2008). "Abortion in the Middle East and North Africa" (PDF). Population Research Bureau. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2011.
          179. **^** Dannenfelser, Marjorie (4 November 2015). "The Suffragettes Would Not Agree With Feminists Today on Abortion". _Time_. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015. Retrieved  4 November 2015.
          180. **^** Charles A. Lee, "Report of a trial for murder," _American Journal of the Medical Sciences_ , vol. XXII (1838), pp. 351–53.
          181. **^** Benjamin Bailey, "Induction of abortion and premature labor," _North American Journal of Homeopathy_ , vol. XI, no. 3 (1896), pp. 144–50.
          182. **^** Keith Simpson, _Forensic Medicine_ , Edward Arnold Publishers, 1969 [first published 1947], pp. 173–74.
          183. **^** Leslie J. Reagan, _When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United States, 1867–1973_ , University of California Press, 1997.
          184. **^** Max Evans, _Madam Millie: Bordellos from Silver City to Ketchikan_ , University of New Mexico Press, 2002, pp. 209–18, 230, 267–86, 305.
          185. **^** James Donner, _Women in Trouble: The Truth about Abortion in America_ , Monarch Books, 1959.
          186. **^** Ann Oakley, _The Captured Womb_ , Basil Blackwell, 1984, p. 91.
          187. **^** Rickie Solinger, _The Abortionist: A Woman Against the Law_ , The Free Press, 1994, pp. xi, 5, 16–17, 157–75.
          188. **^** "Abortion Law, History & Religion". Childbirth By Choice Trust. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013. Retrieved  23 March 2008.
          189. **^** For sources describing abortion policy in Nazi Germany, see: 
            * Friedlander, Henry (1995). _The origins of Nazi genocide: from euthanasia to the final solution_. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-8078-4675-9. OCLC 60191622. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016.
            * Proctor, Robert (1988). _Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp. 122–23, 366. ISBN 978-0-674-74578-0. OCLC 20760638.
            * Arnot, Margaret L.; Cornelie Usborne (1999). _Gender and Crime in Modern Europe_. New York: Routledge. p. 231. ISBN 978-1-85728-745-5. OCLC 186748539.
            * DiMeglio, Peter M. (1999). "Germany 1933–1945 (National Socialism)". In Helen Tierney (ed.). _Women's studies encyclopedia_. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. p. 589. ISBN 978-0-313-31072-0. OCLC 38504469. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015.
          190. **^** Farrell, Courtney (2010). _Abortion Debate_. ABDO Publishing Company. pp. 6–7. ISBN 1-61785-264-3.
          191. **^** "WMA Declaration on Therapeutic Abortion". World Medical Association. Archived from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved  28 October 2015.
          192. **^** Farrell, p. 8
          193. **^** "World Abortion Policies 2013" (PDF). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 31 July 2013.
          194. **^** World Abortion Policies 2007, United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
          195. **^** Theodore J. Joyce; Stanley K. Henshaw; Amanda Dennis; Lawrence B. Finer; Kelly Blanchard (April 2009). "The Impact of State Mandatory Counseling and Waiting Period Laws on Abortion: A Literature Review" (PDF). Guttmacher Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 January 2011. Retrieved 31 December 2010.
          196. **^** Phillips, Tom (29 October 2015). "China ends one-child policy after 35 years". _The Guardian_. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved  30 November 2016.
          197. **^** Buckley, Chris (29 October 2015). "China Ends One-Child Policy, Allowing Families Two Children". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016. Retrieved  30 November 2016.
          198. **^** "China to end one-child policy and allow two". _BBC News_. 29 October 2015. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved  30 November 2016.
          199. **^** Restivo, Sal P., ed. (2005). _Science, Technology, and Society: An Encyclopedia_. Oxford University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-19-514193-1. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015.
          200. **^** "European delegation visits Nicaragua to examine effects of abortion ban". Ipas. 26 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 April 2008. Retrieved  15 June 2009. "More than 82 maternal deaths had been registered in Nicaragua since the change. During this same period, indirect obstetric deaths, or deaths caused by illnesses aggravated by the normal effects of pregnancy and not due to direct obstetric causes, have doubled."
          201. **^** "Nicaragua: 'The Women's Movement Is in Opposition '". Montevideo: Inside Costa Rica. IPS. 28 June 2008. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011.
          202. **^** "Surgical Abortion: History and Overview". National Abortion Federation. Archived from the original on 22 September 2006. Retrieved  4 September 2006.
          203. **^** Nations MK, Misago C, Fonseca W, Correia LL, Campbell OM (June 1997). "Women's hidden transcripts about abortion in Brazil". _Social Science & Medicine_. **44** (12): 1833–45. doi:10.1016/s0277-9536(96)00293-6. PMID 9194245. " Two folk medical conditions, "delayed" (atrasada) and "suspended" (suspendida) menstruation, are described as perceived by poor Brazilian women in Northeast Brazil. Culturally prescribed methods to "regulate" these conditions and provoke menstrual bleeding are also described ..."
          204. **^** Henshaw, S.K. (1991). "The Accessibility of Abortion Services in the United States" (PDF). _Family Planning Perspectives_. **23** (6): 246–63. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.360.6115. doi:10.2307/2135775. JSTOR 2135775. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2017.
          205. **^** Bloom, Marcy (25 February 2008). "Need Abortion, Will Travel". RH Reality Check. Archived from the original on 30 November 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
          206. **^** Gomperts, Rebecca (2002). "Women on Waves: Where next for the abortion boat?". _Reproductive Health Matters_. **10** (19): 180–83.
          207. **^** Best, Alyssa (2005). "Abortion Rights along the Irish-English Border and the Liminality of Women's Experiences". _Dialectical Anthropology_. **29** (3–4): 423–37. doi:10.1007/s10624-005-3863-x. ISSN 0304-4092.
          208. **^** Lambert-Beatty, Carrie (2008). "Twelve miles: Boundaries of the new art/activism". _Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society_. **33** (2): 309–27.
          209. **^** Banister, Judith. (16 March 1999). Son Preference in Asia – Report of a Symposium Archived 16 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 12 January 2006.
          210. **^** Reaney, Patricia. "Selective abortion blamed for India's missing girls". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 February 2006. Retrieved 3 December 2008.
          211. **^** Sudha, S.; Rajan, S. Irudaya (July 1999). "Female Demographic Disadvantage in India 1981–1991: Sex Selective Abortions and Female Infanticide". _Development and Change_. **30** (3): 585–618. doi:10.1111/1467-7660.00130. PMID 20162850. Archived from the original on 1 January 2003. Retrieved  3 December 2008.
          212. **^** "Sex Selection & Abortion: India". Library of Congress. 4 April 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved  18 July 2011.
          213. **^** "China Bans Sex-selection Abortion" Archived 12 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine (22 March 2002). Xinhua News Agency. Retrieved 12 January 2006.
          214. **^** Graham, Maureen J.; Larsen; Xu (June 1998). "Son Preference in Anhui Province, China". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **24** (2): 72–77. doi:10.2307/2991929. Archived from the original on 21 October 2011.
          215. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Preventing gender-biased sex selection" (PDF). UNFPA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 1 November 2011.
          216. **^** "Prenatal sex selection" (PDF). Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 17 November 2015.
          217. **^** Smith, G. Davidson (1998). "Single Issue Terrorism Commentary". Canadian Security Intelligence Service. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. Retrieved 1 September 2011.
          218. **^** Wilson, M.; Lynxwiler, J. (1988). "Abortion clinic violence as terrorism". _Studies in Conflict & Terrorism_. **11** (4): 263–73. doi:10.1080/10576108808435717.
          219. **^** National Abortion Federation (2017). "2017 VIOLENCE AND DISRUPTION STATISTICS" (PDF).
          220. **^** "The Death of Dr. Gunn". _New York Times_. 12 March 1993. Archived from the original on 10 November 2016.
          221. **^** "Incidence of Violence & Disruption Against Abortion Providers in the U.S. & Canada" (PDF). National Abortion Federation. 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2010.
          222. **^** Borger, Julian (3 February 1999). "The bomber under siege". _The Guardian_. London. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017.
          223. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Alesha E. Doan (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation:The abortion wars and strategies of political harassment_. University of Michigan. p. 2.
          224. **^** Spencer, James B. (1908). _Sheep Husbandry in Canada_. p. 114. OCLC 798508694.
          225. **^** "Beef cattle and Beef production: Management and Husbandry of Beef Cattle". _Encyclopaedia of New Zealand_. 1966. Archived from the original on 1 January 2009.
          226. **^** Myers, Brandon; Beckett, Jonathon (2001). "Pine needle abortion". _Animal Health Care and Maintenance_ (PDF). Tucson: Arizona Cooperative Extension, University of Arizona. pp. 47–50. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2015. Retrieved 10 April 2013.
          227. **^** Kim, Ill-Hwa; Choi, Kyung-Chul; An, Beum-Soo; Choi, In-Gyu; Kim, Byung-Ki; Oh, Young-Kyoon; Jeung, Eui-Bae (2003). "Effect on abortion of feeding Korean pine needles to pregnant Korean native cows". _Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research_. Canadian Veterinary Medical Association. **67** (3): 194–97. PMC 227052. PMID 12889725.
          228. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Njaa, Bradley L., editor (2011). _Kirkbride's Diagnosis of Abortion and Neonatal Loss in Animals_. John Wiley  & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-95852-0.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
          229. **^** Overton, Rebecca (March 2003). "By a Hair" (PDF). _Paint Horse Journal_. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2012.
          230. **^** Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018). "Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs". _Biological Conservation_. **217** : 11–27. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010.
          231. **^** "Herpesvirus in dog pups". petMD. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved  18 December 2012.
          232. **^** "Spaying Pregnant Females". Carol's Ferals. Archived from the original on 18 November 2012. Retrieved  17 December 2012.
          233. **^** Coates, Jennifer (7 May 2007). "Feline abortion: often an unnerving necessity". petMD. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
          234. **^** Khuly, Patty (1 April 2011). "Feline abortion: often an unnerving necessity (Part 2)". petMD. Archived from the original on 18 November 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
          235. **^** Schwagmeyer, P.L. (1979). "The Bruce Effect: An Evaluation of Male/Female Advantages". _The American Naturalist_. **114** (6): 932–38. doi:10.1086/283541. JSTOR 2460564.
          236. **^** McKinnon, Angus O.; Voss, James L. (1993). _Equine Reproduction_. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 563. ISBN 0-8121-1427-2. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015.
          237. **^** Berger, Joel W; Vuletić, L; Boberić, J; Milosavljević, A; Dilparić, S; Tomin, R; Naumović, P (5 May 1983). "Induced abortion and social factors in wild horses". _Nature_. **303** (5912): 59–61. doi:10.1038/303059a0. PMID 6682487.
          238. **^** Pluháček, Jan; Bartos, L (2000). "Male infanticide in captive plains zebra, Equus burchelli" (PDF). _Animal Behaviour_. **59** (4): 689–94. doi:10.1006/anbe.1999.1371. PMID 10792924. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2011.
          239. **^** Pluháček, Jan (2005). "Further evidence for male infanticide and feticide in captive plains zebra, _Equus burchelli_ " (PDF). _Folia Zoologica_. **54** (3): 258–62. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2009.
          240. **^** Kirkpatrick, J.F.; Turner, J.W. (1991). "Changes in Herd Stallions among Feral Horse Bands and the Absence of Forced Copulation and Induced Abortion". _Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology_. **29** (3): 217–19. doi:10.1007/BF00166404. JSTOR 4600608.
          241. **^** Agoramoorthy, G.; Mohnot, S.M.; Sommer, V.; Srivastava, A. (1988). "Abortions in free ranging Hanuman langurs ( _Presbytis entellus_ ) – a male induced strategy?". _Human Evolution_. **3** (4): 297–308. doi:10.1007/BF02435859.
        

## Bibliography

        
                  * Devereux, George (1976). _A Study of Abortion in Primitive Societies_. International Universities Press. ISBN 978-0-8236-6245-6.
          * Doan, Alesha E. (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation: The abortion wars and strategies of political harassment_. University of Michigan.
          * Riddle, John M. (1997). _Eve's Herbs: A History of Contraception and Abortion in the West_. Harvard University Press.
          * Ganatra, Bela; Tunçalp, Özge; Johnston, Heidi Bart; Johnson Jr, Brooke R; Gülmezoglu, Ahmet Metin; Temmerman, Marleen (1 March 2014). "From concept to measurement: operationalizing WHO's definition of unsafe abortion". _Bulletin of the World Health Organization_. **92** (3): 155–55. doi:10.2471/BLT.14.136333. PMC 3949603. PMID 24700971.
          * Hartmann, Betsy (1995). _Reproductive Rights and Wrongs: The Global Politics of Population Control_. South End Press. ISBN 978-0-89608-491-9.
          * Koblitz, Ann Hibner (2014). _Sex and Herbs and Birth Control: Women and Fertility Regulation Through the Ages_. Kovalevskaia Fund. ISBN 978-0-9896655-0-6.
          * Sedgh, Gilda; Bearak, Jonathan; Singh, Susheela; Bankole, Akinrinola; Popinchalk, Anna; Ganatra, Bela; Rossier, Clémentine; Gerdts, Caitlin; Tunçalp, Özge; Johnson, Brooke Ronald; Johnston, Heidi Bart; Alkema, Leontine (July 2016). "Abortion incidence between 1990 and 2014: global, regional, and subregional levels and trends". _The Lancet_. **388** (10041): 258–67. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30380-4. PMC 5498988. PMID 27179755.
          * UN (2002). _Abortion Policies: A Global Review 3 vols_. Population Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations.
          * WHO (2005). _The World Health Report 2005: Make every mother and child count_. Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 92-4-156290-0.
          * WHO (2012). _Safe abortion: technical and policy guidance for health systems_ (PDF) (2nd ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-154843-4.
          * WHO (2016). "Health worker roles in providing safe abortion care and post-abortion contraception". Retrieved 8 January 2017.
        

## External links

Library resources about  
**Abortion**

* * *

* * *
        
                  * Resources in your library
          * Resources in other libraries
        

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Scholia_logo.svg/40px-

Scholia_logo.svg.png) | Scholia has a _topic_ profile for _**Abortion**_.  
---|---  
* First-trimester abortion in women with medical conditions. US Department of Health and Human Services * Safe abortion: Technical  & policy guidance for health systems, World Health Organization (2015) **Portals**  
Access related topics|

        
                  * ![WHO Rod.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/WHO_Rod.svg/13px-WHO_Rod.svg.png) _ **Medicine portal**_
          * ![P religion world.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/P_religion_world.svg/30px-P_religion_world.svg.png) _ **Religion portal**_
        

---|--- 

* * *

Find out more on Wikipedia's  
**Sister projects** |

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/22px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media
        

from Commons

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dd/Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg/30px-Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg.png)Travel guides
        

from Wikivoyage

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/30px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News stories
        

from Wikinews

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/30px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png)Definitions
        

from Wiktionary

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/30px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png)Textbooks
        

from Wikibooks

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/25px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations
        

from Wikiquote

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/29px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Source texts
        

from Wikisource

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Wikiversity-logo.svg/30px-Wikiversity-logo.svg.png)Learning resources
        

from Wikiversity

        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

        
                  * History of abortion
          * Methods of abortion
          * Abortion debate
          * Abortion law
        

Movements|

        
                  * Abortion-rights movements
          * Anti-abortion movements
        

Issues|

        
                  * Abortion and mental health
          * Beginning of human personhood
          * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
          * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
          * Anti-abortion violence
          * Abortion under communism
          * Birth control
          * Crisis pregnancy center
          * Ethical aspects of abortion
          * Eugenics
          * Fetal rights
          * Forced abortion
          * Genetics and abortion
          * Late-term abortion
          * Legalized abortion and crime effect
          * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
          * Limit of viability
          * Men's rights
          * Minors and abortion
          * One-child policy
          * Paternal rights and abortion
          * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
          * Prenatal development
          * Reproductive rights
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Sex-selective abortion
          * Sidewalk counseling
          * Societal attitudes towards abortion
          * Toxic abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
          * Women's rights
        

By country|

| Africa|

        
                  * Algeria
          * Angola
          * Benin
          * Botswana
          * Burkina Faso
          * Burundi
          * Cameroon
          * Cape Verde
          * Central African Republic
          * Chad
          * Egypt
          * Ghana
          * Namibia
          * Nigeria
          * South Africa
          * Uganda
          * Zimbabwe
        

---|---  
Asia|

        
                  * Afghanistan
          * Armenia
          * Azerbaijan
          * Bahrain
          * Bangladesh
          * Bhutan
          * Brunei
          * Cambodia
          * China
          * Cyprus
          * Georgia
          * East Timor
          * India
          * Iran
          * Israel
          * Japan
          * Kazakhstan
          * Northern Cyprus
          * South Korea
          * Philippines
          * Qatar
          * Saudi Arabia
          * Turkey
        

Europe|

        
                  * Albania
          * Andorra
          * Austria
          * Belarus
          * Belgium
          * Bosnia and Herzegovina
          * Bulgaria
          * Croatia
          * Czech Republic
          * Denmark
          * Estonia
          * Finland
          * France
          * Germany
          * Greece
          * Hungary
          * Iceland
          * Ireland
          * Italy
          * Kazakhstan
          * Latvia
          * Liechtenstein
          * Lithuania
          * Luxembourg
          * Malta
          * Moldova
          * Monaco
          * Montenegro
          * Netherlands
          * North Macedonia
          * Norway
          * Poland
          * Portugal
          * Romania
          * Russia
          * San Marino
          * Serbia
          * Slovakia
          * Slovenia
          * Spain
          * Sweden
          * Switzerland
          * Ukraine
          * United Kingdom
        

North America|

        
                  * Belize
          * Canada
          * Costa Rica
          * Cuba
          * Dominican Republic
          * El Salvador
          * Guatemala
          * Mexico
          * Nicaragua
          * Panama
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Oceania|

        
                  * Australia
          * Micronesia
          * Fiji
          * Kiribati
          * Marshall Islands
          * New Zealand
          * Papua New Guinea
          * Samoa
          * Solomon Islands
          * Tonga
          * Tuvalu
          * Vanuatu
        

South America|

        
                  * Argentina
          * Bolivia
          * Brazil
          * Chile
          * Colombia
          * Ecuador
          * Guyana
          * Paraguay
          * Peru
          * Suriname
          * Uruguay
          * Venezuela
        

Law|

        
                  * Case law
          * Constitutional law
          * History of abortion law
          * Laws by country
          * Buffer zones
          * Conscientious objection
          * Fetal protection
          * Heartbeat bills
          * Informed consent
          * Late-term restrictions
          * Parental involvement
          * Spousal consent
        

Methods|

        
                  * Vacuum aspiration
          * Dilation and evacuation
          * Dilation and curettage
          * Intact D&X
          * Hysterotomy
          * Instillation
          * Menstrual extraction
          * Abortifacient drugs
            * Methotrexate
            * Mifepristone
            * Misoprostol
            * Oxytocin
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
        

Religion|

        
                  * Buddhism
          * Christianity
            * Catholicism
          * Hinduism
          * Islam
          * Judaism
          * Scientology
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Birth control methods (G02B, G03A)

* * *

Comparison|

        
                  * Comparison of birth control methods
          * Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC)
        

Behavioral|

        
                  * **Avoiding vaginal intercourse** : Abstinence
          * Anal sex
          * Masturbation
          * Non-penetrative sex
          * Oral sex
        

**Including vaginal intercourse** : Breastfeeding infertility (LAM)

        
                  * Calendar-based methods (rhythm, etc.)
          * Fertility awareness (Billings ovulation method
          * Creighton Model, etc.)
          * Withdrawal
        

Barrier and / or  
spermicidal|

        
                  * Cervical cap
          * Condom
          * Contraceptive sponge
          * Diaphragm
          * Female condom
          * Spermicide
        

Hormonal  
(formulations)|

| Combined estrogen-progestogen|

        
                  * Contraceptive patch
          * Extended cycle
          * Injectable
          * Combined vaginal ring
          * Pill
        

---|---  
Progestogen-only|

        
                  * Depo-Provera
          * Etonogestrel implant (Nexplanon)
          * Levonorgestrel implant (Norplant)
          * Progestogen-only pill
          * Progesterone vaginal ring
        

Anti-estrogen|

        
                  * Ormeloxifene (Centchroman)
        

Post-intercourse|

        
                  * Emergency contraception (Ulipristal acetate
          * Yuzpe regimen
          * Levonorgestrel)
        

Intrauterine device|

        
                  * Copper
          * Hormone
        

Sterilization|

        
                  * **Female** : Essure
          * Tubal ligation
        

**Male** : Vasectomy

Experimental|

        
                  * Reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance (Vasalgel)
        

Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC)|

        
                  * Intrauterine device (Hormonal IUD
          * Copper IUD)
          * Contraceptive implant (Etonogestrel implant, Levonorgestrel implant)
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Substantive human rights

* * *

Please note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the
topics listed are universally accepted as human rights

Civil and political|

        
                  * Cannabis rights
          * Equality before the law
          * Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
          * Freedom of assembly
          * Freedom of association
          * Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
          * Freedom from discrimination
          * Freedom from exile
          * Freedom of information
          * Freedom of movement
          * Freedom of religion
          * Freedom from slavery
          * Freedom of speech
          * Freedom of thought
          * Freedom from torture
          * Legal aid
          * Liberty
          * LGBT rights
          * Nationality
          * Personhood
          * Presumption of innocence
          * Right of asylum
          * Right to die
          * Right to a fair trial
          * Right to family life
          * Right to keep and bear arms
          * Right to life
          * Right to petition
          * Right to privacy
          * Right to protest
          * Right to refuse medical treatment
          * Right of self-defense
          * Security of person
          * Universal suffrage
        

Economic, social  
and cultural

|

        
                  * Digital rights
          * Equal pay for equal work
          * Fair remuneration
          * Labor rights
          * Right to an adequate standard of living
          * Right to clothing
          * Right to development
          * Right to education
          * Right to food
          * Right to health
          * Right to housing
          * Right to Internet access
          * Right to property
          * Right to public participation
          * Right of reply
          * Right of return
          * Right to science and culture
          * Right to social security
          * Right to water
          * Right to work
          * Trade union membership
        

Sexual and  
reproductive|

        
                  * Abortion
          * Family planning
          * Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
          * Intersex human rights
          * LGBT rights
          * Reproductive health
          * Right to sexuality
        

Violations|

        
                  * Corporal punishment
        

War and conflict|

        
                  * Civilian
          * Combatant
          * Freedom from genocide
          * Prisoner of war
          * Wartime sexual violence
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Reproductive health

* * *

Rights|

        
                  * Compulsory sterilization
          * Contraceptive security
          * Genital integrity
            * Circumcision controversies
            * Genital modification and mutilation
            * Intersex
        

Education|

        
                  * Genetic counseling
          * Pre-conception counseling
          * Sex education
        

Planning|

        
                  * Assisted reproductive technology
          * Birth control
          * Childfree/Childlessness
          * Parenting
            * Adoption
            * Childbirth
            * Foster care
          * Safe sex
        

Health|

        
                  * Men's
          * Women's
            * Vulvovaginal
          * Research 
            * Self-report sexual risk behaviors
        

Pregnancy|

        
                  * Abortion
          * Birth spacing
          * Maternal health
          * Obstetrics
          * Options counseling
          * Pregnancy from rape
          * Pregnant patients' rights
          * Prenatal care
          * Teenage pregnancy
          * Preteen pregnancy
          * Unintended pregnancy
        

Medicine|

        
                  * Andrology
          * Genitourinary medicine
          * Gynaecology
          * Obstetrics and gynaecology
          * Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
          * Sexual medicine
        

Disorder|

        
                  * Disorders of sex development
          * Infertility
          * Reproductive system disease
          * Sexual dysfunction
          * Sexually transmitted infection
            * Clinic
        

By country|

        
                  * China
          * India
          * Iran
          * Ireland
          * Pakistan
          * Philippines
          * Singapore
          * United Kingdom 
            * Teen
          * United States
            * Teen pregnancy
            * Birth control
        

History|

        
                  * Birth control movement in the United States
          * History of condoms
          * Social hygiene movement
          * Timeline of reproductive rights legislation
        

Policy|

        
                  * One-child policy
          * Two-child policy
          * Financial 
            * Baby bonus
            * Bachelor tax
            * Birth credit
            * Child benefit
            * Tax on childlessness
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abortion&oldid=899864386"

Categories:

        
                  * Abortion
          * Fertility
          * Gender studies
          * Human reproduction
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
          * CS1: long volume value
          * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
          * Webarchive template wayback links
          * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
          * Articles with short description
          * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
          * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
          * Use dmy dates from May 2014
          * Use American English from September 2016
          * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
          * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008
          * All articles containing potentially dated statements
          * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014
          * RTT
          * RTTEM
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
          * Wikiquote
          * Wikisource
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Afrikaans
          * Akan
          * Alemannisch
          * العربية
          * Aragonés
          * Asturianu
          * Avañe'ẽ
          * Azərbaycanca
          * বাংলা
          * Bân-lâm-gú
          * Башҡортса
          * Беларуская
          * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
          * Български
          * Bosanski
          * Буряад
          * Català
          * Čeština
          * Chi-Chewa
          * ChiShona
          * Cymraeg
          * Dansk
          * Deutsch
          * Eesti
          * Ελληνικά
          * Español
          * Esperanto
          * Euskara
          * فارسی
          * Fiji Hindi
          * Føroyskt
          * Français
          * Frysk
          * Gaeilge
          * Galego
          * ગુજરાતી
          * 한국어
          * Հայերեն
          * Արեւմտահայերէն
          * हिन्दी
          * Hrvatski
          * Ido
          * Igbo
          * Ilokano
          * Bahasa Indonesia
          * Interlingua
          * ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
          * Íslenska
          * Italiano
          * עברית
          * Jawa
          * Kabɩyɛ
          * ಕನ್ನಡ
          * Kapampangan
          * ქართული
          * Қазақша
          * Kiswahili
          * Kurdî
          * Кыргызча
          * Latina
          * Latviešu
          * Lëtzebuergesch
          * Lietuvių
          * Limburgs
          * Lumbaart
          * Magyar
          * मैथिली
          * Македонски
          * Malagasy
          * മലയാളം
          * Malti
          * मराठी
          * مصرى
          * Bahasa Melayu
          * Монгол
          * Nederlands
          * नेपाली
          * 日本語
          * Нохчийн
          * Norsk
          * Norsk nynorsk
          * Occitan
          * ଓଡ଼ିଆ
          * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
          * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
          * پنجابی
          * Patois
          * Piemontèis
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Română
          * Runa Simi
          * Русиньскый
          * Русский
          * Sesotho
          * Shqip
          * සිංහල
          * Simple English
          * Slovenčina
          * Slovenščina
          * کوردی
          * Српски / srpski
          * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
          * Suomi
          * Svenska
          * Tagalog
          * தமிழ்
          * Татарча/tatarça
          * తెలుగు
          * ไทย
          * ತುಳು
          * Türkçe
          * Türkmençe
          * Українська
          * اردو
          * Tiếng Việt
          * Winaray
          * 吴语
          * ייִדיש
          * Yorùbá
          * 粵語
          * Zazaki
          * Žemaitėška
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 21:27 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

