

The Balance

CBO Report on Obamacare Costs, Savings and Impact on Economy

Menu Search

Go

Go

  * Investing
    * Basics 
    * Stocks 
    * Real Estate 
    * Value Investing 
    * View All 
  * Credit & Debt
    * Building Credit 
    * Credit Card Basics 
    * Reducing Debt 
    * Reports & Scores 
    * View All 
  * Retirement Planning
    * Basics 
    * 401(k) Plans 
    * IRAs 
    * Social Security 
    * View All 
  * Banking & Loans
    * Basics 
    * Best Savings Account Rates 
    * Getting a Loan 
    * Online Banking 
    * View All 

visit our other sites

US Economy

  * Fiscal Policy
  * Economic Theory
  * Supply
  * Demand
  * National Debt
  * Monetary Policy
  * Trade Policy
  * GDP and Growth
  * Inflation
  * U.S. Markets
  * World Economy
  * Economy Stats
  * Hot Topics
  * Glossary
  * All US Economy

US Economy Fiscal Policy

# CBO Report on Obamacare Costs, Savings and Impact on Economy

## Who Really Pays for Obamacare?

  * Share 
  * Pin 
  * Email 

![hospital administrators ehlp pay for

obamacare](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/C9tKMN0Pwk08_Yd_OMVYVhbkhyE=/300x200/filters:saturation\(0.2\):brightness\(10\):contrast\(5\):no_upscale\(\)/GettyImages-465389047-57b46c845f9b58b5c2b56cb6.jpg)

••• Photo: Steve Debenport/Getty Images

By Kimberly Amadeo

Updated June 07, 2019

The Congressional Budget Office analyzed the impact of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act of 2010 in March 2010. The CBO report covered both
laws that enacted the ACA. It examined the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (Public Law 111-148) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act (Public Law 111-152).

The CBO report said the ACA reduced the budget deficit by $143 billion between
2010 and 2019. Skeptics said a $940 billion program that expanded services
could not also save money.

But most of Obamacare's savings comes from making sure 95 percent of U.S.
citizens had health insurance. It reduced health care costs by making
preventive health care affordable for the 33 million who had no coverage. They
didn't have to wait until their illness became so critical that they used the
hospital emergency room as their primary care provider. That slowed the
increase in national health care costs for everyone.

Obamacare taxes and other fees also offset the cost of the program. Here's a
summary of all the ways the CBO estimated that the ACA saved money.

### Reduce Medicare Payments by $335 Billion

Every year, Medicare agrees on certain payment rates for covered services to
health care providers. These annual updates were reduced by 21 percent, saving
$196 billion. Hospital groups agreed to give up their portion of $155 billion.
They expected to make $170 billion by having to treat fewer uninsured
patients.

Another $136 billion was saved by reducing Medicare Advantage overpayments.
This private health plan covers one in five seniors. Medicare Advantage cost
13 percent more than traditional Medicare. Savings started in 2011.

### Charge Extra Fees to Drug Companies Net $107 Billion

Drug companies would be charged higher fees to help cover the "doughnut hole"
in Medicare Prescription Drug Part D benefits. Medicare only covered the first
$2,840 in prescription drug costs. Before Obamacare, the patient paid 100
percent up to $4,550, before Medicare coverage kicked in again. The ACA helped
cover the costs of the doughnut hole: $250 per patient in 2010, 50 percent in
2011, and 100 percent in 2020.

The extra drug company fees were projected to add $84.8 billion in revenue
over 10 years. They subsidized the cost of prescription drugs, saving Medicaid
$38 billion.

### Impose Excise Tax on High Premium Insurance Plans Add $32 Billion

In 2022, insurance companies will pay a 40 percent excise tax on so-called
"Cadillac" high-end health insurance plans. The tax was supposed to go into
effect in 2018. The Trump administration delayed it until 2022.

### Tax High-Income Families Add $210 Billion

Medicare taxes on income and capital gains were raised for 5 million high-
income families in 2013. That includes 1 million people who make more than
$200,000 and 4 million couples filing jointly who make more than $250,000.
They will pay 3.8 percent in Medicare taxes on dividends, capital gains, rent,
and royalties. They will also pay 2.35 percent in Medicare income taxes, up
from 1.45 percent.

### Tax Employers Add $65 Billion

Employers with more than 50 employees must provide health insurance.
Otherwise, they pay a tax of $2,000 per worker each year if any of them
receives federal subsidies to purchase health insurance. Individuals must buy
coverage or face an additional tax fine. That started in 2015.

### Education Savings of $19 Billion

The ACA eliminated Sallie Mae as the middleman administering federal funding
for student loans. Instead, the Department of Education lends directly to
students. Since then, the number of loans owned by the federal government
quadrupled. There were enough savings to boost the Pell Grant program by $36
billion.

### March 2012 Update

In March 2012, the CBO issued an update that showed the ACA would cost $50
billion less than initially thought. The CBO was looking at 2012 through 2021,
a 10-year period that was two years out from the initial analysis. The revenue
from the ACA increases over time, outweighing any further costs.

### Effect of Supreme Court Decision

On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court upheld most of the ACA. It allowed states
to reject federal funds to expand Medicaid to include more low-income
residents. As a result, the CBO estimated that 3 million fewer people would
have insurance. That saved $84 billion between 2012 and 2022.

For more on who really pays for Obamacare, see my book "The Ultimate Obamacare
Handbook."

Continue Reading

+

  * ![Obamacare costs](//:0)

#### Find Out How Much Obamacare Cost and Why It Doesn't Add to the Debt

  * ![Baby getting temperature taken under armpit](//:0)

#### How the Affordable Health Care Act Affects You

  * ![Whats wrong with obamacare](//:0)

#### 11 Challenges Presented by Obamacare

  * #### 10 Pros and Cons of Obamacare

  * ![obamacare helps newborn baby](//:0)

#### 10 Surprising Changes in the Affordable Care Act Itself

  * ![Doctor standing in front of a healthcare Clock](//:0)

#### A Timeline of How Obamacare Has Impacted Americans

  * ![Obama Healthcare Reform](//:0)

#### How Insurance Companies Changed Obama's Healthcare Reform Plan

  * ![Obamacare definition](//:0)

#### Obamacare in a Nutshell: The Basics You Need to Know

  * ![obamacare-health-clock](//:0)

#### It's Time for Obamacare: Are You Ready?

  * ![family-with-wheelchair](//:0)

#### What You Will and Won't Lose If Obamacare Is Replaced

  * ![obamacare](//:0)

#### How to Make Obamacare Work for You

  * ![emergency room professionals](//:0)

#### See for Yourself If Obamacare Increased Health Care Costs

  * ![The Truth About Obamacare](//:0)

#### 14 Obamacare Myths: What's the Truth Behind Them?

  * ![Doctor Discussing Medicine in His Clinic With a Patient](//:0)

#### Think Obamacare Doesn't Affect You? Think Again.

  * ![2-doctors-in-hospital](//:0)

#### 9 Obamacare Facts That You Don't Know

  * ![Happy female doctor and nurse discussing with male patient in clinic](//:0)

#### What You Really Need to Know About Obamacare

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

  * Investing
  * Credit & Debt
  * Retirement Planning
  * Banking & Loans

  * About Us

  * Advertise
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * Careers
  * Contact
  * Editorial Guidelines

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

  * Lifewire
  * ThoughtCo
  * TripSavvy
  * The Spruce
  * and more

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

