

_Toggle Menu_

![Peterson-Kaiser Health System

Tracker](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--mobile.png) ![Peterson-Kaiser Health

System Tracker](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo.png)

_Toggle Search_

Search:

__Search

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter

* * *

  * Health Spending
  * Quality of Care
  * Access & Affordability
  * Health & Wellbeing

  * Dashboard

  * Interactives
  * Video
  * About Us

* * *

  * Health Spending
  * Quality of Care
  * Access & Affordability
  * Health & Wellbeing

  * Dashboard

  * Interactives
  * Video
  * About Us

# How does health spending in the U.S. compare to other countries?

By Bradley Sawyer and Cynthia Cox _Kaiser Family Foundation_

Chart Collections

Health Spending

Posted: December 7, 2018

###### Share

  * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
  * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
  * 

1 / 8

View as Slideshow

* * *

This chart collection takes a look at how spending on healthcare in the United
States compares to other OECD countries that are similarly large and wealthy
(based on GDP and GDP per capita). The analysis looks at 2017 health data from
the OECD Health Statistics database and the National Health Expenditure
Accounts.

### Relative to the size of its wealth, the U.S. spends a disproportionate

amount on health care

* * *

As would be expected, wealthy countries like the U.S., tend to spend more per
person on health care and related expenses than lower income countries.
However, even as a high income country, the U.S. spends more per person on
health than comparable countries. Health spending per person in the U.S. was
$10,224 in 2017, which was 28% higher than Switzerland, the next highest per
capita spender.

### On average, other wealthy countries spend about half as much per person on

health than the U.S. spends

* * *

Comparing health spending in the U.S. to other countries is complicated, as
each country has unique political, economic, and social attributes that
contribute to its spending. Because health spending is closely associated with
a country’s wealth, the remaining charts compare the U.S. to similar OECD
countries – those that have above median national incomes (as measured by GDP)
and also have above median income per person. The average amount spent on
health per person in comparable countries ($5,280) is roughly half that of the
U.S. ($10,224).

### Since 1980, the gap has widened between U.S. health spending and that of

other countries

* * *

Over the past four decades, the difference between health spending as a share
of the economy in the U.S. and comparable OECD countries has widened. In 1970
the U.S. spent about 6% of its GDP on health, similar to spending by several
comparable countries (the average of comparably wealthy countries was 5% of
GDP in 1970). The U.S. was relatively on pace with other countries until the
1980s, when its health spending grew at a significantly faster rate relative
to its GDP. In 2017, the U.S. spent 17% of its GDP on health consumption,
whereas the next highest comparable country (Switzerland) devoted 12% of its
GDP.

### U.S. health spending growth was higher during the 1980s, but has been

similar since

* * *

While the U.S. has long had higher than average spending, growth rates have
become more in line with other countries. The 1980s saw accelerated growth in
health expenditures per capita in the U.S. The 10.1% average annual growth
rate in the U.S. during the 1980s was the highest among comparable countries.
The comparably wealthy countries saw an average of 7.0% annual growth during
this period. Since the 1990s, health spending has grown similarly in the U.S.
and comparable countries

### In recent years, health spending growth has slowed in the U.S. and in

comparable countries

* * *

Health spending growth in both the U.S and comparable countries has slowed in
recent years. In the 2005-2010 period, the U.S. saw a 4.3% average annual
growth rate compared to 7.2% the previous five year period. Comparable
countries also saw a drop to a 4.4% average annual growth rate during the
2010-2016 period, down from 5.3% on average in the 2005-2010 period.

### While the U.S. has similar public spending, its private sector spending is

triple that of comparable countries

* * *

While the U.S. has much higher total spending as a share of its economy, its
public expenditures alone are in line with other countries. In 2016, the US
spent about 8.5% of its GDP on health out of public funds –essentially
equivalent to the average of the other comparable countries. However, private
spending in the U.S. is much higher than any comparable country; 8.8% of GDP
in the U.S., compared to 2.7% on average for other nations.

### The U.S. has increased both public and private sector spending at a faster

rate than similar countries

* * *

Over the last three decades, the U.S. has seen increased spending by both the
public and private sectors. Comparable countries increased private sector
spending from 1.4% to 2.7% of GDP from 1970 to 2016, while the U.S. increased
private sector spending from 3.9% to 8.8% during the same period. In 2016, the
U.S. spent 8.5% of GDP on health through public funds, a rate similar to
comparable countries.

Spending Total Health Spending

#### Looking for More Data?

Find out more details about U.S. Healthcare from our updated dashboard.

Visit the Dashboard

###### A Partnership Of

![Peterson Center on Healthcare](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--pch.png) ![The Henry J. Kaiser Family

Foundation](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--hjkff.svg)

  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

