

# ![Center on Health Insurance Reforms](http://chirblog.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/11/cropped-CHIR-logo.jpg)

# Center on Health Insurance Reforms

## Blogging about health insurance coverage, insurance markets, and how people

are affected by insurance reform

![CHIRblog: health insurance coverage, insurance markets, and how people are

affected by insurance reform](http://chirblog.org/wp-

content/uploads/2012/08/chir-blog-well-style.png)

_Welcome to CHIRblog, a blog focused on health insurance coverage, insurance
markets, and how people are affected by insurance reform. Our experts share a
common mission: to improve access to affordable and adequate health insurance
for individuals, families, employees, and employers across the country._

Search the Blog

# The Affordable Care Act’s Requirements for Quality Improvement in the Health

Insurance Marketplaces: What Recent Federal Action Tells Us

Posted on January 7, 2015 by Sabrina Corlette

![Share via email](http://chirblog.org/wp-content/plugins/social-sharing-

toolkit/images/buttons/email.png)

![Share](//www.linksalpha.com/images/social_share_button.png)

This past summer we released a report for the Commonwealth Fund that evaluated
the efforts of the state-based marketplaces to implement the Affordable Care
Act’s (ACA) quality improvement provisions. We found that several states were
moving forward with quality-related initiatives, in spite of delayed action by
the federally facilitated marketplace (FFM).

Recent federal rulemaking suggests the FFM is – slowly but surely –
implementing the quality improvement requirements prescribed by the ACA. In
their latest rules and guidance, the FFM puts insurance companies on notice
that quality improvement standards, reporting requirements and rankings are
coming their way.

_Quality Improvement Strategy_

The ACA requires plans participating on the marketplaces to maintain a
“quality improvement strategy” designed to prevent hospital readmissions,
improve health outcomes, reduce health disparities and meet other quality
improvement goals. In their recent proposed Notice of Benefit and Payment
Parameters, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implement
this requirement with a focus on quality improvement strategies that are
grounded in “market-based” incentives that use value-based purchasing
concepts. The proposed rule also emphasizes the importance of aligning
insurers’ provider payment and quality improvement strategies with those
efforts already underway in the Medicare program and other public and private
sector payment reform initiatives. In explanation, CMS says: “We believe that
aligning…standards for quality improvement strategies in Exchanges with
existing initiatives will reinforce national health care quality priorities
while reducing the burden on health plans and stakeholders….”

CMS is proposing that insurers that have been participating in the
marketplaces for at least two years be required to implement the quality
improvement strategy. Beginning in the fall of 2016, insurers that
participated in one or more marketplaces in 2014 and 2015 will have to submit
a quality improvement plan to CMS, followed by annual progress updates.

While CMS is not specifying precise elements for insurers’ quality improvement
strategies, they indicate that they’ll be looking for strategies that link
provider payments to the quality and value of their performance.

_Data Collection and Quality Rankings_

The ACA and federal rules require insurers to collect and report data that
will support the development of quality rating scores for each of their plans
offered through the marketplace. In addition, they must contract with an
approved vendor to conduct enrollee satisfaction surveys. The FFM will use
this data to rate each participating plan through a 1- to 5-star rating scale
(similar to the 5-star rating scale used for Medicare Advantage plans).

While the FFM will collect quality and consumer satisfaction data in 2015,
consumers will not see the health plans rated until the open enrollment period
for the 2017 plan year (i.e., the fall of 2016). In its recent draft Letter to
Issuers for 2016, CMS notes that it will use the information it receives in
2015 for a “beta test” that will inform the rating system that consumers will
ultimately use to select a plan. (Note, however, that eight of the state-based
marketplaces moved forward with their own, state-specific star rating systems
in 2014. They are required to shift to the federally developed star rating
system in 2016).

_What does this mean for consumers?_

For years now, the action on quality improvement and payment reform has
largely come from initiatives in public coverage programs, such as Medicare,
complemented by a limited set of activities through a patchwork of large
employer purchasing coalitions. Drafters of the ACA envisioned that the health
insurance marketplaces, by aggregating the purchasing power of individuals and
small groups, could help extend these quality and payment reforms to the
private health insurance market – and thereby help drive broader delivery
system reforms. To date, however, the attention of marketplace officials has
rightly focused on critical operational functions, such as working eligibility
and enrollment systems. With just a few exceptions, quality improvement has
taken a back seat. Now that the second open enrollment season will draw to a
successful conclusion in just a few short weeks, the time is right for the
marketplaces – and their participating insurers – to step up their efforts to
deliver consumers better health care at a better price. The latest proposals
from CMS are a step in that direction.

### Related posts:

  1. Last Call for State-Based Health Insurance Marketplaces 
  2. Help for Consumers Who Faced Marketplace Glitches 
  3. CHIR Expert Sabrina Corlette Talks Marketplace Problems, Possible Solutions at Alliance for Health Reform Briefing 
  4. Relaxing the ACA’s Regulations: Stakeholders Respond to HHS’ Request for Information, Part 2 - State Departments of Insurance 

This entry was posted in Implementing the Affordable Care Act and tagged aca
implementation, affordable care act, enrollee satisfaction survey, federally
facilitated marketplace, qualified health plan, quality improvement, quality
rating system, state-based marketplace by Sabrina Corlette. Bookmark the
permalink.

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

### Post navigation

<- Previous Next ->

### About This Blog

  * About This Blog

### Recent Blog Posts

  * Coming up Short: The Problem with Counting Short-Term, Limited Duration Insurance as Coverage
  * Can States Fill the Gap if the Courts Overturn Preexisting-Condition Protections?
  * Most Stakeholders Oppose Expanding the Sale of Coverage Across State Lines: Reactions to HHS’ Request for Comments

### Categories

  * CHIR
  * Health reform
  * Implementing the Affordable Care Act
  * Real Stories, Real Reforms
  * State of the States

### Subscribe

![email subscription](http://chirblog.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/email-

icon.jpg)Email Updates

### Tags

ACA aca implementation affordable care act association health plans California
CCIIO certified application counselors CHIR Commonwealth Fund consumer
assistance consumers cost sharing reductions employer sponsored insurance
enrollment essential health benefits exchange federally facilitated exchange
federally facilitated marketplace guaranteed issue healthcare.gov health
insurance health insurance exchange health insurance marketplace in-person
assistance individual mandate lawmakers market reforms NAIC navigator
navigators network adequacy open enrollment out-of-pocket costs pre-existing
condition premium tax credits rate review regulators robert wood johnson
foundation short-term limited duration insurance short-term policy short term
limited duration special enrollment period state-based marketplace states
transparency

### Disclaimer

The opinions expressed here are solely those of the individual blog post
authors and do not represent the views of Georgetown University, the Center on
Health Insurance Reforms, any organization that the author is affiliated with,
or the opinions of any other author who publishes on this blog.

**Copyright (C)** Georgetown University • Privacy Notice • Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

