

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/default/files/_thumb_56366.png) Commonwealth Fund

## Utility Navigation

  * Newsroom
  * To the Point
  * Log in
  * Search

Search

Search

Affordable, quality health care. For everyone.

  * Topics 

    * Health Care Coverage and Access 
    * Health Care Delivery Reform 
    * International Health Policy Center 

    * ACA Repeal Debate 

    * Health System Performance and Costs 
    * Health Insurance Marketplaces 
    * High-Need, High-Cost Patients 
    * Health IT for Consumers 

    * Medicaid Expansion 

    * Medicare 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * State Health Policy and Medicaid 
    * Vulnerable Populations 

![Reference pricing for

pharmaceuticals](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/Reference%20pricing%20for%20pharmaceuticals_3x2.jpg?itok=ye1H2AAM)

Reference Pricing in Germany: Implications for U.S. Pharmaceutical Purchasing

February 4, 2019 | Issue Briefs

  * Publications & Data 

    * Issue Briefs & Reports 
    * Case Studies 
    * To the Point 

    * Charts 

    * Newsletters 
    * Explainers 
    * Journal Article Summaries 
    * Scorecards 

    * Surveys 

    * Infographics 
    * Maps and Interactives 
    * The Dose Podcast 

![state individual mandate action

map](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/State%20Individual%20Mandate%20Map_3x2.jpg?itok=akLupKxG)

What Is Your State Doing to Affect Access to Adequate Health Insurance?

May 30, 2019 | Maps and Interactives

  * Experts 

![David Blumenthal,

M.D.](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/David_Blumenthal_670x670.jpg?itok=LrqP-02k)

David Blumenthal, M.D.

President, The Commonwealth Fund

Expertise:

![Sara

Collins](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/Sara_Collins_15_1x1_0.jpg?itok=MSh4yFRr)

Sara R. Collins

Vice President, Health Care Coverage and Access, The Commonwealth Fund

Expertise:

Health Care Coverage and Access, Medicaid Expansion, Health Insurance
Marketplaces

![Melinda K.

Abrams](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/MKA_670x670.jpg?itok=3wlTx44e)

Melinda K. Abrams

Vice President and Director, Delivery System Reform, The Commonwealth Fund

Expertise:

Health Care Delivery Reform, High-Need, High-Cost Patients, Vulnerable
Populations

  * Grants & Fellowships 

    * Grants 
    * Fellowships 

    * Applicant Resources 

    * Grantee Resources 

    * Harkness Fellowships in Health Care Policy and Practice 

    * Association of Health Care Journalists Reporting Fellowships 

    * Commonwealth Fund Fellowships in Minority Health 

    * The Margaret E. Mahoney Fellowships 

![ 2018-2019 Harkness

Fellows](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/2018-19_HarknessFellows_Group_Steps_21x9.jpg?itok=606y2tFu)

Harkness Fellowships in Health Care Policy and Practice

  * About Us 

    * Newsroom 
    * Programs 

    * Annual Reports 

    * Staff Contact Information 
    * Foundation History 
    * Board of Directors 

    * Governance and Policies 

    * Privacy Policy 
    * Events 
    * Job Opportunities 
  * **Facebook**

  * **Twitter**
  * **LinkedIn**

## What's Trending:

Medicaid Work Requirements

High-Need, High-Cost Patient Personas

Non-ACA-Compliant Health Plans

# Paying for Prescription Drugs Around the World: Why Is the U.S. an Outlier?

October 5, 2017

Dana O. Sarnak,

David Squires,

and Shawn Bishop

![prescription drug prices in the

US](/sites/default/files/styles/cmwf_content_hero/public/images/___media_upload_medications_prescription_drug_prices_is_in_the_united_states.jpg?itok=RW2ooJrE)

## Share

Add to My Library

Print

## Toplines

Higher prices, and greater use of higher-priced drugs, make the U.S. an
outlier on prescription drug spending

Prescription drug spending in the U.S. far exceeds that in other high-income
countries

## Country

Netherlands, Switzerland, Germany, France, Canada, Australia, Norway

## Downloads

Chartpack (ppt)

Chartpack (pdf)

Issue Brief

### Abstract

  * **Issue:** Compared with other high-income countries, the United States spends the most per capita on prescription drugs.
  * **Goal:** To compare drug spending levels and trends in the U.S. and nine other high-income countries — Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom; consider potential explanations for higher U.S. spending; and explore patients’ exposure to pharmaceutical costs.
  * **Method:** Analysis of health data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the 2016 Commonwealth Fund International Health Policy Survey, and other sources.
  * **Findings and Conclusions:** Various factors contribute to high per capita drug spending in the U.S. While drug utilization appears to be similar in the U.S. and the nine other countries considered, the prices at which drugs are sold in the U.S. are substantially higher. These price differences appear to at least partly explain current and historical disparities in spending on pharmaceutical drugs. U.S. consumers face particularly high out-of-pocket costs, both because the U.S. has a large uninsured population and because cost-sharing requirements for those with coverage are more burdensome than in other countries. Most Americans support reducing pharmaceutical costs. International experience demonstrates that policies like universal health coverage, insurance benefit design that restricts out-of-pocket spending, and certain price control strategies, like centralized price negotiations, can be effective.

## Background

U.S. health care spending, per capita and as a percent of GDP, dwarfs that of
any other high-income country, and longitudinal trends reveal that the gap in
spending between the United States and the rest of the world continues to
grow. Understanding the components and drivers of health care spending is
important for policymakers, providers, and patients.

One important component of overall health care expenditures is the amount
spent on prescription drugs. This brief compares prescription drug spending in
the United States and nine other high-income countries: Australia, Canada,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom. We explore how three factors that determine drug spending — drug
utilization, the type and mix of drugs consumed, and the price of drugs —
differ across countries. We then examine how these costs are borne by patients
in these countries — in particular, the role insurance coverage and design
plays in protecting patients, and specifically vulnerable populations, from
the burdens of paying the ever-rising costs of pharmaceuticals.

## Findings

### Pharmaceutical Spending in the U.S. and Abroad

Prescription drug spending per capita is far higher in the United States than
in the nine other high-income countries considered (Exhibit 1). This was not
always the case. In the 1980s, several countries spent about the same amount
per capita as the U.S. But in the 1990s and early 2000s, spending on
prescription medications grew much more rapidly in the U.S. than in other
nations. The mid-1990s saw a decade of rapid pharmaceutical growth in all
countries, as annual numbers of FDA-approved drugs hit all-time highs, and
sales of hypertensive and cancer drugs boomed.1 In the U.S., this was
accompanied by expansions of coverage (including for prescription drugs) by
the federal government, through such programs as the Children’s Health
Insurance Program, Medicaid, and Medicare.

####

Add to ChartCart

In the mid-2000s, spending growth slowed in all 10 countries, as fewer
blockbuster drugs gained approval and many top-selling drugs, like Lipitor,
came off patent.2 This slowdown ended in striking fashion in 2014 and 2015, as
U.S. prescription spending spiked by approximately 20 percent over a period of
two years. This growth, like that experienced in the 1990s, was principally
because of the introduction of several expensive specialty drugs to treat
hepatitis C, cystic fibrosis, and other conditions.3 Also likely contributing
to this growth in the U.S. was the increase in health insurance coverage
following passage of the Affordable Care Act.

While prescription spending also rose in 2014 and 2015 in several other
countries (Germany, Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom), the
increases were not as large or abrupt as in the U.S.

The result is that by 2015, U.S. spending on pharmaceuticals exceeded $1,000
per person and was 30 percent to 190 percent higher than in the other nine
countries (Exhibit 2).

####

Add to ChartCart

However, _as a share of total national health expenditures_ (NHE),
prescription drug spending in the U.S. is not out of line with that in other
countries. In fact, it is in the middle of the range: retail prescription
drugs account for 10 percent of total NHE in the U.S., whereas in Norway they
account for 7 percent and in Canada for 15 percent (Exhibit 2). These numbers
represent conservative estimates, as they do not include spending on
pharmaceuticals consumed in other health care settings or in hospitals. If
this other spending were included, U.S. drug spending as a share of NHE would
be closer to 17 percent.4

### Explaining High U.S. Spending on Pharmaceuticals: Volume, Utilization,

Mix, and Prices

Four possible factors determine a country’s spending on pharmaceuticals:
country population and volume of drugs consumed, drug utilization per person,
type and mix of drugs consumed (e.g., generics versus brand-name drugs), and
prices at which drugs are sold.

While the United States has the largest population and the greatest absolute
prescription drug spending as a country, its spending per capita (shown in
Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2) is still significantly higher than that of other
countries. This higher per person spending is not because of its larger
population.

At the same time, The Commonwealth Fund’s 2016 International Health Policy
Survey suggests that per person prescription drug utilization in the U.S.,
while at the high end among high-income countries, is not an outlier.5 Forty-
seven percent to 60 percent of adults in all countries report taking one or
more prescription drugs regularly, and while the U.S. is at the upper end of
this range (59%), the differences may not be statistically significant. These
findings align with other research concluding that Americans consume similar
amounts of drugs as people do in other countries.6

The types of drugs consumed also influence pharmaceutical spending. In
general, generic drugs have a lower per-unit price than nongenerics. In the
U.S., generics make up 84 percent of the total pharmaceutical market (in terms
of utilization, not spending), a larger share than in all the other countries
except for the U.K. (Exhibit 3).

####

Add to ChartCart

That generics — which have been aggressively promoted over brand-name drugs by
payers and pharmaceutical benefit managers — make up such a large portion of
the U.S. pharmaceutical market may seem counterintuitive, given that the U.S.
spends more on pharmaceuticals than any other country. Further complicating
the picture are research findings that approximately 20 percent of U.S.
generics underwent a rapid price increase between 2010 and 2015.7 More
research is needed on how these markups affected overall U.S. pharmaceutical
spending.

Finally, we investigated whether and how drug prices contribute to high U.S.
spending. Comparing drug prices across countries is a complicated and
imperfect process, primarily because of the proprietary nature of the rebates
drug manufacturers offer different payers. In a 2013 analysis, researchers
attempting to account for these rebates created a retail price index for
pharmaceuticals, with the U.S. set at 100. Index values ranged from 95 in
Germany to 46 in the United Kingdom, reflecting that U.S. retail prices for
commonly prescribed drugs were 5 percent to 117 percent higher than prices in
the other six countries included in the study (Exhibit 4). The authors
suggested that the lower prices in these other countries reflected their more
centralized processes for procuring pharmaceuticals and determining coverage.8

####

Add to ChartCart

Another recent analysis from Bloomberg compared the prices of six top-selling
drugs across countries (Exhibit 5).9 Though these drugs’ higher prices may not
be representative of all brand-name drugs, they suggest that — even after
adjusting for the confidential discounts offered to U.S. health plans — prices
for many blockbuster drugs are markedly higher in the U.S. than elsewhere.
Further, this analysis does not include potential rebates negotiated in other
countries for payers (e.g., the government), and therefore may represent a
conservative analysis of the price differential compared with the U.S.10

####

Add to ChartCart

### Patients’ Exposure to Pharmaceutical Costs

Just as pharmaceutical spending differs across countries, the degree to which
patients are exposed to out-of-pocket costs varies. Cost exposure is
determined by the extent of insurance coverage among the country’s population
and by national standards (or a lack thereof) for insurance benefit design and
protections against high out-of-pocket costs for poor or sick patients
(Appendix).

In Norway, for example, copayments for pharmaceuticals can be more than $50
per prescription, though these charges are capped at approximately $260
annually. In contrast, the U.K.’s National Health Service requires little or
no patient cost-sharing.

Despite the differences among them, all countries do more than the U.S. does
to limit patients’ exposure to high out-of-pocket costs. While insured U.S.
patients often pay little or nothing for generic prescriptions, they can be
billed tens of thousands of dollars for certain high-priced medicines. Even
Medicare’s Part D prescription drug benefit has no out-of-pocket cap for
beneficiaries. Only a handful of U.S. states have passed legislation to limit
out-of-pocket spending for insurance sold within their borders; for example,
Maryland has a $150 monthly cap for specialty-tier drugs.11

In a 2016 international survey of adults, 14 percent of insured Americans
reported that, in the past year, they did not fill a prescription or skipped
doses of medicine because of the cost, compared with 2 percent in the U.K. and
10 percent in Canada, the nation with the highest rate after the U.S. (Exhibit
6).12 Among Americans without continuous insurance coverage over the past
year, the rate was twice as high: one-third reported they did not fill a
prescription for medicine, or skipped doses of medicine, because of the cost.

####

Add to ChartCart

For patients with chronic conditions, cost barriers are particularly
detrimental, as they can undermine adherence to highly effective medication
regimens.13 The 2016 survey found that, in most countries, patients with two
or more chronic conditions were significantly more likely to skip medications
because of costs than were healthier patients, with one-fourth of chronically
ill adults in the U.S. reporting such a problem (Exhibit 7). Notably, the only
countries where such patients were not significantly more likely to report
cost barriers to prescription drugs were France, Germany, and the U.K. —
countries that have instituted protections to reduce out-of-pocket charges for
their chronically ill populations.

####

Add to ChartCart

The Affordable Care Act, however, implemented significant reforms to improve
the affordability of health care, including prescription drugs. Most notable
were the insurance coverage expansions, through which more than 20 million
low- and middle-income Americans gained coverage. Data from the Commonwealth
Fund’s Biennial Health Insurance Surveys show that the percentage of low-
income adults who reported not taking a prescribed drug because of the cost
declined to 24 percent in 2016 from 39 percent in 2010 (Exhibit 8).

####

Add to ChartCart

## Discussion: The Primacy of Price

Spending on prescription drugs in the U.S. far exceeds that in nine other
high-income countries, a phenomenon that appears to be principally explained
by the higher prices U.S. purchasers and consumers pay. Americans are more
likely than their counterparts to bear this financial burden out-of-pocket —
both because the U.S. is the only country among those studied with a large
uninsured population, and because even Americans with insurance tend to have
less protective benefits than people in other countries.

The importance of price in explaining high U.S. pharmaceutical spending is
made apparent when we examine historical trends. The two eras when drug
spending growth in the U.S. broke away from that in other high-income
countries (the 1990s and 2014–15) took place when blockbuster drugs were
hitting markets all over the world. Given that the U.S. generally pays higher
prices for on-patent drugs, this influx may have caused its spending to
rapidly outstrip that in other countries.

One reason U.S. prescription drug prices are higher may be the relative lack
of price control strategies. Unlike the U.S., many other countries employ
centralized price negotiations, national formularies, and comparative and
cost-effectiveness research for determining price ceilings.14 In the U.S.,
health care delivery and payment are fragmented, with numerous, separate
negotiations between drug manufacturers and payers and complex arrangements
for various federal and state health programs.15 And, in general, the U.S.
allows wider latitude for monopoly pricing of brand-name drugs than other
countries are willing to accept.

Recent opinion polls have found that large majorities of Americans believe the
government should be doing more to reduce the cost of prescription drugs.16
Ninety-two percent of U.S. adults favor letting the federal government
negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries. Such a reform would
mark a significant shift in U.S. policy toward the more centralized pricing
determinations used in other high-income countries. Currently, the Veterans
Health Administration and the Department of Defense are the only federal
entities allowed to effectively negotiate directly with drug manufacturers;
they pay prices that are roughly half of those paid at retail pharmacies.17

Granting Medicare — which finances well over a quarter of prescription
expenditures — the properly designed authority to negotiate drug prices could
help reduce costs for beneficiaries.18 Doing so could also potentially bring
prices closer to those in other high-income countries. But given the maze of
public and private payers in the U.S. health system, bringing down drug prices
for all Americans will most likely require a suite of market-based and
government-led pricing reforms.

The more moderate spending trends in the other nine countries also may reflect
policies that result in new drugs and medical technologies being adopted more
gradually.19 Other countries generally assess not just whether a new drug is
effective, but whether it is more effective than existing therapies — and, in
some cases, whether it is cost-effective. Thus, while U.S. per-person drug
utilization may be similar to that in other high-income countries, new
research indicates that the mix of drugs Americans consume includes a higher
proportion of newer, more expensive medications — yet with no evidence of
better health outcomes.

It is crucial to note that America’s higher spending on prescription drugs
(and the higher prices Americans pay) does not necessarily mean the spending
is wasteful. A larger, more profitable pharmaceutical sector may attract
investments resulting in more innovative and effective drugs in the future.
For this reason, policymakers who wish to reduce America’s prescription drug
bill need to weigh, on the broader merits, the pros and cons of different
cost-control policies.

Since implementation of the Affordable Care Act’s insurance expansions, there
has been a clear improvement in access to pharmaceuticals and other health
care services in the United States, the only one of the 10 countries in our
study that lacks universal health coverage. Still, cost barriers remain far
too common, especially for those Americans still without coverage. As
policymakers and the public debate the future of the ACA, the goal should be
to improve on the country’s recent gains, rather than to further restrict
access to prescription drugs based on ability to pay.

### Methods

The data in this issue brief are drawn from a variety of sources on
pharmaceutical spending in high-income, industrialized countries. Generally,
the analysis seeks to provide a comprehensive yet targeted overview of
pharmaceutical spending trends in a set of countries using varied but
symbiotic data.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) annually
tracks and reports on a wide range of health system measures across 34 high-
income countries, from population health status to health care spending and
utilization. The pharmaceutical spending analyses shown in Exhibits 1 and 2
examined OECD health data released in 2017 for 10 countries: Australia,
Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. These exhibits present OECD data for
the year 2015 or, if not available, for 2014. All currency amounts are listed
in U.S. dollars (USD) and adjusted for national differences in cost of living.
Total pharmaceutical spending refers in most countries to “net” spending,
i.e., adjusted for possible rebates payable by manufacturers, wholesalers, or
pharmacies. Data from all countries include only the portion spent on retail
prescription medicines except for the data from the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, which include prescribed medicines, over-the-counter medications, and
other medical nondurable goods, as the disaggregated data were not available.
Pharmaceuticals consumed in hospitals and other health care settings are
excluded.

The share of generics in pharmaceutical markets analysis shown in Exhibit 3
utilized 2016 OECD health data for ten countries: Australia, Canada, France,
Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States (data not available for Sweden). This exhibit presents OECD data for
the year 2014 or for the most recent year available (2013 in Canada and
France, 2012 in the U.S., and 2007 in Australia).

Data in Exhibit 4 come from an analysis by Kanavos and colleagues (2013) on
branded drug prices and spending, originally published in Health Affairs for
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Switzerland, the U.K., and the U.S. The
other three countries were not included in the article and therefore excluded
from Exhibit 4.

Data in Exhibit 5 are from a Bloomberg analysis (2015) that compared prices of
eight brand-name drugs in the U.S. and other countries, which includes both
the U.S. list price for the drug as well as an approximate U.S. price after
discounts.

Exhibits 6, 7, and 8 present data from Commonwealth Fund surveys: the 2016
Commonwealth Fund International Health Policy Survey of Adults in 11
Countries, and the 2003–2016 Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance
Surveys.

* * *

####

### Notes

1 S. Morgan, C. Cunningham, and M. Law, _Changes, Challenges, and Innovations
in Pharmaceutical Expenditure Management,_ presented at Commonwealth Fund
International Symposium on Health Care Policy, Nov. 2011.

2 M. Aitken, E. R. Berndt, and D. M. Cutler, “Prescription Drug Spending
Trends in the United States: Looking Beyond the Turning Point,” _Health
Affairs,_ Jan.–Feb. 2009 28(1):w151–w160.

3 C. Roehrig, “The Impact of New Hepatitis C Drugs on National Health
Spending,” _Health Affairs Blog,_ Dec. 7, 2015.

4 Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, _Observations
on Trends in Prescription Drug Spending_ (ASPE, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, March 8, 2016).

5 R. Osborn, D. Squires, M. M. Doty, D. O. Sarnak, and E. C. Schneider, “In
New Survey of 11 Countries, U.S. Adults Still Struggle with Access to and
Affordability of Health Care,” _Health Affairs_ Web First, published online
Nov. 16, 2016.

6 P. O’Neill and J. Sussex, _International Comparison of Medicines Usage:
Quantitative Analysis_ (Office for Health Economics, Association of the
British Pharmaceutical Industry, 2014).

7 U.S. Government Accountability Office, _Part D Generic Drug Prices Declined
Overall, But Some Had Extraordinary Price Increases,_ GAO-16-706 (GAO, Aug.
12, 2016).

8 P. Kanavos, A. Ferrario, S. Vandoros et al., “Higher U.S. Branded Drug
Prices and Spending Compared to Other Countries May Stem Partly from Quick
Uptake of New Drugs,” _Health Affairs,_ April 2013 32(4):753–61.

9 R. Langreth, B. Migliozzi, and K. Gokhale, “The U.S. Pays a Lot More for Top
Drugs Than Other Countries,” _Bloomberg,_ Dec. 18, 2015.

10 S. G. Morgan, S. Vogler, and A. K. Wagner, “Payers’ Experiences with
Confidential Pharmaceutical Price Discounts: A Survey of Public and Statutory
Health Systems in North America, Europe, and Australasia,” _Health Policy,_
April 2017 121(4):354–62.

11 S. Corlette, A. Williams, and J. Giovannelli, “State Efforts to Reduce
Consumers’ Cost-Sharing for Prescription Drugs,” _To the Point,_ The
Commonwealth Fund, Nov. 16, 2015.

12 R. Osborn, D. Squires, M. M. Doty, D. O. Sarnak, and E. C. Schneider, “In
New Survey of 11 Countries, U.S. Adults Still Struggle with Access to and
Affordability of Health Care,” _Health Affairs_ Web First, published online
Nov. 16, 2016.

13 D. P. Goldman, G. F. Joyce, and Y. Zheng, “Prescription Drug Cost Sharing:
Associations with Medication and Medical Utilization and Spending and Health,”
_Journal of the American Medical Association,_ July 4, 2007 298(1):61–69.

14 World Health Organization, _WHO Guideline on Country Pharmaceutical Pricing
Policies_ (WHO, 2015).

15 D. Blumenthal and D. Squires, “Drug Price Control: How Some Government
Programs Do It,” _To the Point,_ The Commonwealth Fund, May 10, 2016.

16 A. Kirzinger, B. DiJulio, E. Sugarman et al., _Kaiser Health Tracking Poll
— Late April 2017: The Future of the ACA and Health Care & the Budget_ (Henry
J. Kaiser Family Foundation, April 2017).

17 D. Blumenthal and D. Squires, “Drug Price Control: How Some Government
Programs Do It,” _To the Point,_ The Commonwealth Fund, May 10, 2016; and
Congressional Budget Office, _Comparing the Costs of the Veterans’ Health Care
System with Private-Sector Costs_ (CBO, Dec. 2014).

18 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure
Accounts, https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html.

19 M. Kyle and H. L. Williams, _Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient?
Evidence from Prescription Drugs_ _,_ NBER Working Paper No. 23068 (National
Bureau of Economic Research, Jan. 2017).

## The Commonwealth Fund Recommends

![](/themes/custom/primary_bootstrap/img/default-list-img.png)

Households with employer coverage can spend thousands of dollars on premiums
and out-of-pocket costs

May 23, 2019 | Chart

![Household figures out budget due to health care

costs](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/Household-figures-out-

budget-due-to-health-care-costs_3x2.jpg?itok=j0HlPEi8)

How Much U.S. Households with Employer Insurance Spend on Premiums and Out-of-
Pocket Costs: A State-by-State Look

May 23, 2019 | Issue Briefs

![Choosing Wisely Recommendation

1](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/CW_case_cards_3x2_rec1.jpg?itok=Ix5LCZwl)

Don’t Do Imaging for Low-Back Pain Within the First Six Weeks, Unless Red
Flags Are Present

May 16, 2019 | Case Study

![Choosing Wisely: The Harms of Overuse in Health

Care](/sites/default/files/styles/3_2_promo/public/choosingwisely_ig_3x2.jpg?itok=wcR1Gsgx)

Choosing Wisely: The Harms of Overuse in Health Care

May 13, 2019 | Infographic

## Publication Details

Publication Date: October 5, 2017

Author: Dana O. Sarnak, David Squires, Shawn Bishop

Contact: Shawn Bishop, Former Vice President, Controlling Health Care Costs
and Advancing Medicare, The Commonwealth Fund

Editor: Deborah Lorber

Citation:

D. O. Sarnak, D. Squires, G. Kuzmak, and S. Bishop, _Paying for Prescription
Drugs Around the World: Why Is the U.S. an Outlier?_ The Commonwealth Fund,
October 2017.

Topics

International Health Policy Center

Health System Performance and Costs

Prescription Drugs

## Tags

Health Spending, International Health Policy

## Experts

![](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/people/Dana_O__Sarnak.jpg?itok=z3mhFPP7)

## Dana O. Sarnak

Former Senior Research Associate, International Program in Health Policy and
Practice Innovations, The Commonwealth Fund

![](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/people/David_Squires.jpg?itok=0bLD6k7f)

## David Squires

Former Senior Researcher to the President, The Commonwealth Fund

![Shawn

Bishop](/sites/default/files/styles/bio_photo_thumb_160x160_/public/SMB_670x670.jpg?itok=K3kK7H25)

## Shawn Bishop

Former Vice President, Controlling Health Care Costs and Advancing Medicare,
The Commonwealth Fund

![Home](/sites/default/files/_thumb_56366.png)

## Footer menu

  * Topics
  * Publications
  * Grants and Fellowships
  * Experts
  * Newsroom
  * To The Point
  * About Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

### Headquarters

1 East 75th Street

New York, NY 10021 Map

### Washington, D.C. Office

1666 K Street, NW, Suite 1100

Washington, DC 20006 Map

  * info@cmwf.org
  * 212.606.3800
  * 212.606.3500

  * **Facebook**

  * **Twitter**
  * **LinkedIn**

© 2019 The Commonwealth Fund. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy

## Get the Latest Info

Sign up to receive e-alerts and newsletters on the health policy topic you
care about most.

Submit

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

