

![Up](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/themes/concept/images/smt/arrow-

up.png)

![Care for Your Mind](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/03/logo-t-01.png)

![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CGResourcesSS.png)

### CFYM News

Email Address

Preferred Format

  * HTML
  * Text

### Post Categories

  * Access to Treatment
  * Care Coordination
  * Care for Your Mind
  * Caregivers
  * Children's Mental Health
  * Health Care Plans
  * Health Insurance Plans
  * Maternal Mental Health
  * Medicare
  * Mental Health
  * Mental Health Parity
  * Mental Health Reform
  * Peer Support Services
  * Psychiatric Emergencies
  * Veterans
  * Workplace Issues
  * Young Adults

### Connect With Us

![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/plugins/social-

stickers/themes/somicro/facebook.png) ![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/plugins/social-stickers/themes/somicro/twitter.png)
![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/plugins/social-

stickers/themes/somicro/youtube.png) ![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/plugins/social-stickers/themes/somicro/rss.png)

### Facebook

# The Right to Treatment and the Right to Refuse Treatment

Posted in Access to Treatment | August 6, 2013 | 18 comments

###### **Lloyd I. Sederer, M.D.

Adjunct Professor, Columbia/Mailman School of Public Health  
Medical Editor for Mental Health, _Huffington Post_ /AOL**

All patients have both a right to treatment _and_ a right to refuse treatment.
These rights sometimes become the centerpiece of debate and dispute for people
who are hospitalized with an acute psychiatric illness.

**The Right to Treatment![sederer](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/uploads/2013/08/sederer-200x300.jpg)**

There is a long legal history on the right to treatment. Much of the law
derives from court cases in the previous century involving people who were
admitted to state psychiatric hospitals where they languished without proper
treatment, sometimes for many years. Laws compelling a right-to-treatment law
developed and became instrumental to the quality-controlled public psychiatric
hospitals that exist today. In fact, in order for public psychiatric hospitals
to receive Medicare and Medicaid (and other third-party) payment, they must
obtain the same national certification as academic medical centers and local
community hospitals. For patients and families, this means that a person
admitted to a public psychiatric hospital has a right to receive—and should
receive—the standard of care delivered in any accredited psychiatric setting.

**The Right to Refuse Treatment**

It may seem odd that a person can be involuntarily admitted, or “committed,”
to a hospital and then refuse treatment. But the right to _refuse_ treatment
is also fundamental to the legal requirements for psychiatric treatment.

Someone who enters a hospital _voluntarily_ and shows no imminent risk of
danger to self or others may express the right to refuse treatment by stating
he or she wants to leave the hospital. But a person admitted _involuntarily_ ,
due to danger to self or others, cannot leave, at least not right away.
However, despite having the authority to keep the patient in the hospital, the
professional staff cannot treat the person against his or her will, except by
court order.

The concept of a right to refuse treatment was built on basic rights to
privacy, equal protection under the law, and due process. In other words,
involuntarily hospitalized patients still have a right to decide what happens
to their bodies.

Unfortunately, the right to refuse treatment can, and does, result in some
patients being locked up in a hospital where doctors then cannot proceed with
treatment. What’s worse, and deeply ironic, is that insurance companies may
refuse to pay, stating there is “no active treatment.” This state of financial
affairs, by and large, does not happen in state psychiatric hospitals, which
represent the true safety net of services for people with serious and
persistent mental illnesses, because these hospitals are not wholly dependent
on insurance payment and cannot refuse to treat someone who cannot pay.

**Exceptions to the Rule**

There are exceptions to a patient’s right to refuse treatment. In an
emergency, all bets are off. A doctor may provide involuntary treatment,
usually a medication given by injection or by mouth, but only to control the
emergency—which, again, is defined as “an imminent danger to self or others.”
Whatever treatment is provided in an emergency cannot be continued after the
immediate danger has passed, unless the patient agrees and gives informed
consent. Clinicians cannot continue the medication, even if it could prevent
another emergency situation; the patient has the right to decide whether to
continue or not.

For involuntary treatment (treatment without consent) to be delivered outside
of an acute emergency, the doctor and hospital must petition a court to order
it. Laws vary from state to state and, of course, no two judges are alike.

Generally, judges rule in favor of well-prepared doctors and hospitals that
show that

  1. the treatment is necessary for safety and recovery;
  2. all efforts at voluntary treatment were exhausted;
  3. family and others were engaged to help persuade the patient to accept care (and were not successful); and
  4. the benefits of treatment are likely to outweigh its risks.

Inpatient stays often last several weeks (or months) longer if court-ordered
treatment is required. Notably, as clinicians have seen, once a court order is
obtained, almost all patients comply with treatment within a day or so, and
then, hopefully, proceed to respond to treatment.

**Solutions**

We need better solutions than coercion—whether it is involuntary commitment by
doctors (or courts) or involuntary treatment (ordered by courts). As I wrote
in the _Wall Street Journal_ earlier this year, “[g]ood intentions spawned
[laws that protect patient privacy], but in practice they can interfere with
or delay the delivery of necessary care and crucial communication between
caregivers and families [. . .] [L]aws are made to serve the people. Let 's
ask the families of people with serious mental illnesses what changes in law
and clinical practices could better help their family members.”

**What changes, if any, do you think will facilitate effective emergency care
for people with mental health conditions that impair their decision-making
abilities?**

**What do you think is the appropriate role of families and physicians in
treatment decisions?**

**Have you or a loved one created anadvance directive, a plan that designates
someone to make decisions in emergency situations when decision-making is
impaired? How can we encourage people with mood disorders and their mental
health providers to make advance planning a part of the treatment and recovery
process?**

### Facebook Comments

12 comments

![Livefyre](http://zor.fyre.co/wjs/v3.0/images/lf-logo.png)

  * Get Livefyre
  * FAQ

Sign in

  * Follow 

Post comment

Link

Newest | Oldest

![Husband of 30

years](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b995250f5752bba25fdbd026442b975d/?s=50&d=https://dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

Husband of 30 years 5pts

My wife and I have been married for almost 30 years. (We were married 10 days
before I went into the military). Just prior to our getting married, I found
out that a family member had abused her and she was NEVER offered treatment.
Worse yet, it likely happened to other family members and they eventually sent
my wife away like SHE had did something wrong. Other the next few years,
whenever we would have a conflict, I saw how angry she really was. I have
often tried to get her into a treatment program. A few years ago, I also
noticed, as she approached her mid-40's, every "month" became worse. We soon
found out that she has a tumor inside of her uterus. From her other symptoms,
she also is in the middle of either peri-menopause or beginning full blown
menopause. Last Saturday we had the most romantic day and evening that we have
had in months. (We renewed our wedding vows in April and we were both so
happy). After a early night of passion, she went to take her sleeping pills
she has been on for 3-5 years, and for some reason, she took more that she
should have. After watching her for about 20 minutes, I tried to get her to
vomit up and then I noticed her pupils were not reacting with the light. I was
really afraid that her breathing may stop, so I had no choice but to call 911.
When we got to the hospital, the gave her a shot of Narcan, and she
immediately became VERY agitated They had already cathed her but she was
yellow that she had to use the bathroom. She knew I was there and she was
asking me to get them off of her. I just tried to reassure her. Eventually,
they took her up to ICU as they do not have a psych ward. I did not see her
for the first day, but sat up waited for 36 hours in the waiting room. When
she finally was alert enough she called for me. She told me that "They said
she tried to kill herself" although she swears she does not remember it.
Secondly, they had her sign papers that were going to send her over 100 miles
away. Now we both have Sweeping Medical Power Of Attorneys. As I stated, I
have known her for over 30 years and she has NEVER, E-V-E-R attempted to hurt
herself or me, or our children in any way, shape, or form. During the 3rd day
at our local hospital, she told me that she had asked for a shower, or a
sponge bath, and the day shift would not respond to her. I did not try to talk
to them because they all stayed behind the nurses station on the computer and
did not seem to want to be bothered. My wife then told me that the day before,
a case worker from MHMR asked if she was ready to go home with me, or did she
want to go to her mom's. At this point, she was still completely out of from
the medications, so I do not think ANY form she would have signed would be
legal or any decision she made would be legal either. When I found out that
she had not been allowed to wash her face or sponge bath, I went to speak to
the Administrator's Office. The Assistant Administrator when in to see what
was going on. During this time our 14 year old daughter was with my wife
visiting. The next thing I knew, an off duty sheriff's officer told me that I
had to leave the hospital! I asked him why, and he stated that "I was making
the nursing staff nervous!" I tried explaining to him that I had not even
spoken with one of the nurses or aids and was just trying to ensure my wife
was being taking care of. The next thing I know, my wife calls me and says
they are taking her to a town 70 miles away by police car to a different
facility!

I had worked for this hospital system and knew Executive Officers. I beat them
down there and the were COMPLETELY different. My problem now is that people
that were involuntary admitted after her have already been released. The
doctor she sees once a day at 7:00 a.m. for 4 minutes is concerned about her
blood pressure being too high. I asked her if she had mentioned that the
generic version does this to her (as it did it to my Dad), and ALL she wants
is to come home. I have removed ALL prescription medication from our home, and
also asked if she had told the doctor about her monthly cycle problems and her
peri-menopause, however, I believe he is scared ANYTHNG she says will add days
to her being there. We have already decided to keep going to outpatient
treatment, and to deal with the issues from her childhood. She home schools
our 14 year old and We need her at home. I love her with ALL my heart and if I
thought she was dangerous to herself or others, I would be the first to admit
her back. I just cannot see other people that were worse that he already have
been discharged home and I cannot get my oving wife who has went to EVERY
activity and EVERY session and participated fully. Can someone PLEASE HELP
ME????!

![no

one](http://gravatar.com/avatar/49c319557155acc04a6f62a911943982/?s=50&d=https%3A//dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

no one 5pts

I could not walk for a month, random shaking like epilepsy but was not that,
weakness, dizziness, was sent for an mri for tumor in spine, refused to go, i
have no insurance, been told i can not be a burden on the goverment in any
way, will not get the that'll do service and left in a Coronado so waiting to
see what happens next, the usa systme for insurance is a joke, since when has
lives been worth money, if i die, hat ever, dont care any more, usa is nothing
but dictators bullying people for money and they DO NOT care about life, as
for me, hope what ever happens, happens soon, lost the will

![flower01](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c13302cb869451f98f0487e15b87db74/?s=50&d=https://dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

flower01 5pts

if money is paid to take care of a patient and the patient died without being
treated will your money be given back?

![entry

mats](http://gravatar.com/avatar/98cf45d8ad728f5e93da66ec0f37da40/?s=50&d=https%3A//dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

entry mats 5pts

Where is the state intervention?  
If a shopping-center arrests you for shoplifting, and lock you in their
security-room, the police will just come out and free you, if there's no
probable cause.

![logo

mats](http://gravatar.com/avatar/18dc520ac80bf46a45a385aaa08fcdf6/?s=50&d=https%3A//dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

logo mats 5pts

To consent to or refuse treatment, you must have the capacity to make that
decision. Capacity means the ability to use and understand information to make
a decision.

Under the terms of the Mental Capacity Act 2005, all adults are presumed to
have sufficient capacity to decide on their own medical treatment, unless
there is significant evidence to suggest otherwise.

![Rosemarie

Boyd](http://gravatar.com/avatar/2362f61d32c194bd7559b2b50899595e/?s=50&d=https%3A//dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

Rosemarie Boyd 5pts

I was involuntarily committed to a psych ward because I ticked off a
policeman.He told me I was going to learn not to give him a rough time. The
blood drawn in the ER proved I had no illegal drugs in my system or overdose
of any kind. So he then told them he saw a gun in my lap. Poof, I was
committed. I do have PTSD from spousal abuse etc. I am fearful of men. I did
emotionally blackout during some of the policemans roughing me up. The psych
ward was scarey. They not only had psych patients but also a rapist who was
thrown out of his nursing home and couldn't find any where to live. He would
actually get interviews on the ward with other homes. Since the suicide theory
was shot down they tried to prove I was paranoid as I had told them about my
ex stalking me. They called the daughter I had lived with and she confirmed
every story I had told them. Then they tried to prove I was delusional as I
had told them I was a national recognized psychic. Once again my daughter was
called to confirm. I found that ridiculous as all they had to do was search
the Internet and they would have pulled up the tv and radio shows I have done
and the book I was written about in. At the hearing I had after 3 days they
decided to keep me up to another 5 days. This was because I was told not to
say any thing but my name. But when they started to list what the police said
about me etc I stood up for myself. Even when it was my time to speak. The
"judge" kept saying "you're not helping yourself". This was held in the staff
lunchroom of the psych ward. I was released early as having a psycosis. I
think the fact that I finally told the nurses that if the rapist made one more
pass at me I was going to start kicking "nuts" might be what did it.

Because of this incident I have been treated as a mental patient since. I was
then diagnosed with malabsorbtion syndrome which includes pernicious anemia
and vitamin B12 deficiency. They called my daughter to try and get me back
into the psych ward stating that since I was married 3 times I must have a
mental problem.

I've now been diagnosed with osteoporosis, stenosis, arthritis in the spine,
pinched nerves, 1 disk is herniating, one disk has slipped and is overlapping
another, 2 synovial cysts in my spine, arthritis and joint degeneration in
both my knees. I have been refused any painkillers because of "mental
conditions" and arthritis meds because of my blood problems. My hematologist
upon my discharge wrote I was to be continued on hydrocodone. They refuse. But
she was the one who wanted me off the arthritis medicine which they did comply
with.

My point is that you do not really need to be mentally ill. You just need to
be different. My level of pain has become unbearable. You see before I moved
here I had been in the care of a pain management clinic for 6 years. I had
provided all records for the last 3 years along with drug screens and
pharmaceutical records. I have decided to stop all medical supplementation
that keeps me alive by helping me to produce blood. I do not want to die, make
no mistake. But I can not live with this pain. I can not take care of myself
or my home.

I am a 62 year old woman. I bet you never guessed that.

![Guest](http://gravatar.com/avatar/97851f7219351a779a79c9cef9345ec3/?s=50&d=https%3A//lfavatar-a.akamaihd.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

Guest 5pts

When your chart carries a mental health diagnosis, good luck getting a second
opinion or having physical complaints addressed first. A patient shouldn't
have to undergo an involuntary commitment of arbitrary length for mistaking
anxiety for heart and/or circulatory trouble and seeking medical help. Getting
an ulcer diagnosed shouldn't depend on the time of day a patient seeks
treatment or the luck of the draw in emergency room physicians. Psych
evaluations should also be done by professionals with the presence of mind to
comb their hair when on call, if not actual physicians.

If psychiatrists are no longer willing or "able" to spend more than 15 minutes
per session with a patient, then they should be required to work in
conjunction with the patient's psychologist, or at least be checked by another
psychiatrist, especially in inpatient settings. The responsibility for
establishing trust shouldn't be solely the patient's burden, nor should
psychiatrists hide behind the fine print on pharmacy printouts.

Psychiatric facilities, however, do have astonishing speed in treating meth
addictions and suicide attempts in patients with little or no insurance; their
ability to induce depression with low staffing that restricts recreational
activities and specialized visitation for patients with adequate insurance is
also excellent. When seconds count, psychiatric hospital staff are just
minutes away . . .

![Jade](http://gravatar.com/avatar/dc67339ad02c774cc8ad0eb4902a7595/?s=50&d=https%3A//lfavatar-a.akamaihd.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

Jade 5pts

the issue is completely controversial even today. that story about the 17 year
old taken into custody and given chemotherapy for Hodgkin Lymphoma against her
will? it is wrong and a complete violation. so basically they said she had a
good chance of survival, 8/10. still a 20% chance she would die. So she wanted
alternatives, why in the world would they do that? it was her body and her
rights! chemo can cause more cancer! Anyone care to explain? to argue? Please
tell me what is real.

![DebbieBizal](http://avatars.fyre.co/a/1/9ad51f3c8139b407501aef50d89f0478/50.jpg?v=1406733118)

DebbieBizal 5pts

I requested a med to be DC'd in assisted living and they gave it anyway. They
said I did not ask for them to hold it. Since I asked for it to be DC'd they
gave it until they got the order. As a POA and family member I think they
should not of given the medication. Saying I wanted it DC''d would also mean I
wanted it held until they got the order.

![boudiceatx](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b7ba8b5d8babf1ced3053dc228a5568d/?s=50&d=https://dpstvy7p9whsy.cloudfront.net/a/anon/50.jpg)

boudiceatx 5pts

I looked into an advance directive but learned they are pretty worthless when
it comes to psychiatric treatment. First, in my state they can be overridden
in an emergency. That renders then worthless. Second, they are only in effect
for an involuntary hospitalization. So, all these so called "voluntary"
hospitalizations where patients were threatened into signing consent, well the
advance directive doesn't kick in here, even though many of these are really
involuntary hospitalizations as well. Third, in my state they are only good
for one year. Who is going to fill a new one out every single year? That's not
even logical. Fourth, you cannot opt out of hospitalization.

What we need are enforceable advance directives that enforce what psychiatric
patients want and/or do not want in an emergency. Currently, they don't do
that.

![Larry

Drain](http://gravatar.com/avatar/8792f236637d6db6a8a060693337bfe3/?s=50&d=http://avatars.fyre.co/a/anon/50.jpg)

Larry Drain 5pts

My view is expressed in the following quote from john grohol: “As a society,
we’ve shown time and time again that we cannot devise a system that won’t be
abused or used in ways that it was never intended. Judges simply don’t work as
check for forced treatment, because they don’t have any reasonable basis on
which to actually rest their judgment in the short time they’re given to make
a determination.

The power to force treatment — whether through the old-style commitment laws
or the new-style “assisted outpatient treatment” laws — cannot be trusted to
others to wield compassionately or as an option of last resort.

What should be good enough for the rest of medicine should be good enough for
mental health concerns. If an oncologist can’t force a cancer patient to
undergo life-saving chemotherapy, there’s little that can justify our use of
this type of power in psychiatry and mental health.”

larry drain

![Randikranz](http://gravatar.com/avatar/bb3ef30d7f27cfc5f3c9c3867c238089/?s=50&d=http://avatars.fyre.co/a/anon/50.jpg)

Randikranz 5pts

This is such a complicated issue. If a person isn't in their right mind it
would seem that he wouldn't be able to make a rational decision even after the
imminent danger to himself and others has passed. I am not a doctor but I
would think someone admitted against their will would go through a process of
coming to terms with hospitalization. It would almost than make sense to
determine a time period for treatment to continue to not only remove any
imminent danger but to stabilize the patient. This stabilization period would
have to be monitored by not only a doctor but an intermediary such as a peer
support specialist. It also seems that even if a patient refuses treatment
there should be manditory counseling required. Another matter that can confuse
this issue is that patients who most need care are those who cannot think
rationally. About ten years ago my mother was hospitalized. Her health was
severely compromised by the long term effects of uncared for diabetes. She
stopped eating after having a heart attack and losing kidney function. There
is a strong history of mental illness in her family but she had never been
treated. At that time, a psychiatrist was called in to talk to her. She said
she didn't want to talk to him and he left. He was paid by the insurance
company for a visit lasting three minutes. My mother passed about eight months
after that at the age of 62. There has to be some parameters created to get
treatment to those who cannot make decisions rationally and there has to be
some persistence on the doctors side to provide treatment.

### Trackbacks

  1. Self-tracking Pills? They are here to Serve like GPS - Ethiopian says:

October 16, 2015 at 3:21 PM

[…] not everyone's convinced that the ability to track pills will be good news
for patients. The right to refuse treatment is an important, fragile principle
in health care. Many are worried that tracking whether a pill is […]

  1. # 3: Pills that Track Inside Your Body - Highbrow Lowbrow says:

October 23, 2015 at 10:03 PM

[…] not everyone's convinced that the ability to track pills will be good news
for patients. The right to refuse treatment is an important, fragile principle
in health care. Many are worried that tracking whether a pill […]

  1. Involuntary Commitments | Neurology News Transmitters says:

June 21, 2017 at 8:59 AM

[…] An involuntary commitment, also known as a civil commitment, is a legal
process by which a person is deemed to have a mental illness and is court
ordered into recommended treatment. Historically, the mentally ill were
"institutionalized" with little consideration for their civil rights. But
these days, progress in the psychiatric field, especially since the 1960s, has
improved psychiatric practices and given patients more autonomy. In this
regard, respecting an essential civil rights protection in healthcare allows
individuals who believe they are not mentally ill to legally refuse treatment.
[…]

Tags: Families, hospitalization, involuntary hospitalization, patient rights,
right to refuse treatment, right to treatment, voluntary hospitalization

### Related Posts:

  * ![You Care, Help Share During Mental Health Awareness Month](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Caregiver-Education-is-Critical-graphic-150x150.jpg)

You Care, Help Share During Mental Health Awareness Month

  * ![Does Your Family Know Your Mental Health Care Preferences?](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Maybe-Hispanic-couple-with-clinician-150x103.jpg)

Does Your Family Know Your Mental Health Care Preferences?

  * ![Readers Reveal Thoughts about HIPAA Reform in Online Survey](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/oncomputer.jpg)

Readers Reveal Thoughts about HIPAA Reform in Online Survey

### Care for Your Mind

  * About CFYM
  * Learn About Mood Disorders
  * Personal Stories
  * Who We Are
  * Contact Us
  * Terms of Use & Privacy Statement
  * For Media

![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/fda_logo.png)

### Latest Post

  * 14  
May ![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Caregiver-

Education-is-Critical-graphic-150x150.jpg) You Care, Help Share During Mental
Health Awareness Month

**Families for Depression Awareness**

For Mental Health Awareness Month, Families for Depression Awareness has
launched #YouCareHelpShare, a campaign to provide education and encouragement
to family caregivers. Through the distribution of caregiver education
materials and a social media awareness campaign, we aim to help caregivers all
across the U.S. get the support, information, and resources they need to be
effective partners in care.

**The importance of caregivers**

Caregivers of people with depression or bipolar disorder play a crucial role
in their loved ones’ lives. Parents, spouses, siblings, and other close
connections are pivotal in recognizing a problem, accessing care, and lending
sup...

### Connect With Us

![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/plugins/social-

stickers/themes/somicro/facebook.png) ![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/plugins/social-stickers/themes/somicro/twitter.png)
![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/plugins/social-

stickers/themes/somicro/youtube.png) ![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-

content/plugins/social-stickers/themes/somicro/rss.png)

![](http://careforyourmind.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/MTM-CFYM.png)

Copyright (C) 2019 Care for Your Mind - The mood disorder advocacy blog

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

