
    
        * Billionaires
    
      * All Billionaires 
      * World's Billionaires 
      * Forbes 400 
      * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
      * China's Richest 
      * India's Richest 
      * Indonesia's Richest 
      * Korea's Richest 
      * Thailand's Richest 
      * Japan's Richest 
      * Australia's Richest 
      * Taiwan's Richest 
      * Singapore's Richest 
      * Philippines' Richest 
      * Hong Kong's Richest 
      * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation
    
      * All Innovation 
      * AI & Big Data 
      * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
      * Cloud 100 2018 
      * Consumer Tech 
      * Cybersecurity 
      * Enterprise & Cloud 
      * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
      * Games 
      * Green Tech 
      * Healthcare 
      * Oracle BrandVoice 
      * SAP BrandVoice 
      * Science 
      * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
      * Sharing Economy 
      * Social Media 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership
    
      * All Leadership 
      * Careers 
      * CMO Network 
      * Crowe BrandVoice 
      * Deloitte BrandVoice 
      * Diversity & Inclusion 
      * Education 
      * Entrepreneurs 
      * ForbesWomen 
      * Franchises 
      * Leadership Strategy 
      * Small Business 
      * Under 30 
      * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money
    
      * All Money 
      * Banking & Insurance 
      * Crypto & Blockchain 
      * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
      * Fintech 
      * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
      * Investing 
      * Markets 
      * Personal Finance 
      * Retirement 
      * Taxes 
      * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
      * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer
    
      * All Consumer 
      * Food & Drink 
      * Hollywood & Entertainment 
      * Media 
      * Real Estate 
      * Retail 
      * SportsMoney 
    * Industry
    
      * All Industry 
      * Aerospace & Defense 
      * Energy 
      * Flexport BrandVoice 
      * Manufacturing 
      * Policy 
      * Transportation 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle
    
      * All Lifestyle 
      * Arts 
      * Boats & Planes 
      * Capital One BrandVoice 
      * Cars & Bikes 
      * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
      * Dining & Drinking 
      * Forbes Travel Guide 
      * ForbesLife 
      * Watches & Jewelry 
      * Travel 
      * Vices 
    * BrandVoice
    
      * AppDynamics 
      * Capital One 
      * Cole Haan 
      * Crowe 
      * Deloitte 
      * ExtraHop 
      * Flexport 
      * Impact Partners 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
      * Oracle 
      * SAP 
      * ServiceNow 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor
    
      * All Advisor 
      * Credit Cards 
      * Personal Loans 
      * Brokerage 
      * Checking Accounts 
      * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured
    
      * 30 Under 30 2019 
      * Daily Dozen Briefing 
      * Forbes8 
      * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
      * Forbes Editors' Picks 
      * Forbes Finds 
      * Forbes Insights: AI 
      * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
      * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
      * Forbes Video 
      * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
      * Newsletters 
      * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
      * Tech MD 
      * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
    

# The Ugly Realities Of Socialized Medicine Are Not Going Away

![Sally

Pipes](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cf1f7690a1a155326e800ebd1861bd63?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Sally Pipes

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

I cover health policy as President of the Pacific Research Institute

    
        * Share to facebook __
    * Share to twitter __
    * Share to linkedin __
    

Image via Wikipedia

The worldwide recession has forced countries around the world to curb public
spending -- or risk defaulting on their debt.

The United Kingdom is the latest to tighten its belt. The National Health
Service (NHS) -- the centralized public agency that runs Britain's government
healthcare system -- is being forced to shave $31 billion from its budget by
2015.

These cuts are leading to a precipitous drop in the quality of care patients
receive. The NHS has been living well beyond its means for quite awhile. And
now brutal government-enforced cost controls are exacting a heavy human toll.

Thanks to Obamacare, America will soon face the same sort of reckoning.

Other nations with government-dominated healthcare systems offer a preview of
the fiscal woes and substandard care that lie ahead thanks to the president's
spendthrift reform plan.

In order to realize some savings, the NHS is raising the threshold at which
patients qualify for treatment and lengthening wait times for surgeries
determined "non-lifesaving." The Service is also cutting more than 20,000 NHS
jobs over the next two years and shuttering a number of hospitals.

Patients are feeling the pain. For decades, they've turned over substantial
portions of their hard-earned paychecks as taxes -- and accepted "free"

health care from the government in return. Only about 11 percent of Britons
pay for their care privately.

They've foregone cutting-edge medical treatments available in the United
States, told by their leaders that these new therapies were no better than the
old ones -- just more expensive. At least in Britain, they thought, everyone
has access to basic health care. That has to be better than the situation in
America, where tens of millions of people lack health insurance, right?

Hardly. The British healthcare system may "guarantee" access to care -- but
that doesn't mean patients actually receive it.

Take the case of David Evans, a 69-year-old farmer living in Cornwall, in
southwest England. About a year ago, he developed a hernia and needed an
operation. Despite government requirements that he receive treatment within 18
weeks of diagnosis, he still hasn't been treated.

Recently, he had to use his own ultrasound equipment -- typically used to
examine pregnant sheep -- to check the hernia himself and determine if it was
getting worse.

"I was in quite a lot of pain," explained Evans. "There will be many more
people like me who are suffering and are now being forced to wait quite a long
time."

The law furnishes all Britons -- Evans included -- with health insurance. But
he might as well not have coverage at all -- because he's certainly not
getting any care.

A report released in October by Britain's health regulator found that a
stunning 20 percent of hospitals were failing to provide the minimum standard
of care legally required for elderly patients.

As part of the study, inspectors dropped by dozens of hospitals unannounced.
They found patients shouting or banging on bedrails desperately trying to get
the attention of a nurse. At one hospital, inspectors identified bed-ridden
patients that hadn't been given water for over 10 hours.

The upcoming austerity measures will only amplify maladies like these.

The NHS is broken -- and not in some superficial way that a simple tweak would
fix. The incentives are wrong. The government's main priority is keeping costs
low -- not providing quality care. Patients can't choose how they receive
their care -- it's one-size-fits-all medicine. And the entrenched NHS
bureaucracy has no reason to improve efficiency.

The problems with "universal" health care aren't confined to Britain. Canada's
single-payer, government-run system -- where any private health care is
outlawed under the Canada Health Act -- is similarly failing its patients.

The Health Council of Canada recently surveyed over three thousand patients
and found that those with chronic illnesses like high blood pressure or heart
disease were largely dissatisfied with the medical care they received. Less
than half of respondents with such conditions reported that the care they
received was excellent or very good.

But aren't they getting it for free? Shouldn't they be grateful?

Not really. Despite the massive taxes Canadians remit to finance universal
care, they still must pay out of pocket for some services. Nearly a quarter of
chronically ill respondents said that they had skipped their medications or
neglected to fill a prescription because it was too expensive.

Further, many Canadians travel to the United States and pay out of pocket for
treatments and procedures, as they feel the wait in Canada is too long and
harmful to their health.

The American health system is far from perfect. But it's wrong to think that
government can fix it. The socialized systems found up North or across the
Atlantic are proof. We need more market forces in our medical sector -- not
more government controls.

_Sally C. Pipes is President, CEO, and Taube Fellow in Health Care Studies at
the Pacific Research Institute. Her next book --_ The Pipes Plan: The Top Ten
Ways to Dismantle and Replace Obamacare _(Regnery) -- will be released in
January 2012._

![uncaptioned](//img.zemanta.com/pixy.gif?x-id=de9ee2a1-c7a9-4bc9-a977-33c9418a5b8b)

![Sally

Pipes](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cf1f7690a1a155326e800ebd1861bd63?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Sally Pipes

Contributor

Sally C. Pipes is president, CEO, and Thomas W. Smith Fellow in Health Care
Policy at the Pacific Research Institute. Her latest book is The False Promise
of Single-Paye...

Read More

    
        * Print
    * Site Feedback
    * Tips
    * Corrections
    * Reprints & Permissions
    * Terms
    * Privacy
    * Â©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
    * AdChoices
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

