

Skip to main content

LinkedIn Twitter Facebook

Search

Enclose phrases in quotes. Use a + to require a term in results and - to
exclude terms.  
Example: +water -Europe

## Top Menu

    
        * Jobs
    * Resources
    * Webinars
    * Events
    * Subscribe
    

![Home](/themes/custom/tektite_fierce/assets/images/logo/logo-healthcare.svg)

![Questex](/themes/custom/tektite/assets/images/logo-questex.svg)

## Main navigation

    
        * Hospitals & Health Systems
    * Tech
    * Payer
    * Finance
    * Practices
    * Regulatory
    

## Main navigation - Mobile

    
        * Hospitals & Health Systems
    * Tech
    * Payer
    * Finance
    * Practices
    * Regulatory
    

##

Hospitals & Health Systems

# Hospitals spend big bucks on advertising. Here’s a look at the cost of 8 ad

campaigns

by Paige Minemyer |

Aug 27, 2018 7:35am

![](https://qtxasset.com/styles/breakpoint_sm_default_480px_w/s3/fiercehealthcare/1535379959/Screen%20Shot%202018-08-27%20at%2010.21.39%20AM.png?lMytnOqgFPD7e1Pg___L2BxKn4qtmG3P&itok=WvT2uSzR)

FierceHealthcare takes a look at eight advertising campaigns from big-name
hospitals and healthcare systems. Ascension Health's advertisement focused on
telling patients how easily its primary care offerings can fit into their busy
day-to-day lives. (Ascension)

Ascension Health wants patients to know how easily its primary care offerings
can fit into their busy day-to-day lives. Johns Hopkins Medicine is promoting
how hard they'll work to get patients in their orthopedic and sports medicine
programs back to normal activity quickly after treatment.

As the industry continues to focus on a consumer-centric care model, they are
among health systems increasingly trying to connect directly with patients
through TV spots highlighting what makes their services different. The message
from these health systems is clear: You have the power to choose, and you
should pick us.

Providers have recognized that patients have more room to make choices than in
the past, Mark Fratrik, senior vice president and chief economist for
advertising consulting firm BIA/Kelsey, told FierceHealthcare.

## Free Daily Newsletter

###

Like this story? Subscribe to FierceHealthcare!

The healthcare sector remains in flux as policy, regulation, technology and
trends shape the market. FierceHealthcare subscribers rely on our suite of
newsletters as their must-read source for the latest news, analysis and data
impacting their world. Sign up today to get healthcare news and updates
delivered to your inbox and read on the go.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

“Hospitals themselves are sort of trying to influence the consumer and their
decisions in terms of getting care,” Fratrik said. “Ten, 20 years ago ... you
went to the hospital your doctor told you to go to. There’s a little bit more
choice available with the internet.”

**RELATED:Slideshow—A look at the cost of 8 hospital ad campaigns**

Fratrik is one of the authors of a BIA/Kelsey report published last year that
tracks advertising spend in healthcare. Healthcare providers spent upwards of
$10 billion on advertising in 2017, and Fratrik said that figure isn't likely
to drop any time soon. The analysis projects healthcare organizations’
spending on ads will continue to grow at a rate of about 1.8% each year,
reaching $11.56 billion by 2021.

BIA/Kelsey will update its report this fall, but Fratrik said preliminary data
suggests that spending on marketing across a number of industries grew less
than researchers expected, due to cutbacks in industries such retail and
automobiles. Those cutbacks didn't extend to the healthcare sector, however.

**RELATED:Fundraising campaigns in the spotlight—St. Jude Children’s Research
Hospital was the top TV ad spender in April 2017**

The majority of that is in traditional forms of advertising—television spots,
direct mailers or newspaper ads—making for about $8.7 billion in 2017. But
interest in digital advertising is growing as more and more patients move
online, and expect providers to follow, Fratrik said. The group projects, for
example, that mobile ads will rival print newspaper ads by 2021, making for
5.8% compared to 7.3% amid a diminishing focus on traditional forms of
advertising.

The report estimates $2.1 billion in digital advertising spend for 2017, and
that could reach $2.9 billion by 2021.

The data also includes a look at how much hospitals are spending to draw in
new customers in some of the country’s largest metropolitan areas. In New
York, for example, hospitals spent $16.52 per capita on advertising, while in
Houston that figure reached $19.81 per capita.

To get a better picture of just how much hospitals are spending on certain
spots, FierceHealthcare compiled data provided by iSpot.tv, which tracks
advertising spend across a number of different industries. The map below
details a few case studies on ad spend.

**RELATED:Mayo Clinic’s new social media campaign highlights the patient
experience in patients’ own voices**

We looked at ads that some big-name providers aired in the last year. For
some, spend on certain clips was in the millions. iSpot TV calculates “media
spend” based on value of the ads and the air times they were on television,
but that may not necessarily indicate total dollar value spent, as airtime may
have been donated or discounted.

Advertising from healthcare companies has become the norm, Fratrik said,
though that hasn’t always been the case. As these groups throw more money at
advertising campaigns, consumers just get used to the idea, he said.

“It’s well-understood that health services are like any other type of product
or service that competes for more customers,” Fratrik said.

**Read more on**

Marketing Finance Consumer-Driven Healthcare Fierce Exclusive Research
Ascension Health Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Nationwide
Children's Hospital Shriners Hospital for Children MD Anderson Cancer Center
Johns Hopkins Cancer Treatment Centers of America City of Hope BIAKelsey Mark
Fratrik

#### Suggested Articles

![Humana building

](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercehealthcare/1560284477/Humna_building_0.jpg/Humna_building_0.jpg?ANzmbEsqQ1LxNhfnJdxWnhgCrKph9_Pq&itok=PfTD6bme)

Payer

## Humana to integrate real-time benefits check with Epic

Humana is teaming up with the largest electronic health record platform, Epic,
to boost payer-provider collaboration and data-sharing.

by Paige Minemyer Jun 11, 2019 4:19pm

![](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercehealthcare/1560280692/GettyImages-946399780.jpg?fHhvV7PB8jsYULFNiK5CUPHnKT9UTA_l&itok=-rXA_hhJ)

Payer

## South Carolina submits request for Medicaid work requirements

South Carolina is the latest state to seek permission to implement work
requirements in its Medicaid program.

by Paige Minemyer Jun 11, 2019 3:41pm

![Ascension](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercehealthcare/1560276838/ascension-

health-800x445.png/ascension-

health-800x445.png?l7g4.8ymPF6hHSfwWAqrdozvEIseovad&itok=iYmfGDSW)

Hospitals & Health Systems

## Ascension names new top leadership team

The St. Louis-based healthcare giant announced a handful of leadership changes
including a new CFO and COO.

by Tina Reed Jun 11, 2019 2:13pm

## About the Author

![Paige

Minemyer](https://qtxasset.com/field/image/Paige%20Minemyer_0.jpg?GeejTEbQuLkA0N4TtA8iMBwqz3FkUoMH)

Paige Minemyer

Senior Editor

[email protected]

https://twitter.com/fiercehealth

![](/themes/custom/tektite/assets/images/footer-questex.svg)

    
        * GENERAL
      * Home
      * Privacy
      * Terms of Use
      * RSS
    * CONTACT
      * Advertise
      * About Us
    * NEWSLETTERS
      * Subscribe
      * Manage Subscriptions
    * Connect
      *       *       * © 2019 Questex LLC. All rights reserved. 3 Speen Street, Suite 300, Framingham, MA 01701
    

Reproduction in whole or part is prohibited.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

