

drugcostfacts.org

Menu Home

## Search form

Search

## Key Questions

X

    
        * Are prescription drug costs out of control?
    * Why are some drugs so expensive?
    * How are prescription drug costs really determined?
    * Does increasing out-of-pocket spending reduce premiums?
    * Shouldn't the U.S. Government do more to regulate high drug prices?
    * How does the U.S. maintain its leadership in innovation?
    * How much do innovative new drugs impact overall health care costs?
    * What role does private sector R&D play compared to NIH?
    * Follow the debate...
    
    * See all questions
    * Advocate Toolkit
    * Follow the Debate
    

# Are prescription drug costs out of control?

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

News stories frequently suggest that prescription drug costs are
“skyrocketing.” But the reality that’s reflected across the country is quite
different than the one portrayed in most media reports, which typically focus
on isolated examples.

In fact, prescription drugs costs — both the prices for drugs and how much
money society spends on medicines — have been remarkably stable in recent
years. Starting with spending on prescription drugs:

    
        * According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services or CMS, national spending on retail prescription drugs grew just 0.4% percent in 2017. The growth in drug spending was slower than the spending growth for hospital services (4.6%), physician services (4.2%) and overall health care expenditures (3.8%).i
    * IQVIA — a nonpartisan health care data analytics firm— reports that national spending on all prescription drugs increased less than 1 percent in 2017. Additionally, they note that spending on retail and mail-order pharmacies decreased by 2.1 percent.ii
    

A similar trend exists when it comes drug prices.

    
        * The same report by IQVIA found that the average net price for brand-name drugs grew less than 2 percent in 2017. The net price is after factoring in discounts and rebates offered by drugmakers, which in 2017, reached an estimated $153 billion.iii
    

The data clearly show that the trend on prescription drug costs is not as dire
as some argue. This positive trend also been reaffirmed by pharmacy benefits
managers (PBMs). These drug cost middlemen manage drug benefits on behalf of
health plans, and some of the nation’s leading PBMs have reported very little
change in drug prices for commercial health plans in 2017.iv

    
        * One of the largest PBMs—Express Scripts—recently reported that net drug prices dropped by 0.4% in 2018 for the commercial health plans it services. Express Scripts also announced the drug prices for the Medicare plans it services declined by 1.4% last year.v
    

![](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/styles/question_illustration/public/By-

the-number-charts-4_updated-06112019.png?itok=y0wHeBgw)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Share

## Where are most health care dollars spent?

Hospitals are by far the largest single share, at about 30 percent of all U.S.
healthcare spending, or more than $1 trillion annually. Physicians and
clinical services are another 18 percent, while other services (such as home
health care and nursing care facilities) together make up just over a third of
all health care spending.

On the other hand, prescription medicines comprise just 14 percent of all
health care spending,vi which is roughly the same share as in 1960. That is a
remarkable fact considering that more than 450 new medicines have been brought
to market over the past 15 years.

![](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/styles/question_illustration/public/By-

the-number-charts-5.jpg?itok=pm7RiYc5)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Share

The modest share of spending on prescriptions holds true even in very costly
to treat conditions. A report on cancer care, for example, found that
prescriptions accounted for just 12 percent of overall health costs for cancer
in 2014, while hospital inpatient stays account for 27 percent, and hospital
outpatient or office-based provider visits comprise 58 percent.vii

![](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/styles/question_illustration/public/By-

the-number-charts-1.jpg?itok=f-QdaLH0)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Share

As we look for ways to make health care more affordable, it is also important
to consider what are the driving forces behind future health care spending.
The answer is both payments to doctors and hospitals, which are expected to
grow by a combined $1.1 trillion over the next debate.viii

![](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/styles/question_illustration/public/By-

the-number-charts-Recovered-03132019.jpg?itok=oOIPqVsU)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Share

## How does U.S. spending on drugs compare to other developed countries?

Quite favorably. According to OECD statistics, U.S. spending on prescription
drugs is very similar to countries like Germany, France and Canada.

![](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/styles/question_illustration/public/By-

the-number-charts-3.jpg?itok=OacxAGSE)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Share

What we in the U.S. spend on medicines is not high or unsustainable, and there
is value in greater use of biopharmaceuticals instead of more expensive health
care services such as hospital stays, surgeries and nursing homes. A smarter
health care system would increase the use of cost-effective
biopharmaceuticals, not seek to constrain or ration it.

### Additional Reading & Resources

https://www.bio.org/toolkit/infographics/prescription-drug-costs-numbers

https://www.bio.org/toolkit/infographics/mid-year-2017-report-drug-spending-
significantly-lower

Cuckler, Gigi A., et al, National Health Expenditure Projections, 20-17-26:
Despite Uncertainty, Fundamentals Primarily Drive Spending Growth. Health
Affairs, 2018. Vol. 37, No. 3.
https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.1655

### References

    
        1. https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-office-actuary-releases-2017-national-health-expenditures
    2. https://www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-review-of-2017-outlook-to-2022
    3. https://www.drugchannels.net/2018/04/the-gross-to-net-rebate-bubble-topped.html
    4. See trend reports by CVS Health, Express Scripts, and Prime Therapeutics.
    5. https://my.express-scripts.com/rs/809-VGG-836/images/Express%20Scripts%202018%20Drug%20Trend%20Report.pdf
    6. https://altarum.org/sites/default/files/uploaded-publication-files/Non-Retail%20Rx%20Forecast%20Data%20Brief_with%20Addendum.pdf
    7. The Costs of Cancer Care: American Cancer Society: Cancer Action Network; April 2017. https://www.fightcancer.org/sites/default/files/Costs%20of%20Cancer%20-%20Final%20Web.pdf
    8. https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nationalhealthaccountsprojected.html
    

__Back to top

### Related Questions

    
        * Does increasing patients’ out-of-pocket spending really reduce health insurance premiums?
    * How are prescription drug costs really determined?
    * Shouldn't the U.S. Government do more to regulate high drug prices?
    * Why are some drugs so expensive?
    * Why do some patients pay so much for drugs?
    

### Related Debates

    
        * Profits and R&D
    * Private and Public R&D Financing
    * Importation of Drugs
    

### Why are some drugs so expensive?

Learn More

BIO

© BIO 2018 All Rights Reserved

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Linked In
    * Youtube
    
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Contact Us
    * Graphic Library
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

