

__

![IFLScience

logo](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/iflscience_logo.png?v=1.3.5)
![IFLScience

logo](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/iflscience_logo_narrow.png?v=1.3.5)

    
        * ![I Love Science Store](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/ilss-logo.png?v=1.3.5)
    * __
    * __
    *     *     * __
    
    * ![Environment](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-environment.png?v=1.3.5) **Environment**
    * ![Technology](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-technology.png?v=1.3.5) **Technology**
    * ![Space](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-space.png?v=1.3.5) **Space**
    * ![Health and Medicine](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-health-and-medicine.png?v=1.3.5) **Health and Medicine**
    * ![The Brain](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-the-brain.png?v=1.3.5) **The Brain**
    * ![Plants and Animals](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-plants-and-animals.png?v=1.3.5) **Plants and Animals**
    * ![Physics](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-physics.png?v=1.3.5) **Physics**
    * ![Chemistry](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-chemistry.png?v=1.3.5) **Chemistry**
    * ![Policy](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-policy.png?v=1.3.5) **Policy**
    * ![Editor's Blog](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-editors-blog.png?v=1.3.5) **Editor 's Blog**
    

# Where Is Your Country On This Global Ranking Of Nations' Healthcare Systems?

126

__ Share **on Facebook**

__ Share **on Twitter**

__

__

__

__ Health and Medicine

![Where Is Your Country On This Global Ranking Of Nations' Healthcare

Systems?](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/ifls-

placeholder.png?v=1.3.5)

The study was funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, who are known -
among other things - for their huge investments in healthcare research. Mr.
Lightman1975/Shutterstock

![Robin

Andrews](https://cdn.iflscience.com/images/677be514-ad8a-554e-be6e-7eb22b8697af/author_large-1465395159-robin-

andrews.jpg)

##### By Robin Andrews

14 Jun 2018, 17:31

Funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), an international team of
researchers have ranked the best and worst nations based on access to
healthcare, and the quality of it, using a novel metric.

Published in The Lancet, it reveals that the US, by far the wealthiest nation
on Earth, comes in at #29. This doesn’t sound great if you think America’s
strange, lop-sided, and under-attack healthcare system is the best in the
world, but it’s still quite high on the list, mind you – there are 195 nations
on Earth, after all. It’s also in familiar company, with the UK, Singapore,
and South Korea all appearing in the upper levels of the ranking.

The team behind this endeavor are all collaborators on the Global Burden of
Disease (GBD), a tool that aims to quantify health loss so that others can
rectify such problems. Using reams of collected data from the GBD initiative’s
2016 assessment of the world’s health, they’ve now published it in the form of
a ranking.

Known as the Healthcare Access and Quality (HAQ) Index, it’s primarily derived
from an assessment of the incidences of 32 causes of preventable death. These
include diseases you can avoid by getting vaccinated, cardiovascular diseases,
surgery-treatable gastrointestinal conditions, a variety of cancers, and so
on.

The open-access paper – a hallmark feature of BMGF research publications –
explains that if people have access to solid healthcare systems, there should
be lower incidences of these afflictions.

Using carefully weighted methods, each country was scored on a scale from
0-100. Here, 0 represents the worst levels of the incidences of these
preventable diseases from 1990 to 2016. This scoring was conducted on a
global, national, and (in parts) subnational level.

![](http://cdn.iflscience.com/images/ee42f540-bc37-5f63-b9e5-3f9ba79cb752/content-1528985110-gr1-lrg.jpg)World
map of HAQ Index values. GBD/The Lancet

Fortunately, it looks like between 1990 and 2016, there has been a global
improvement in such matters. Sub-Saharan Africa and South-East Asia have
seemingly drastically improved since the turn of the millennium, compared to
the time period beforehand.

The overall country rankings make for some interesting reading, and can be
viewed in full here. The top 10 are:

1 – Iceland

2 – Norway

3 – Netherlands

4 – Luxembourg

5 – Australia

6 – Finland

7 – Switzerland

8 – Sweden

9 – Italy

10 – Andorra

Next Page **Next Page**

Full Article

Comments __

## __If you liked this story, you'll love these

### __Popular Stories

### Week in Science

#### The IFLScience Newsletter

Sign up today to get weekly science coverage direct to your inbox

    
        * #### Navigation
    
    * Home
    * Team
    * Careers
    * IFLScience Store
    * #### Contact
    
    * Submit News
    * Contact
    * #### Advertising
    
    * Advertise
    * #### Legal
    
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    

__

**This website uses cookies**

This website uses cookies to improve user experience. By continuing to use our
website you consent to all cookies in accordance with our cookie policy.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=18981470&cv=2.0&cj=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

