

![](https://s.amazon-adsystem.com/iui3?d=forester-did&ex-

fargs=%3Fid%3D3dae64da-db6d-bf7f-5616-432e3da21751%26type%3D55%26m%3D1&ex-

fch=416613&ex-src=news.gallup.com/&ex-

hargs=v%3D1.0%3Bc%3D2193743270401%3Bp%3D3DAE64DA-DB6D-BF7F-5616-432E3DA21751)
![](//bat.bing.com/action/0?ti=5986988&Ver=2)

**Notice:** JavaScript is not enabled. Please Enable JavaScript Safely.

skip to main content

Toggle navigation

        
                  * Gallup
          * What We Do
        

Close menu

Our Services

Exceptional Workplaces

Create an environment where employees and teams excel.

        
                    * Employee Experience 
            * Culture 
            * Employee Engagement 
            * Manager Development 
            * Workforce Analytics 
            * Performance Management 
            * Hiring Analytics 
            * Strengths-Based Culture 
            * Wellbeing 
            * Diversity & Inclusion
        

Advanced Analytics

Make accurate decisions to ensure long-term success.

        
                    * World Poll 
            * Gallup Panel 
            * U.S. Daily Tracking 
            * Gallup Analytics 
            * Business-to-Business 
            * Customer Analytics
        

CliftonStrengths

Boost performance by maximizing what your employees do best.

        
                    * For Individuals 
            * For Managers 
            * For Organizations 
            * For Education 
            * How It Works 
            * CliftonStrengths 34 Themes 
            * Builder Initiative
        

Education

Drive high engagement and performance at your institution.

        
                    * K-12 Education 
            * Higher Education 
            * Research Partners 
            * Strada-Gallup Alumni Survey 
            * CliftonStrengths for Students 
            * Talent-Based Hiring 
            * Gallup Student Poll
        

Featured Solution

Gallup Access

Manage your workforce through a dynamic online platform.

Featured Book

It's the Manager

Learn about the biggest factor in your organization's success.

More from Gallup

News

Read about the attitudes and behaviors of the world's 7 billion citizens.

        
                    * Reports 
            * Books 
            * Courses & Workshops 
            * Events
        

View All Services & Solutions

        
                  * Who We Are
          * Locations
          * Careers
          * Store
        
          * Search
        

![News](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)
Toggle navigation

        
                  * Overview
          * Business 
            * Business
            * Advanced Analytics
            * B2B
            * CliftonStrengths
            * Customer Engagement
            * Employee Engagement
            * Leadership
            * Marketplace
            * Workplace
            * Gallup Business Journal
            * Chairman's Blog
          * Politics 
            * Politics
            * Foreign Affairs
            * Government
            * The Presidency
            * Presidential Job Approval Center
          * World 
            * World
            * Americas
            * Asia Pacific
            * Europe
            * Middle East & North Africa
            * Sub-Saharan Africa
          * Education 
            * Education
            * Higher Education
            * K-12
          * Social & Policy Issues 
            * Social & Policy Issues
            * Abortion
            * Crime
            * Environment
            * Guns
            * Healthcare
            * Immigration
            * LGBT
            * Marijuana
            * Millennials
            * Race Relations
            * Taxes
            * Terrorism
            * Women
            * Gallup Vault
            * Polling Matters
          * Well-Being 
            * Well-Being
            * Chronic Disease
            * Drugs & Alcohol
            * Health Habits
            * Health Insurance
          * Economy 
            * Economy
            * Entrepreneurship
            * Personal Finance
            * Retirement
            * Small Business
          * Blogs & Podcast 
            * The Chairman's Blog
            * Gallup Blog
            * Gallup Vault
            * Methodology Blog
            * Polling Matters
            * Gallup Podcast
          * Sign In
          * Subscribe
          * About Gallup and Our Services
          * Access Log In
        

Politics

Men, Women Generally Hold Similar Abortion Attitudes

        
                  * Share on Facebook
          * Share on Twitter
          * Share on LinkedIn
          * Share via Email
          * Print
        
          * Share on Facebook
          * Share on Twitter
          * Share on LinkedIn
          * Share via Email
          * Print
        

Politics

June 14, 2018

# Men, Women Generally Hold Similar Abortion Attitudes

by Frank Newport

![Men, Women Generally Hold Similar Abortion

Attitudes](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/d9mjxqxwb0kaimnlxza-

fw.png)

#### Story Highlights

        
                  * 19% of both men and women say abortion should be totally illegal
          * 31% of women and 26% of men want abortion to be totally legal
          * 42% of female college graduates want abortion to be totally legal
        

WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Many U.S. political leaders may think of abortion as a key
"women's issue," but it is not an issue about which women have substantially
different attitudes than men. A Gallup analysis shows that differences in
views on the legality of abortion between men and women have been relatively
narrow for decades, going back to the 1970s. Additionally, there are only
slight differences in men's and women's descriptions of themselves as pro-
choice or pro-life.

Gallup's 2010 comprehensive analysis of gender differences in views of
abortion concluded, "Over the past three decades, men and women have
consistently held similar views about the extent to which abortion should be
legal." The current update, adding in data for the years 2010-2018, shows a
continuation of this same general pattern.

Gallup's long-term trend question on this issue offers three choices on
abortion: legal in all circumstances, illegal in all circumstances or legal in
only certain circumstances.

Since 1990, the average gender difference in the view that abortion should be
legal in all circumstances is four percentage points, with women more likely
than men to hold that attitude. For the past four years, an average of 31% of
women and 26% of men have held this view.

![Graph

1](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/l754dxvt4kknupnfjd8uzg.png)

Gender differences in the view that abortion should be _illegal_ in all
circumstances are even smaller, with an average gap of two points since 1990.
For the past four years, there has been no difference, with 19% of both men
and women saying that abortion should be totally illegal.

![Graph

2](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/l2nkao8ijkcdszh02z4usq.png)

The modal choice for both men and women is the view that abortion should be
legal, but only in certain circumstances. Men have been slightly more likely
than women to hold this view since the 1980s, including by a five-point
average difference over the past four years.

![Graph

3](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/epzl_ukea0ghgz14q5fsxa.png)

**Only Small Gender Differences in Self-Described Pro-Choice, Pro-Life**

There is a narrow gender gap in Americans' descriptions of themselves as
either pro-choice or pro-life. Gallup began asking this question annually in
2001 as part of Gallup's Values and Beliefs survey, and since that time, men
have been slightly more likely than women to choose the pro-life descriptor.
The gap has been between three and four points since 2010 -- including the
most recent period from 2015-2018, with 47% of men and 44% of women choosing
the pro-life label.

![Graph

4](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/w0esmjooxu-

woi6dwyzlmw.png)

The slight male edge in identification as pro-life reflects women becoming
slightly more pro-choice in recent years, with 50% of women and 46% of men
choosing the pro-choice label over the past four years. Similarly small
differences were evident in previous years, including an even tie in self-
descriptions as pro-choice between 2005 and 2009.

![Graph

5](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/aqeol2iexkqyulpskp6vpa.png)

The net result of these attitudes is that men are divided in their self-
identification -- 47% pro-life and 46% pro-choice, while women tilt toward
describing themselves as pro-choice, 50% to 44%.

**Among College Graduates, Women More Likely to Favor Abortion Being Legal**

Educational attainment is a significant predictor of Americans' position on
abortion, with college graduates more likely than those with less education to
favor abortion being legal in all circumstances.

There has been and continues to be a significant gender gap on this measure
among college graduates, with female graduates more likely than male graduates
to favor abortion being legal in all circumstances. This pattern has been
constant over the past decades, despite modest fluctuations in the overall
percentages favoring legalized abortion. Most recently, over the past four
years, 42% of female college graduates have chosen the "legal in all"
alternative, versus 32% of male college graduates.

![Graph

6](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/tslvekrdxuwv1bpkfqkpya.png)

Over the past four years, only one or two points have separated the
percentages of men and women with some college education, as well as men and
women with a high school education or less, who support abortion being legal
in all circumstances. In prior years, the gap was slightly larger.

![Graph

7](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/xyjnv0iv0eok7cnroccyyg.png)

## SPEEDBUMP

**Implications**

There are significant gender gaps on a number of political and social issues
in American society today, including political party identification,
presidential job approval, views of the death penalty, and views of the moral
acceptability of pornography, stem cell research, marijuana and cloning
animals -- but abortion is not one of these issues. Women are slightly more
likely to favor abortion being completely legal and slightly more likely to
personally identify as pro-choice than men are, but these differences are
quite small -- as has generally been the case for decades.

One exception to this pattern occurs within the ranks of Americans with
college degrees, with female college graduates over the years consistently
more likely than male graduates to favor completely legal abortion. Gender
differences among those with less formal education are much smaller.

Other research shows that abortion attitudes differ significantly along
political and ideological dimensions, and by age, the latter the topic of a
forthcoming Gallup analysis.

##### Survey Methods

Results for this Gallup poll are based on telephone interviews conducted May
1-10, 2018, with a random sample of 1,024 adults, aged 18 and older, living in
all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. For results based on the
total sample of national adults, the margin of sampling error is ±4 percentage
points at the 95% confidence level. All reported margins of sampling error
include computed design effects for weighting.

Each sample of national adults includes a minimum quota of 70% cellphone
respondents and 30% landline respondents, with additional minimum quotas by
time zone within region. Landline and cellular telephone numbers are selected
using random-digit-dial methods.

Learn more about how the Gallup U.S. Poll works.

![Gallup News

Alerts](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/SPEEDBUMPS/tfe_fhkmreyvka6sbix0cw.jpg)

**Gallup News Alerts**  
Get the latest data-driven news delivered straight to your inbox.

Sign Up

## Related Topics Include:

USA Abortion All Gallup Headlines Ethics and Morals Moral Issues Politics

Advanced Analytics

### Access Crucial Data for Your Research

Search, examine, compare and export nearly a century of primary data.

Learn More about Access Crucial Data for Your Research

**Subscribe to receive weekly Gallup News alerts.**  
Never miss our latest insights.

Sign Up

## Recommended

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/TGBCMS/85ikf7mn50c_ug9ikpyrxq.jpg)

Gallup Blog

Jun 8, 2018

### Get to Know Americans' Views on Abortion

Gallup will release its 2018 update about Americans' views on abortion in a
six-article series, starting Monday.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/gzcpyypf6ucdsvqvsmgrvg.png)

Politics

Jun 11, 2018

### U.S. Abortion Attitudes Remain Closely Divided

Americans continue to be divided in their opinions on abortion, with equal
percentages describing themselves as "pro-choice" and "pro-life."

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/POLL/hixqacjmdug7lxeprn2irg.png)

Politics

Jun 13, 2018

### Trimesters Still Key to U.S. Abortion Views

Americans' support for abortion continues to vary sharply by trimester and by
the reason for the procedure.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](//content.gallup.com/origin/gallupinc/GallupSpaces/Production/Cms/TGBCMS/ube7dqgdlek241b_otmugg.jpg)

Gallup Blog

May 15, 2019

### Alabama Bill at Odds With Public Consensus on Abortion

by Lydia Saad

By failing to include an exception for cases of rape or incest, the Alabama
anti-abortion bill is out of step with the views of most Americans.

June 14, 2018  
Gallup https://news.gallup.com/poll/235646/men-women-generally-hold-similar-
abortion-attitudes.aspx  
Gallup World Headquarters, 901 F Street, Washington, D.C., 20001, U.S.A  
+1 202.715.3030

![News](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZpZXdCb3g9IjAgMCA2My4zOSAzMCIgd2lkdGg9IjYzIiBoZWlnaHQ9IjMwIj4NCiAgPHRpdGxlPk5ld3M8L3RpdGxlPg0KICA8ZyBmaWxsPSIjZmZmIj4NCiAgICA8cGF0aCBkPSJNLjIuMTNIMmwxMC44LDE2LjY4Vi4xM0gxNC40VjE5LjRIMTIuNjJMMS43OSwyLjY2VjE5LjRILjJaIi8+DQogICAgPHBhdGggZD0iTTMwLjEyLDE1Ljc2YTQuNzUsNC43NSwwLDAsMS0xLjczLDIuOTQsNi4yMSw2LjIxLDAsMCwxLTQsMS4xNCw1LjgyLDUuODIsMCwwLDEtNC42NS0xLjkzLDcuODcsNy44NywwLDAsMS0xLjY2LTUuMzEsMTAuMDUsMTAuMDUsMCwwLDEsLjQ3LTMuMjRBNi42OCw2LjY4LDAsMCwxLDE5Ljg3LDdhNS41OSw1LjU5LDAsMCwxLDItMS40NSw2LjQ3LDYuNDcsMCwwLDEsMi41Mi0uNDgsNi41Nyw2LjU3LDAsMCwxLDIuNzYuNTJBNS4wOSw1LjA5LDAsMCwxLDI5LDdhNiw2LDAsMCwxLDEsMi4xNSwxMC44NSwxMC44NSwwLDAsMSwuMzIsMi42N3YxSDE5LjY3YTgsOCwwLDAsMCwuMywyLjIzLDUuMTEsNS4xMSwwLDAsMCwuODksMS44MSw0LjE2LDQuMTYsMCwwLDAsMS40OCwxLjIxLDQuNTEsNC41MSwwLDAsMCwyLjA1LjQ1LDcsNywwLDAsMCwxLjc5LS4yLDMuNTksMy41OSwwLDAsMCwxLjIxLS41OCwzLjA2LDMuMDYsMCwwLDAsLjc3LS44OCw0LjY4LDQuNjgsMCwwLDAsLjQ1LTEuMTJabS0xLjM4LTQuMjdhOC41NCw4LjU0LDAsMCwwLS4yNC0yLjA4LDQuNjMsNC42MywwLDAsMC0uNzYtMS42MywzLjQyLDMuNDIsMCwwLDAtMS4zNS0xLjA3LDQuODYsNC44NiwwLDAsMC0yLS4zNyw0LjI2LDQuMjYsMCwwLDAtMy4yNCwxLjI3LDYuMjksNi4yOSwwLDAsMC0xLjQ1LDMuODhaIi8+DQogICAgPHBhdGggZD0iTTMxLjcxLDUuNWgxLjczbDMuMjQsMTIuMTVMNDAuMjIsNS41OGgxLjgzbDMuNDYsMTIuMDdMNDguNzUsNS41aDEuNjdMNDYuMzQsMTkuNEg0NC41M0w0MS4wNSw3LjI1LDM3LjU0LDE5LjRIMzUuNzNaIi8+DQogICAgPHBhdGggZD0iTTUzLjM5LDE1LjU0YTMuMjQsMy4yNCwwLDAsMCwxLjM4LDIuMyw1LjgyLDUuODIsMCwwLDAsMy4wOC42Nyw0LjI4LDQuMjgsMCwwLDAsMi44Ni0uNzUsMi40NSwyLjQ1LDAsMCwwLC44NC0xLjg5LDMuNzIsMy43MiwwLDAsMC0uMTEtLjkxLDIsMiwwLDAsMC0uNDItLjc3LDIuNTEsMi41MSwwLDAsMC0uODktLjU5LDcuNTQsNy41NCwwLDAsMC0xLjUtLjQxbC0xLjctLjI3YTE1LjEzLDE1LjEzLDAsMCwxLTItLjQ1LDQuODYsNC44NiwwLDAsMS0xLjQ4LS43MiwyLjg5LDIuODksMCwwLDEtLjkyLTEuMTFBMy43NiwzLjc2LDAsMCwxLDUyLjIzLDlhMy40LDMuNCwwLDAsMSwuNDEtMS42NiwzLjU0LDMuNTQsMCwwLDEsMS4xLTEuMjQsNS4xOSw1LjE5LDAsMCwxLDEuNjYtLjc3LDcuNjIsNy42MiwwLDAsMSwyLjA3LS4yNyw4LjU2LDguNTYsMCwwLDEsMi4zOS4yOCw0LjU1LDQuNTUsMCwwLDEsMS41Ni43NywzLjUyLDMuNTIsMCwwLDEsLjk1LDEuMTMsNy40Miw3LjQyLDAsMCwxLC41MywxLjM4bC0xLjQ0LjNBNS4yNSw1LjI1LDAsMCwwLDYxLDcuODRhMi40NSwyLjQ1LDAsMCwwLS43MS0uNzksMy4xNSwzLjE1LDAsMCwwLTEuMDgtLjQ3LDguMjksOC4yOSwwLDAsMC0zLjQzLDAsMy4zNSwzLjM1LDAsMCwwLTEuMTcuNTUsMi4xMSwyLjExLDAsMCwwLS42NC44MSwyLjQxLDIuNDEsMCwwLDAtLjE5Ljk1LDMuNDIsMy40MiwwLDAsMCwuMTEuODgsMS40MSwxLjQxLDAsMCwwLC40My42OCwyLjg3LDIuODcsMCwwLDAsLjkxLjUyLDksOSwwLDAsMCwxLjUyLjM4bDIuMTMuMzVhNi43MSw2LjcxLDAsMCwxLDMuMjcsMS4zMSwzLjU1LDMuNTUsMCwwLDEsMS4wOCwyLjg0LDMuNTMsMy41MywwLDAsMS0uMzQsMS41NCwzLjM1LDMuMzUsMCwwLDEtMSwxLjI2LDUuMjMsNS4yMywwLDAsMS0xLjY3Ljg0LDcuOTMsNy45MywwLDAsMS0yLjI5LjMxLDEwLjEyLDEwLjEyLDAsMCwxLTIuMzQtLjI1LDUuNTYsNS41NiwwLDAsMS0xLjg0LS43NSwzLjk0LDMuOTQsMCwwLDEtMS4yNy0xLjMzLDQuNDgsNC40OCwwLDAsMS0uNi0yWiIvPg0KICA8L2c+DQo8L3N2Zz4NCg==)

Our Company

        
                  * About Gallup
          * Locations
          * George Gallup
          * Methodology Center
          * Senior Scientists & Advisers
        

Topics

        
                  * Business
          * Politics
          * World
          * Education
          * Social & Policy Issues
          * Well-Being
          * Economy
          * Blogs
          * Trends A-Z
        

More From Gallup

        
                  * Gallup.com
          * Exceptional Workplaces
          * Advanced Analytics
          * CliftonStrengths
          * Gallup Access
          * News
          * Reports
          * Books
          * Courses & Workshops
          * Events
          * Shop
        

Contact Us

        
                  * Careers
          * Media Inquiries
          * Gallup Speakers
          * Get In Touch
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * LinkedIn
          * YouTube
        

Copyright © 2019 Gallup, Inc. All rights reserved.

Copyright © 2016 Gallup, Inc. All rights reserved.  
Gallup, Inc. maintains several registered and unregistered trademarks that
include but may not be limited to: A8, Accountability Index, Business Impact
Analysis, BE10, CE11, CE11 Accelerator, Clifton StrengthsExplorer, Clifton
StrengthsFinder, Customer Engagement Index, Customer Engagement Management,
Dr. Gallup Portrait, Employee Engagement Index, Enetrix, Engagement Creation
Index, Follow This Path, Gallup, Gallup Brain, Gallup Business Journal, GBJ,
Gallup Consulting, Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index, Gallup Management
Journal, GMJ, Gallup Panel, Gallup Press, Gallup Tuesday Briefing, Gallup
University, Gallup World News, HumanSigma, HumanSigma Accelerator, ICE11, I10,
L3, ME25, NurseInsight, NurseStrengths, Patient Quality System, Performance
Optimization, Power of 2, PrincipalInsight, Q12, Q12 Accelerator, Q12
Advantage, Selection Research, Inc., SE25, SF34, SRI, Soul of the City,
Strengths Spotlight, Strengths-Based Selling, StatShot, StrengthsCoach,
StrengthsExplorer, StrengthsFinder, StrengthsInsight, StrengthsQuest,
SupportInsight, TX(R+E+R)=P3, TeacherInsight, The Gallup Path, The Gallup
Poll, The Gallup School, VantagePoint, Varsity Management, Wellbeing Finder,
Achiever, Activator, Adaptability, Analytical, Arranger, Belief, Command,
Communication, Competition, Connectedness, Consistency, Context, Deliberative,
Developer, Discipline, Empathy, Fairness, Focus, Futuristic, Harmony,
Ideation, Includer, Individualization, Input, Intellection , Learner,
Maximizer, Positivity, Relator, Responsibility, Restorative, Self-Assurance,
Significance, Strategic, and Woo. All other trademarks are the property of
their respective owners. These materials are provided for noncommercial,
personal use only. Reproduction prohibited without the express permission of
Gallup, Inc.

        
                  * Privacy Statement
          * Legal
        

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=250461002030724&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=361939940932133&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=86430&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

