
    
        * About ACG
    * Donate
    * Find a GI
    * Contact Your ACG Governor
    * Join
    

My ACG/Log In

![American College of

Gastroenterology](https://acgcdn.gi.org/themes/giorg/img/logo.svg)

![Advancing Gastroenterology, Improving Patient

Care](https://acgcdn.gi.org/themes/giorg/img/logo-type-gotham.svg)

    
        * Guidelines
    * ACG Blog
    * Patients
    

![](https://acgcdn.gi.org/themes/giorg/img/meeting-2019.svg)

    
        * Membership
      * My ACG/Log In
      * Renew/Pay Dues
      * Benefits & Resources
      * Apply for FACG
      * Find/Connect with Colleagues
      * Committees
      * Contact Your ACG Governor
      * Join
    * Education
      * Meetings, CME & MOC
      * Education Universe
      * Journal CME & MOC
      * Board Prep / Self-Assessment Tests
      * Claim CME & MOC
      * Training Program Resources
      * Educating Your Colleagues & Patients
      * Exhibitors & Sponsors
    * Journals &
    

Publications

    
          * _The American Journal of Gastroenterology_
      * _Clinical and Transnational Gastroenterology_
      * _ACG Case Reports Journal_
      * Guidelines
      * _ACG Magazine_
      * ACG Blog
      * This Week in Washington DC
      * SmartBrief Newsletter
      * Podcasts
      * Journal CME & MOC
    * ACG Institute
    

& Research

    
          * About the ACG Institute
      * Support the ACG Institute
      * Research Grants & Awards
      * Programs & Publications
      * Young Physician Leadership Scholars Program
      * Edgar Achkar Visiting Professorships
    * Practice
    

Management

    
          * Toolbox - GI Practice Resources
      * Coding and Reimbursement
      * FDA Information
      * GIQuIC Registry
      * Making Sense of MACRA
      * This Week in Washington DC
    * Public Policy
      * This Week in Washington DC
      * Contact Your ACG Governor
      * Contact Policy Makers on Important Issues
      * Connect With Your State GI Society
    * Trainees
      * Trainee Courses and Events
      * Find a Mentor
      * Research & Training Grants
      * Question of the Week Competition
      * GI Jeopardy Competition
      * Program Director Resources
      * GI Fellowship Program Information
    

Search

×

### Education

    
        * ACG 2019
    * Meetings Calendar
    * Education Universe
    * Journal CME & MOC
    * Board Prep/Self-Assessment Tests
    * Claim CME & MOC
    * Educating Your Colleagues & Patients
    * Training Program Resources
    * Exhibitors & Sponsors
    

### **Guidelines**

### Journals & Publications

    
        * AJG
    * CTG
    * ACG Case Reports Journal
    * ACG Magazine
    * ACG Blog
    * SmartBrief
    * Podcasts
    * Journal CME & MOC
    

### Membership

    
        * Join
    * Benefits & Resources
    * ACG/Log in
    * Renew/Pay Dues
    * Membership Director
    * Apply for FACG
    * Join a Committee
    * GI Circle: Connect with Colleagues
    * Contact Your ACG Governor
    

### Patients & Families

    
        * Find a Gastroenterologist
    * GI Health & Disease Resources
    

### ACG Institute

    
        * About the Institute
    * Donate
    * Research Grants & Awards
    * Programs & Publications
    * Edgar Achkar Visiting Professorships
    * Young Physician Leadership Scholars Program
    * Monographs
    

### Trainees

    
        * Courses & Events
    * Find a Mentor
    * Research & Training Grants
    * Question of the Week Competition
    * GI Jeopardy Competition
    * Program Director Resources
    * GI Fellowship Program Information
    

### Research

    
        * Junior Faculty Development Award
    * Clinical Research Awards
    * Clinical Research Award Pilot Projects
    * "Smaller Programs" Clinical Research Award
    * Resident Clinical Research Award
    * Medical Student Research Award
    * Grant Recipients
    

### **Media & Press**

    
        * Media Statements
    * Annual Meeting Press Information
    * Join Press List
    

### Store

### Practice Management

    
        * Toolbox
    * Coding & Reimbursement
    * ASC Quality Reporting
    * GIQuIC Registry
    * FDA Information
    * Making Sense of MACRA
    

### Public Policy

    
        * This Week in Washington DC
    * Contact Your ACG Governor
    * Contact Policy Makers
    * Legislative Action Center
    * Legislative & Public Policy Council
    * State Society Information
    

### About

    
        * Board of Trustees
    * Board of Governors
    * Committees
    * Governance
    * History
    * Awards
    * International Affiliate Societies
    * Auxiliary
    

Gi.org / Patients / Medications and the Liver

# Medications and the Liver

    
        * GI Health and Disease
    * Recursos en Español
    * Video and Audio Podcasts
    * What is a Gastroenterologist?
    * Brochures
    * Digestive Health Insights
    

**GI Health Centers**

Colorectal Cancer Hepatitis C Inflammatory Bowel Disease Irritable Bowel
Syndrome Obesity

**Digestive Health Topics**

Abdominal Pain Syndrome Belching, Bloating, and Flatulence Common GI Symptoms
Gastroparesis See All Topics (A-Z)

**GI Procedures**

Colonoscopy Colorectal Cancer Screening Upper GI endoscopy (EGD) See All
Procedures (A-Z)

Find a  
Gastroenterologist

Locate an ACG member gastroenterologist in your area.

Find a  
Liver Expert

Find an ACG member gastroenterologist with a specialized interest in liver
disease.

    
        * Basics
    

## Overview

One of the main functions of the liver is to break down substances that we
take by mouth, including medications, herbs and supplements. This process
usually takes place efficiently and without causing any harm. When new
medications are developed, they are extensively tested in many people prior to
being approved for general use. During this period careful tests are done to
ensure that the liver is not damaged. For this reason, the vast majority of
the medications currently available are safe even for people with known liver
disease.

Despite these safeguards sometimes medications can harm the liver. In some
instances, a person can have a rare tendency that makes their liver
susceptible to injury after taking a certain medication – we call this an
idiosyncratic reaction. It happens in very rare instances and often cannot be
predicted. Occasionally, medications that proved safe during testing are found
to be potentially harmful when they are released for general use and millions
of people take it. In other instances, people with liver disease may be at
increased risk of developing liver damage when certain medications are used.
Medications that are known to be toxic to people with liver disease usually
carry a warning regarding its use in people with liver problems.

## Symptoms

In most cases substantial liver damage can occur before symptoms appear.
Typical symptoms of liver disease may include nausea, lack of appetite,
discomfort on the right upper corner of the abdomen, generalized itching, dark
urine and jaundice (yellow discoloration of the eyes and skin), but many
people have no symptoms at all. Blood tests can usually detect evidence of
liver damage before symptoms develop. When a medication known to possibly
cause liver damage is used, your physician may recommend that blood tests be
checked periodically after starting the medication so that any evidence of
liver damage can be detected before symptoms appear.

## Diagnosis

Liver damage of any type is usually detected by doing blood tests. Usually
there is no need to monitor the liver tests when a medication is started. If
your physician is planning on using a medication that in the past has been
shown to rarely cause liver damage, the most common test used to monitor the
liver is a liver panel, which consists of several blood tests that detect
liver damage. These tests are: AST (aspartate aminotransferase), ALT (alanine
aminotransferase), AP (alkaline phosphatase) and bilirubin. There are many
other causes for elevated liver tests. For that reason your physician may
obtain a baseline liver panel prior to starting a medication to be sure that
it is normal.

Minor elevations of these tests may occur after starting a medication and do
not indicate significant liver damage. Generally speaking physicians are most
concerned about serious medication-induced liver damage when the levels of AST
and ALT rise 3 to 5 times or more over baseline or if there is an increase in
bilirubin. If the elevations are minor, the medication is continued and the
liver tests monitored. In most cases, the liver tests will return to normal
despite continuing the medication.

## Common Medications That Can Cause Liver Damage

The best known medication that can damage the liver is acetaminophen, also
known as Tylenol®. This medication is widely available without prescription
and is present in many of the cold and flu remedies sold in drugstores as well
as in prescription pain medications. Most pain medications that are labeled as
“non-aspirin” have acetaminophen as its main ingredient.

Acetaminophen, when used as directed, is extremely safe even for people with
liver disease. However, taking too much acetaminophen at once, or taking a
high dose of acetaminophen continuously over several days can cause damage to
the liver. Healthy individuals should not take more than 1,000 mg of
acetaminophen per dose, and should not take more than 3,000mg in one day (i.e.
maximum of 1,000 mg every 8 hours). In addition, even healthy persons should
avoid taking 3,000mg of acetaminophen daily for more than 3 to 5 days.
Patients with liver disease should restrict the daily amount of acetaminophen
to 2,000mg per day, or even less if severe liver disease is present. Even if
you have no liver disease, always use the smallest amount of acetaminophen
needed to obtain relief. It is important that you read the labels of all
prescription and non-prescription medications that you take. Often
acetaminophen may be present in several medications which could cause you to
take a dose of acetaminophen that exceeds the safe limits.

People who drink alcoholic beverages regularly are at higher risk of
developing severe liver damage from acetaminophen. Drinking alcohol regularly
changes the way the liver breaks down certain medications. In the case of
acetaminophen, alcohol use leads to accumulation in the liver of a toxic
byproduct of acetaminophen that can kill the liver cells. People who drink
alcohol regularly should not take acetaminophen or take it is small doses if
at all.

## Cholesterol Lowering Medications

Another common group of medications that can affect the liver tests are the
cholesterol lowering medications commonly known as “statins”; a group that
includes many of the currently prescribed medications to lower cholesterol.
These medications have been used in millions of people with an excellent
safety record and very little evidence of liver damage, even when used in
people with mild liver disease. It is not rare, however, for people to develop
minor elevations of the liver tests soon after they start taking these
medications. In the vast majority of cases, these elevations are less than 3
times the baseline level and the levels return to normal despite continued use
of the medication; recently the FDA discontinued the recommendation for
routine monitoring of liver tests when starting a patient on statins. If the
liver tests are monitored, the medication should not be stopped if only minor
elevations of liver tests are noted.

## Supplements and Herbs

Supplements and herbs, despite being “natural” can be toxic to the liver. The
production and distribution of these supplements is not regulated as carefully
as the production of prescription medications. “Natural” products can be sold
with little testing and with no proof of efficacy. Sometimes the herb or
supplement itself can cause liver damage. In other cases, impurities or toxins
introduced during the preparation of the product may be toxic to the liver.
Some of the natural products known to be toxic to the liver include chaparral,
comfrey tea, kava, skullcap, and yohimbe, but there are many others. Even
vitamin supplements and dietary supplements, such as weight losing products,
can be harmful. Too much iron or vitamin A can result in significant liver
damage. Generally speaking, you do not need to take iron supplements unless
you have been diagnosed with iron deficiency. Vitamin A dose should never
exceed 5,000 units a day, unless provided as beta-carotene.

## Medication Use in People with Liver Disease

With very rare exceptions, people that have mild liver disease can safely take
most common prescription and non-prescription medications at the recommended
dose. Having mild liver disease such as hepatitis C or fatty liver does not
increase the risk that a given medication will be toxic to the liver, however,
if a person with pre-existing liver disease happens to develop liver injury
from a medication, the resulting liver damage may be more severe than would
occur in an otherwise healthy person with the same reaction. For that reason,
whenever possible, physicians prefer to use “liver-safe” medications when we
know a person has liver disease.

Often physicians may be reluctant to start patients on a cholesterol lowering
medication if the liver tests are already mildly elevated; usually due to
fatty liver disease. Research has shown that cholesterol lowering medications
are safe in people with fatty liver disease or mild hepatitis C infection, and
in fact, may be beneficial to the liver by decreasing inflammation.

People with more severe types of liver disease such as cirrhosis have to be
more careful regarding the types and dose of medications they take. While the
ability of the liver to properly break down and utilize medications is
preserved even when severe liver disease is present, there are some
medications that should not be used or should be used at reduced dose when
given to patients with advanced cirrhosis.

**Recommendations to Minimize the Risk of Liver Injury from Medications**

    
        1. Always keep a list of all the prescription and non-prescription medications that you take, including herbs, vitamins and supplements. Bring this list with you to every physician’s appointment.
    2. The fewer medications you take the better. This includes herbs, supplements, prescription and non-prescription medications. If you have several physicians prescribing medications for you, be sure all of them are updated on your current list of medications.
    3. When using non-prescription medications, be sure to read the label carefully and never exceed the recommended amount. Avoid taking the maximum recommended dose for a prolonged period without consulting a physician. 
    4. If you are taking several medications, be sure the ingredients are not the same; otherwise you may risk taking an accidental overdose.
    5. If you drink a significant amount of alcohol daily, avoid or restrict the use of acetaminophen; never take the maximum recommended dose.
    6. If you have liver disease, make sure that your physician is aware of your diagnosis and the severity of your liver disease.
    7. If you have advanced liver disease such as severe cirrhosis, it is a good idea to consult with the liver specialist before starting new medications.
    

## Author(s) and Publication Date(s)

_Jorge L. Herrera, MD, FACG, University of South Alabama College of Medicine,
Mobile, AL_ – Published November 2007. Updated December 2012.

Return to Top

![](https://acgcdn.gi.org/themes/giorg/img/logo.svg)

Advancing gastroenterology, improving patient care

### Education

    
        * ACG 2019
    * Meetings Calendar
    * Education Universe
    * Journal CME & MOC
    * Board Prep/Self-Assessment Tests
    * Claim CME & MOC
    * Educating Your Colleagues & Patients
    * Training Program Resources
    * Exhibitors & Sponsors
    

### **Guidelines**

### Journals & Publications

    
        * AJG
    * CTG
    * ACG Case Reports Journal
    * ACG Magazine
    * ACG Blog
    * SmartBrief
    * Podcasts
    * Journal CME & MOC
    

### Membership

    
        * Join
    * Benefits & Resources
    * ACG/Log in
    * Renew/Pay Dues
    * Membership Director
    * Apply for FACG
    * Join a Committee
    * GI Circle: Connect with Colleagues
    * Contact Your ACG Governor
    

### Patients & Families

    
        * Find a Gastroenterologist
    * GI Health & Disease Resources
    

### ACG Institute

    
        * About the Institute
    * Donate
    * Research Grants & Awards
    * Programs & Publications
    * Edgar Achkar Visiting Professorships
    * Young Physician Leadership Scholars Program
    * Monographs
    

### Trainees

    
        * Courses & Events
    * Find a Mentor
    * Research & Training Grants
    * Question of the Week Competition
    * GI Jeopardy Competition
    * Program Director Resources
    * GI Fellowship Program Information
    

### Research

    
        * Junior Faculty Development Award
    * Clinical Research Awards
    * Clinical Research Award Pilot Projects
    * "Smaller Programs" Clinical Research Award
    * Resident Clinical Research Award
    * Medical Student Research Award
    * Grant Recipients
    

### **Media & Press**

    
        * Media Statements
    * Annual Meeting Press Information
    * Join Press List
    

### Store

### Practice Management

    
        * Toolbox
    * Coding & Reimbursement
    * ASC Quality Reporting
    * GIQuIC Registry
    * FDA Information
    * Making Sense of MACRA
    

### Public Policy

    
        * This Week in Washington DC
    * Contact Your ACG Governor
    * Contact Policy Makers
    * Legislative Action Center
    * Legislative & Public Policy Council
    * State Society Information
    

### About

    
        * Board of Trustees
    * Board of Governors
    * Committees
    * Governance
    * History
    * Awards
    * International Affiliate Societies
    * Auxiliary
    

**American College of Gastroenterology** 6400 Goldsboro Rd, Bethesda, MD 20817
| (301) 263-9000 Contact Us

©2019 American College of Gastroenterology Privacy Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

