

Skip to main content

# AMA Journal of Ethics

## Illuminating the Art of Medicine

Search

Menu

## Main navigation

    
        * Home
    * Issues
    * Browse Articles
    * Cases
    * Podcast
    * CME
    * For Authors
    * Call for Papers
    * Call for Theme Issue Editors
    * 2019 Conley Contests
    * Sign Up for Newsletter
    * Follow Us Twitter
    

Health Law

Mar 2013

## Religious Employers and Exceptions to Mandated Coverage of Contraceptives

Lauren Sydney Flicker, JD, MBE

_Virtual Mentor._ 2013;15(3):220-225. doi:
10.1001/virtualmentor.2013.15.3.hlaw1-1303.

Citation

PDF Altmetric

    
        *     *     *     *     * email
    

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has been one of the most
divisive pieces of legislation in the last few years [1]. And the most
controversial component of the ACA has arguably been the mandate that group
health plans cover contraception costs. The contraception mandate, part of a
seemingly straightforward effort to enhance preventive care for women, has
elicited backlash from religious and conservative groups who believe it
violates certain employers’ religious freedoms.

### The Contraception Mandate

The ACA, signed into law in March 2010, mandates that group health plans,
including self-insured plans (in which an employer is the insurer of its
employees and assumes financial risk for the plan), cover the cost of
preventive care for women without requiring cost-sharing from beneficiaries
[2]. These preventive services, recommended by an Institute of Medicine expert
committee in women’s health and prevention, include annual well-woman visits,
screening for sexually transmitted infections (STIs), domestic violence
counseling, and coverage for contraceptives for women with reproductive
capacity [3, 4]. All plans that are not grandfathered (i.e., the plan has not
covered at least one person continuously since March 23, 2010) or otherwise
exempt (discussed in detail below) must comply [3, 4].

The federal mandate does not pose as significant a change to health care
coverage in the United States as some believe. Prior to the ACA, 28 states
already had laws that required insurance policies that covered other
prescription drugs to cover FDA-approved contraceptive drugs and devices [5].
Although these state laws did not affect self-insured employer plans, a 2000
ruling by the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
held that employers who provided coverage for other prescription drugs but not
for contraceptives were in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act [6].
The ACA then, did not create a sweeping change as much as it extended earlier
legislation to all states and included self-insured employer plans.

### Religious Exemptions

In the wake of the objections that covering contraception costs would violate
some employers’ religious freedoms, interim final rules were published in
August 2011 announcing that churches, but not religiously affiliated groups
such as religious schools or hospitals, would be exempt from the contraception
mandate [4]. The interim final rules defined a religious employer eligible for
exemption as “one that (1) has the inculcation of religious values as its
purpose; (2) primarily employs persons who share its religious tenets; (3)
primarily serves persons who share its religious tenets; and (4) is a non-
profit organization under the Internal Revenue Code” [4]. This narrow
exemption appeased some, but left many religious employers seeking further
accommodation.

In January 2012, the Department of Health and Human Services announced a
compromise [7]. Although HHS continued to guarantee that all women with health
insurance would have access to contraception coverage without cost sharing, it
provided a 1-year extension to nonprofit employers who, on the basis of
religious beliefs, do not cover the cost of contraception. While other
employers would be bound by the mandate starting in August 2012, these
religious employers were given until August 2013 to comply [7]. HHS Secretary
Kathleen Sebelius stated that “this proposal strikes the appropriate balance
between respecting religious freedom and increasing access to important
preventive services” [7]. This compromise did not satisfy many religious
groups, who felt that the extension merely gave religious employers an extra
year to “figure out how to violate [their] consciences” [8].

A further compromise on institutional exemptions to the contraception mandate
came from the federal government on February 10, 2012. The “Final Rule”
provided a second level of exemptions [9, 10]. In addition to the complete
exemption for churches and other employers who fell into the guidelines
established in August 2011, HHS granted a further compromise to not-for-profit
employers such as hospitals, universities, and charities that object on
religious grounds to the provision of contraceptive services. Under the final
rule, this second group of employers would not be forced to pay for
contraceptives themselves. Instead, their insurance providers would directly
pay for the services [9, 10]. To some, this compromise seemed hollow because
it required religious employers to be complicit in behavior that they believed
to be morally wrong [11]. This compromise addresses neither self-insured nor
for-profit companies with religious objections to contraception service.

Finally, on March 21, 2012, HHS released an Advance Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking that requested comments on how to accommodate self-insured
religious institutions, while ensuring that women receive contraceptive
coverage [9]. For these institutions, HHS proposed that “a third-party
administrator of the group health plan or some other independent entity assume
this responsibility” [9]. These proposals have not yet been finalized, and, in
the meantime, multiple lawsuits have been filed.

### Challenges

Dozens of lawsuits have been filed in federal court in recent months
challenging the contraception mandate or seeking injunctions against it [12].
Lawsuits have been filed by for-profit institutions that have been given no
exemptions to the contraception mandate and nonprofit institutions that do not
believe that the accommodations made by the government have sufficiently
protected their interests.

Lawsuits have been filed on behalf of for-profit companies ranging from those
with a clear religious purpose such as Tyndale Publishing House, a Christian
publishing company [13], to seemingly secular organizations founded by deeply
religious individuals, such as Hobby Lobby, a national chain of craft supply
stores [14]. The outcomes of these cases have varied significantly.

In _Tyndale House Publishers v. Sebelius_ , the plaintiffs succeeded in
winning an injunction against having to pay for intrauterine devices (IUDs)
and Plan B (an oral emergency contraception), which the plaintiffs consider to
be abortifacients. The court found that the government had not demonstrated
that these specific contraceptives furthered the government’s interest in
promoting public health. The court further noted that, “when the beliefs of a
closely-held corporation and its owners are inseparable, the corporation
should be deemed the alter-ego of its owners for religious purposes” [13].
This view is not shared by all district court judges.

The plaintiffs in _Hobby Lobby Stores v. Sebelius_ , who also sought an
injunction specifically against providing Plan B and IUDs, were unsuccessful
after the judge held that Hobby Lobby is not a religious organization and that
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that all women have
access to contraceptive services [14].

While these decisions seem to be unpredictable, companies with a clear
religious purpose, even when for-profit, are more likely to be successful in
their challenges. As Judge Heaton said in _Hobby Lobby_ , “The court has not
found any case concluding that secular, for-profit corporations…have a
constitutional right to the free exercise of religion” [14].

Many of the lawsuits brought by nonprofit institutions have been filed on
behalf of Catholic and Christian colleges, such as Belmont Abbey College [15],
Wheaton College [16], East Texas Baptist University [17], and Colorado
Christian University [18]. Unlike the lawsuits filed by for-profit companies,
the suits filed by nonprofits have been largely unsuccessful. Most have been
dismissed for being premature because, unlike for-profit companies, which were
required to comply with the mandate as of August 2012, plaintiffs at
nonprofits have until August 2013 to comply and have not yet been able to
demonstrate that they have been harmed by the mandate. However, there has
recently been a major change on this front.

On December 18, 2012, the D.C. Court of Appeals ruled that the Belmont Abbey
and Wheaton College cases should not have been dismissed [19]. In oral
arguments, the federal government stated that it was never planning on
enforcing the contraception mandate against religious colleges and
institutions and that HHS would be publishing a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
in the first quarter of 2013 and issuing a new Final Rule by August 2013 [19].
The court promised to hold the government to its word, and lawsuits against
the contraception mandate are pending until HHS has amended its rules. As an
enforcement mechanism, the court has ordered that HHS must file status reports
with the court every 60 days [19].

### The Current Status of the Mandate

Employers who do not believe that the compromise is sufficient have sued and
will continue to sue the federal government. Because these cases are decided
on an ad-hoc basis and affect individual companies rather than the general
applicability of the contraception mandate in general, their outcomes have
varied significantly. The lower court cases have affected individual companies
but have not affected the general applicability of the contraception mandate.
However, the December 18, 2012, opinion by the D.C. Circuit Court ushered in
significant changes.

In response to the court ruling, the Department of Health and Human Services
issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in February 2013. The proposed rules
[20] expand compromises to nonprofit religious institutions such as colleges
and hospitals. Under the proposed rules, these institutions would be
completely removed from the process of providing contraceptive coverage to
enrollees. Not only would these institutions be exempt from directly paying
for contraceptive coverage, but they would not have to contract with or
arrange for contraceptive coverage by insurance companies. Instead an
institution would self-certify as a nonprofit religious organization that
opposes providing contraceptive coverage on religious grounds. The
organization would submit this self-certification to its insurance provider,
which would then notify enrollees and provide them separate contraception
coverage at no cost to the employer or to the enrollee. Similarly, the
employees of religious organizations that are self-insured would be covered by
an insurance provider arranged for by a third-party administrator. The
proposed rules are open to public commentary through April 2013.

It is likely that there will be further adjustments to the contraception
mandate down the road.

## Read More

    
        * Health policy/Affordable Care Act,
    * Religion and health care/Conscientious objection,
    * Reproductive health/Contraception
    

### References

    
        1. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Pub L No 111-148. 
    2. Coverage of preventive health services, 42 USC section 300gg-13(a)(4) (Supp. 2010).
    
    3. Institute of Medicine. _Clinical Preventive Services for Women: Closing the Gaps._ Published July 19, 2011. Accessed January 2, 2013.
    
    4. Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury; Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department of Labor; Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services. Group health plans and health insurance issuers relating to coverage of preventive services under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Interim final rules with request for comments. _Fed Regist._ 2011;76(149):46621-46626.
    

PubMed Google Scholar

    
        5. Guttmacher Institute. State policies in brief: insurance coverage of contraceptives. http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_ICC.pdf. Accessed January 2, 2013.
    
    6. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Decision on contraception. http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/decision-contraception.html. Accessed January 2, 2013.
    
    7. A statement by U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius [news release]. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services; January 20, 2012. Accessed December 12, 2012.
    
    8. Times Topics: contraception and insurance coverage (religious exemption debate). _New York Times._http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/health/diseasesconditionsandhealthtopics/health_insurance_and_managed_care/health_care_reform/contraceptionindex.html. Accessed January 2, 2013.
    
    9. Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury; Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department of Labor; Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services. Certain preventive services under the Affordable Care Act. _Fed Regist._ 2012;77(55):16501-16508.
    
    10. Administration releases advance notice of proposed rulemaking on preventive services policy [news release]. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services; March 16, 2012. Published March 16, 2012. Accessed January 2, 2013.
    
    11. Goodstein L. Bishops reject White House’s new plan on contraception. _New York Times._ February 11, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/12/us/catholic-bishops-criticize-new-contraception-proposal.html?scp=1&sq=Catholic%20Bishops%20Reject%20New%20Plan%20on%20Contraception&st=cse. Accessed December 10, 2012.
    
    12. Hall R.  The Women’s Health Amendment and religious freedom: finding a sufficient compromise. _J Health Care Law Policy_. 2012;15(2):401-424.
    

Google Scholar

    
        13. _Tyndale House Publishers v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. 12-1635 (D DC 2012).
    
    14. _Hobby Lobby Stores v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. 12-1000 (WD Ok 2012).
    
    15. _Belmont Abbey College v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. 11-1989 (D DC 2012).
    
    16. _Wheaton College v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. 12-1169 (D DC 2012).
    
    17. _East Texas Baptist University v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. H-12-3009 (SD Tex 2012).
    
    18. Complaint, _Colo Christian Univ v Sebelius_ , Civil Action Complaint No. 11-03350 (D Col 2011).
    
    19. _Wheaton College v Sebelius_ , Civil Action No. 12-5273 (D DC Cir 2012).
    
    20. Internal Revenue Service, the Employee Benefits Security Administration, and the Health and Human Services Department. Proposed rules: coverage of certain preventative services under the Affordable Care Act. https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2013/02/06/2013-02420/coverage-of-certain-preventive-services-under-the-affordable-care-act. Accessed February 20, 2013.
    

### Citation

_Virtual Mentor._ 2013;15(3):220-225.

### DOI

10.1001/virtualmentor.2013.15.3.hlaw1-1303.

The viewpoints expressed in this article are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views and policies of the AMA.

### Author Information

    
        * **Lauren Sydney Flicker, JD, MBE** is a 2012-2014 fellow in the Cleveland Fellowship in Advanced Bioethics, a multi-institutional program administered by the Cleveland Clinic. In 2010, Ms. Flicker was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Pennsylvania Center for Bioethics and an adjunct professor at Earle Mack School of Law at Drexel University in Philadelphia. Her research focuses on the legal rights and ethical questions in assisted reproduction and physician-assisted suicide.
    

### Art of Medicine Contest

Winning artist is awarded a $5000 prize.

Learn more

### You may also be interested in

Mar 2019

## How Should Nonprofit Hospitals’ Community Benefit Be More Responsive to

Health Disparities?

Michael Rozier, PhD, MHS, Susan Goold, MD, MA, MHSA, and Simone Singh, PhD

Mar 2019

## How Can Clinicians Catalyze Investments to Improve Community Health?

Robin Hacke, MBA and Alyia Gaskins, MPH

Mar 2019

## Hospitals’ Obligations to Address Social Determinants of Health

Hannah R. Sullivan

Jan 2019

## Why Physicians Should Advocate for Undocumented Immigrants’ Unimpeded

Access to Prenatal Care

Rachel Fabi, PhD

### Also in this Issue

#### Mar 2013

![](/sites/journalofethics.ama-

assn.org/files/styles/teaser_image_style_450x225_/public/2018-07/shutterstock_1015109143.jpg?itok=F_0eJ4uU)

Viewpoint

## The Limits of Conscientious Refusal: A Duty to Ensure Access

Margaret Little, PhD and Anne Drapkin Lyerly, MA, MD

![](/sites/journalofethics.ama-

assn.org/files/styles/teaser_image_style_450x225_/public/2018-08/shutterstock_566091370.jpg?itok=9Ne-2ck1)

Policy Forum

## Protecting Positive Claims of Conscience for Employees of Religious

Institutions Threatens Religious Liberty

Christopher O. Tollefsen, PhD

![](/sites/journalofethics.ama-

assn.org/files/styles/teaser_image_style_450x225_/public/2018-09/shutterstock_437089900.jpg?itok=6dAY0lAA)

Case and Commentary

## Invoking Shared Beliefs in End-of-Life Decision Making

William J. Hogan, Jr., MD and Juan R. Velez, MD

![](/sites/journalofethics.ama-

assn.org/files/styles/teaser_image_style_450x225_/public/2018-07/shutterstock_499379230.jpg?itok=mJErY30t)

Case and Commentary

## Medical School Accommodations for Religious and Cultural Practices

Lori Arviso Alvord, MD

View Full Issue

# AMA Journal of Ethics®

## Illuminating the Art of Medicine

## Footer menu

    
        * About
    * Conditions of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * FAQ
    * Contact
    

![American Medical

Association](/themes/custom/ama_joe_theme/images/brand/logo.svg)

Copyright 2019 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. ISSN
2376-6980

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

