
    
        * Billionaires
    
      * All Billionaires 
      * World's Billionaires 
      * Forbes 400 
      * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
      * China's Richest 
      * India's Richest 
      * Indonesia's Richest 
      * Korea's Richest 
      * Thailand's Richest 
      * Japan's Richest 
      * Australia's Richest 
      * Taiwan's Richest 
      * Singapore's Richest 
      * Philippines' Richest 
      * Hong Kong's Richest 
      * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation
    
      * All Innovation 
      * AI & Big Data 
      * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
      * Cloud 100 2018 
      * Consumer Tech 
      * Cybersecurity 
      * Enterprise & Cloud 
      * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
      * Games 
      * Green Tech 
      * Healthcare 
      * Oracle BrandVoice 
      * SAP BrandVoice 
      * Science 
      * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
      * Sharing Economy 
      * Social Media 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership
    
      * All Leadership 
      * Careers 
      * CMO Network 
      * Crowe BrandVoice 
      * Deloitte BrandVoice 
      * Diversity & Inclusion 
      * Education 
      * Entrepreneurs 
      * ForbesWomen 
      * Franchises 
      * Leadership Strategy 
      * Small Business 
      * Under 30 
      * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money
    
      * All Money 
      * Banking & Insurance 
      * Crypto & Blockchain 
      * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
      * Fintech 
      * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
      * Investing 
      * Markets 
      * Personal Finance 
      * Retirement 
      * Taxes 
      * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
      * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer
    
      * All Consumer 
      * Food & Drink 
      * Hollywood & Entertainment 
      * Media 
      * Real Estate 
      * Retail 
      * SportsMoney 
    * Industry
    
      * All Industry 
      * Aerospace & Defense 
      * Energy 
      * Flexport BrandVoice 
      * Manufacturing 
      * Policy 
      * Transportation 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle
    
      * All Lifestyle 
      * Arts 
      * Boats & Planes 
      * Capital One BrandVoice 
      * Cars & Bikes 
      * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
      * Dining & Drinking 
      * Forbes Travel Guide 
      * ForbesLife 
      * Watches & Jewelry 
      * Travel 
      * Vices 
    * BrandVoice
    
      * AppDynamics 
      * Capital One 
      * Cole Haan 
      * Crowe 
      * Deloitte 
      * ExtraHop 
      * Flexport 
      * Impact Partners 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
      * Oracle 
      * SAP 
      * ServiceNow 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor
    
      * All Advisor 
      * Credit Cards 
      * Personal Loans 
      * Brokerage 
      * Checking Accounts 
      * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured
    
      * 30 Under 30 2019 
      * Daily Dozen Briefing 
      * Forbes8 
      * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
      * Forbes Editors' Picks 
      * Forbes Finds 
      * Forbes Insights: AI 
      * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
      * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
      * Forbes Video 
      * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
      * Newsletters 
      * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
      * Tech MD 
      * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
    

# Busted! Health Insurers Secretly Spent Huge To Defeat Health Care Reform

While Pretending To Support Obamacare

![Rick

Ungar](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f44c2a69d509af79a723c15f759aa28?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Rick Ungar

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

I write from the left on politics and policy.

    
        * Share to facebook __
    * Share to twitter __
    * Share to linkedin __
    

(Image credit: AFP via @daylife)

No matter what your perspective on the Affordable Care Act, this shocking bit
of news should concern—and disturb—you greatly.

According to the National Journal’s Influence Alley, at the very same time the
American Health Insurance Plans (AHIP)—the health insurance industry super
lobby—was cutting a deal with the White House leading to its stated support of
the proposed Obamacare legislation, they were secretly funneling huge amounts
money to the Chamber of Commerce to be spent on advertising designed to
convince the public that the legislation should be defeated.

How much money?

A stunning $102.4 million spent over just 15 months.

While one would not think that so much money could be spent in secret, AHIP
pulled it off by utilizing a completely legal process of funneling the cash to
the Chamber under the radar while putting the giant expenditure on their books
under the simple heading of ‘advocacy’.

According to the National Journal:

> The backchannel spending allowed insurers to publicly stake out a pro-reform
position while privately funding the leading anti-reform lobbying group in
Washington. The chamber spent tens of millions of dollars bankrolling efforts
to kill health care reform.

>

> The behind-the-scenes transfers were particularly hard to track because the
law does not require groups to publicly disclose where they are sending the
money or who they are receiving it from.

>

> For example, in its 2009 IRS filing, AHIP reported giving almost $87 million
to unnamed advocacy organizations for "grassroots outreach, education and
mobilization, print, online, and broadcast advertising and coalition building
efforts" on health care reform. That same year, the chamber reported receiving
$86.2 million from an undisclosed group. Bloomberg's Drew Armstrong first
reported the AHIP-chamber link. The $86 million accounted for about 42 percent
of the total contributions and grants the chamber received.

>

> The next year followed a similar pattern. In 2010, AHIP reported giving
$16.5 million to unnamed advocacy organizations working on health care reform
and the chamber reported receiving about $16.2 million from an undisclosed
source, which the Alley has learned was AHIP. The $16.2 million accounted for
about 8.6 percent of the total contributions and grants the chamber received
that year.

So, why would AHIP try to secretly destroy a legislative scheme that would
drive millions of new customers into their arms thanks to the mandated
insurance provisions?

According to Neera Tanden, who served as the senior advisor for health reform
at the Department of Health and Human Services and was a member of the Obama
White House health reform team, it was all about the Medical Loss Ratio
(MLR)—the provision of the ACA that not only requires the health insurance
companies to spend 80 percent of your premium dollars on actual health care
expenditures, but further requires that they refund to their customers any
amounts they fail to spend as required by the MLR.

The total rebates under the law that will shortly be refunded to insurance
customers are estimated to total $1.1 billion for 2011 alone—clearly
motivation for the insurers to defeat the law although one wonders if it
wouldn't be easier for these companies to simply follow the law and spend
according to the MLR.

Any industry group is free to take whatever position it believes to be in the
best interests of its members. However, to present itself as being supportive
of critically important proposed law while secretly spending over $100 million
to defeat the very same legislation is the ultimate in duplicitous behavior
and should make very clear just what the health insurance industry is all
about.

Whether you support or oppose the Affordable Care Act, I cannot imagine that
this type of behavior would be acceptable to _any_ American and stands as a
shining example of the corruption big money imparts to our political system.

If the insurance industry lacks sufficient spine to take a legitimate stand on
a piece of legislation that is critical to its interests—and ours— how do you
imagine they are going to behave when you find yourself depending on these
people to come through for you during a medical emergency?

To borrow a phrase from Keith Olbermann (remember him?), these have to be the
worst people in the world.

_Contact Rick at thepolicypage@gmail.com and Twitter @rickungar_

_**You might also like:**_

**_Appeals-Court Decision Gives Roberts A Way To Uphold Obamacare_**

**_Democrats Pre-Emptively Second-Guess Each Other on Obamacare's Supreme
Court Reckoning_**

**_On Thursday, Roberts Is Likely To Write The Supreme Court Opinion That
Partially Overturns Obamacare_**

![Rick

Ungar](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f44c2a69d509af79a723c15f759aa28?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Rick Ungar

Contributor

I am a Senior Political Contributor at Forbes and the official 'token lefty,'
as the title of the page suggests. However, writing from the 'left of center'
should not be...

Read More

    
        * Print
    * Site Feedback
    * Tips
    * Corrections
    * Reprints & Permissions
    * Terms
    * Privacy
    * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
    * AdChoices
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

