

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

SubscribeLog In

Log In

Today’s Paper

The Upshot|Is Medicare for All the Answer to Sky-High Administrative Costs?

    
        *     *     *     *     *     * Advertisement
    

Upshot

Supported by

The New Health Care

# Is Medicare for All the Answer to Sky-High Administrative Costs?

It would save money compared with private plans, but would also probably shed
features that some might miss.

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2018/10/16/upshot/16up-health-

medicarePRINT/merlin_97741400_0250a847-6d4f-49ae-90c1-9669fc77c0ea-

articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

Nurses rallying for Medicare for All in Washington in 2015, on the 50th
anniversary of the founding of Medicare. Three years later, the idea has a lot
of support.CreditCreditJacquelyn Martin/Associated Press

![Austin Frakt](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2015/08/01/upshot/up-frakt-

headshot/up-frakt-headshot-thumbLarge.jpg)

By Austin Frakt

    
        * Oct. 15, 2018
    *       *       *       *       *       *       * Calls for a Medicare for All system are growing louder. Many Democrats have embraced it, while President Trump said last week that it would raise health care costs drastically.
    

Democrats say that giving people the option to partake in Medicare — no matter
their age — will actually cut costs.

American administrative costs for health care are the highest in the world,
and they argue that one advantage of Medicare for All is that it would save
money because Medicare's administrative costs are below those of private
insurers.

Does that argument hold up?

## Don’t forget about Medicare’s private plans

Medicare’s administrative costs were $8.1 billion last year, or 1.1 percent of
total spending, close to the proportion it has been in recent years.

But some have argued that the actual cost is higher because of services
performed for Medicare by other parts of the government that aren’t accounted
for: The Social Security Administration collects premiums, the Internal
Revenue Service collects taxes for the program, the F.B.I. provides fraud
prevention services, and at least seven other federal agencies and departments
also do work that benefits Medicare.

The claim that these administrative costs are overlooked is false. As annual
reporting of Medicare’s finances plainly states, they are accounted for.

But there _is_ something missing from the $8.1 billion Medicare administrative
cost figure, as Kip Sullivan explains in a 2013 paper published in the Journal
of Health Politics, Policy and Law. Although it accurately accounts for the
federal government’s administrative costs, it does not include those borne by
private plans that also offer Medicare benefits.

In addition to the traditional (public) Medicare plan, Medicare is also
available from private plans through the Medicare Advantage program. Today,
one-third of people using Medicare are in such plans, up from about one-fifth
a decade ago. Moreover, all Medicare drug benefits are administered through
private plans.

National Health Expenditure data shows both the government’s administrative
costs for Medicare and those of Medicare’s private plans. Putting them
together for the most recent year available (2016), they reach $47 billion, or
7 percent of total Medicare spending — well above the administrative costs
borne directly by the Medicare program.

Medicare’s private drug benefit plans incur administrative costs that are
about 11 percent of their spending. All of this additional, private
administrative cost is paid for by taxpayers and, through their premiums,
people who use Medicare.

Medicare’s direct administrative costs are not only low, but they also have
been falling over the years, as a percent of total program spending. Yet the
program’s total administrative costs — including those of the private plans —
have been rising.

“This reflects a shift toward more enrollment in private plans,” Mr. Sullivan
said. “The growth of those plans has raised, not lowered, overall Medicare
administrative costs.”

## The high costs of private insurer plans

Making an accurate estimate of the administrative costs of Medicare for All
would depend, in part, on whether it would be more like an expansion of
traditional Medicare (with its 1.1 percent administrative cost rate) or of all
of Medicare, including its private plans (with a combined 7 percent
administrative cost rate).

Yet both figures are well below private insurers’ administrative costs, which
run about 13 percent of spending (this also includes profit), according to
America’s Health Insurance Plans, an advocacy organization for the industry.

Some critics have argued that Medicare’s administrative cost rate appears
artificially low because Medicare enrollees’ health spending is so high.
Average Medicare spending per beneficiary is just over $12,000 per year; for
an average worker in a private plan, it’s about $6,000. If you simply divide
administrative costs by total spending, you will get a lower number for
Medicare for this reason alone.

This is true, but the government’s administrative costs for Medicare are still
below those of private plans. The government’s administrative costs are about
$132 per person compared with over $700 for private plans. One reason
Medicare’s are so much lower is that it reaps economies of scale. It also
benefits from not needing to do much marketing, and it doesn’t earn profits.

A final critique of Medicare’s administrative costs is that they’re
inefficiently low because the program doesn’t spend enough on anti-fraud
efforts.

This is hard to prove or disprove. The government engages in a number of
Medicare anti-fraud activities that more than pay for themselves. Perhaps
another dollar spent tracking fraud would yield more than a dollar in return.

Still, even if Medicare did every bit as much in this area as the private
sector, it would not raise its administrative costs by much.

“While private health plans have active anti-fraud, waste and abuse efforts,
their total spending on this is very low,” said Andrew Naugle, a health care
consultant with Milliman who studies health plan administrative costs. “For
most plans, it’s not even in the top 10 categories of administrative
spending.” **__**

## Features that may be worth the cost

Although Medicare for All might shed some administrative costs, it could also
shed some other features, including some that many people appreciate.

“We should keep in mind that traditional Medicare and private plans are
completely different products, and thus their associated administrative cost
loads are very different,” Mr. Naugle said.

Traditional Medicare is primarily focused on processing payments to providers,
while private plans — including those offered by Medicare Advantage, employers
and Affordable Care Act marketplace plans — engage in care management, which
could help coordinate care for people with chronic conditions. Private plans
also establish networks of physicians, which could help steer enrollees to
higher-quality providers.

These activities cost money and are things traditional Medicare doesn’t do, at
least not directly. It has, however, put in new programs to give health care
providers incentives to better coordinate care.

Another point in favor of private plans is that they’re more responsive to
consumer demand. For this reason, private plans have provided some benefits
that Medicare hasn’t — or provided them long before Medicare did.

For example, drug coverage was commonplace in private plans well before
Medicare put in a universal prescription drug benefit in 2006. Another is that
traditional Medicare still doesn’t have an out-of-pocket limit, whereas that’s
standard for private plans.

But let’s get back to the main question we posed at the top: Are Democrats
right that Medicare’s administrative costs are below those of private
insurers? The answer is yes. But that’s in part because private plans do
things that Medicare doesn’t. Whether those things are worth higher
administrative costs is a value judgment on which reasonable people can
disagree.

Austin Frakt is director of the Partnered Evidence-Based Policy Resource
Center at the V.A. Boston Healthcare System; associate professor with Boston
University's School of Public Health; and adjunct associate professor with the
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. He blogs at The Incidental
Economist. @afrakt

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B6 of the New York
edition with the headline: Using Medicare for All Is Likely to Reduce Some
Costs, but Also Some Benefits. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

    
        *     *     *     * Advertisement
    

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

listings & more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

### opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

### arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

### living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

### more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### Subscribe

    
        * home delivery
    * digital subscriptions
    * Crossword
    * Cooking
    * email newsletters
    * corporate subscriptions
    * education rate
    * mobile applications
    * replica edition
    

## Site Information Navigation

    
        * © 2019 The New York Times Company
    * Contact Us
    * Work with us
    * Advertise
    * Your Ad Choices
    * Privacy
    * Terms of Service
    * Terms of Sale
    * Site Map
    * Help
    * Help
    * Subscriptions
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

