

icon-circle-arrow-up icon-circle-arrow-right

Menu

Verywell Health

Differences Between Universal Coverage and Single-Payer

    
        * Share 
    * Flip 
    * Email
    

Search

Search Clear GO

#### More in Health Insurance

    
        * More Types 
    * Healthcare Reform 
    * Affordable Care Act & Obamacare 
    * Medicare 
    * Medicaid 
    * Prescription Drug Insurance 
    * Financial Aid & Subsidies
    

View More

#### Tools & Resources

    
        * Thyroid Test Analyzer 
    * Doctor Discussion Guides 
    * Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer 
    * Lipid Test Analyzer
    
    * Skin Cancer Symptoms 
    * Juniper Berries 
    * Sciatic Nerve 
    * Hemp Oil for Skin 
    * Postural Drainage 
    * Meditation and Migraine
    
    * ####  Health A-Z
    
      * Arthritis
      * Type 2 Diabetes
      * Heart Disease
      * Digestive Health
      * Lung Cancer
      * Multiple Sclerosis
      * View All 
    * ####  Prevention & Treatment
    
      * Vaccines
      * First Aid
      * Surgery
      * Herbal Medicine
      * Supplements
      * Healthy Aging
      * View All 
    * ####  Health Care
    
      * Health Insurance
      * Public Health
      * Patient Rights
      * Health Technology
      * For Caregivers & Loved Ones
      * For Healthcare Professionals
      * View All
    

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Fit Verywell Mind Verywell Family

Health Insurance

More Types

Print

# Differences Between Universal Coverage and Single-Payer

##

By Kelly Montgomery | Updated May 06, 2019

### In This Article

Table of Contents

Expand

    
        * Universal Coverage
    
    * Single-Payer System
    
    * Two-Tier Healthcare
    
    * Challenges in the U.S.
    
    * Socialized Medicine
    
    * Around the World
    

View All

Back To Top

![Health

Insurance](https://www.verywellhealth.com/thmb/Qs_6sArolTNuPQbUjiS2O9YwdXA=/220x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/Illo_HealthInsurance-56f5b0b45f9b5829866536cd.png)

#### More in Health Insurance

    
        * More Types 
    * Healthcare Reform 
    * Affordable Care Act & Obamacare 
    * Medicare 
    * Medicaid 
    * Prescription Drug Insurance 
    * Financial Aid & Subsidies
    

Health care reform has been an ongoing debate in the U.S. for decades. Two
terms that are often used in the discussion are universal health care coverage
and a single-payer system. They're not the same thing, despite the fact that
people sometimes use them interchangeably.

And while single-payer systems generally include universal coverage, many
countries have achieved universal coverage without using a single-payer
system. Let's take a look at what the two terms mean, and some examples of how
they're implemented around the world.

### Universal Coverage

Universal coverage refers to a health care system where every individual has
health coverage. To date, there are no less 32 countries with some for some
form of universal health coverage, the first of which was Norway in 1912.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, there were 28.1 million Americans without
health insurance in 2016, a sharp decline from the 46.6 million who had been
uninsured prior to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

In contrast, there are no uninsured Canadian citizens; their government-run
system provides universal coverage. Thus, Canada has universal health care
coverage, while the United States does not.

It is important to note, however, that the 28.1 million uninsured in the U.S.
includes an estimated 4.7 million undocumented immigrants. Canada's
government-run system does not provide coverage to undocumented immigrants.

### Single-Payer System

On the other hand, a **** single-payer system is one in which there is one
entity—usually the government— responsible for paying health care claims.

In the United States, Medicare and the Veterans Health Administration are
examples of single-payer systems.

Medicaid is sometimes referred to as a single-payer system, but it is actually
jointly funded by the federal government and each state government. So
although it's a form of government-funded health coverage, the funding comes
from two sources rather than one.

People who are covered under employer-sponsored health plans or individual
market health plans in the U.S. (including ACA-compliant plans) are not part
of a single-payer system, and their health insurance is not government-run. In
these markets, thousands of separate, private insurance companies are
responsible for paying members' claims.

There are currently 17 countries that offer a single-payer system, including
Norway, Japan, the United Kingdom, Kuwait, Sweden, Bahrain, Brunei, Canada,
United Arab Emirates, Finland, Slovenia, Italy, Portugal, Cyprus, Spain, and
Iceland.

### Two-Tier Healthcare

In most cases, universal coverage and a single-payer system go hand-in-hand,
because a country's federal government is the most likely candidate to
administer and pay for a health care system covering millions of people.

It is difficult to imagine a private entity like an insurance company having
the resources, or even the overall inclination, to establish a nationwide
health care coverage system.

However, it is very possible to have universal coverage without having a
single-payer system, and numerous countries around the world have done so.

Some countries operate a **two-tier system** in which the government provides
basic health care with secondary coverage available for those can afford a
higher standard of care.

Denmark, France, Australia, Ireland, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Israel each
have two-tier systems.

While Medicare operates similarly in the United States, the supplement Medicap
coverage if offered and managed by a private health insurer rather than the
government.

### Challenges in the United States

Some experts have suggested that the United States should incrementally reform
its current health care system to provide a government-funded safety net for
the sick and the poor (sort of an expanded version of the ACA's Medicaid
expansion) while requiring those who are more fortunate health-wise and
financially to purchase their own policies.

However, the political gridlock that has been in place over the Affordable
Care Act over the last several years makes it difficult to imagine such a
proposal gaining enough traction to pass. But it is technically possible to
construct such a system, which would provide universal coverage while also
having multiple payers.

While it is theoretically possible to have a national single-payer system
without also having universal health coverage, it is extremely unlikely to
ever occur because the single-payer in such a system would undoubtedly be the
federal government. If the U.S. federal government were to adopt such a
system, it would not be politically viable for them to exclude any individual
citizen from health coverage.

Despite this, a growing number of congressional representatives have called
for the establishment of "Medicare for All," a proposal popularly endorsed by
the supporters of Vermont Senator Bernie Sander his in 2016 presidential bid
(and one incorrectly labeled "socialist" by most in the Republican Party.)

### Socialized Medicine

Socialized medicine is another phrase that is often mentioned in conversations
about universal coverage, but this model actually takes the single-payer
system one step further.

In a socialized medicine system, the government not only pays for the
healthcare but operates the hospitals and employs the medical staff. In the
United States, the Veterans Administration (VA) is an example of socialized
medicine.

The National Health Service (NHS) in the United Kingdom is an example of a
system in which the government pays for services and also owns the hospitals
and employs the doctors.

But in Canada, which also has a single-payer system with universal coverage,
the hospitals are privately operated and doctors are not employed by the
government. they simply bill the government for the services they provide.

The main barrier to any socialized medicine system is the government's ability
to effectively fund, manage, and update its standards, equipment, and
practices to offer optimal health care. It is a challenged faced by the VA as
well as governments like South Africa that struggle with a crumbling
healthcare infrastructure in the face of extreme poverty and a high employment
rate.

### Health Coverage Around the World

According to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, several countries have truly achieved universal coverage with 100
percent of their population covered.

Today, 18 countries offer true universal health coverage: Australia, Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.

In addition, several other countries have achieved near-universal coverage
with more than 98 percent of their population insured, including Austria,
Belgium, Japan, and Spain.

In contrast, only a little over 91 percent of the U.S. population was insured
in 2016, and Gallup tracking indicated that the percentage of Americans with
health coverage had dropped to under 88 percent by late-2017.

Let's take a look at the various ways that some countries have achieved
universal or near-universal coverage:

#### Germany

Germany has universal coverage but does not operate a single-payer system.
Instead, everyone living in Germany is required to maintain health coverage.
Most employees in Germany are automatically enrolled in one of more than 100
non-profit "sickness funds," paid for by a combination of employee and
employer contributions.

Alternatively, there are private health insurance plans available, but only
about 11 percent of German residents choose private health insurance.

#### Singapore

Singapore has universal coverage, and large health care expenses are covered
(after a deductible) by a government-run insurance system called MediShield.
But Singapore also requires everyone to contribute between 7 and 9.5 percent
of their income to a MediSave account.

When patients need routine medical care, they can take money out of their
MediSave accounts to pay for it, but the money can only be used for certain
expenses, such as medications on a government-approved list.

In Singapore, the government directly subsidizes the cost of health care
rather than the cost of insurance (as is the case with insurance plans
purchased through the ACA health exchanges in the United States).

As a result, the amount people have to pay for their healthcare in Singapore
is much lower than it would be under a U.S.-style model.

#### Japan

Japan has universal coverage but does not use a single-payer system. Coverage
is mainly provided via thousands of competing health insurance plans in the
Statutory Health Insurance System (SHIS). Residents are required to enroll in
coverage and pay ongoing premiums for SHIS coverage, but there is also an
option to buy private, supplemental health insurance.

By implementing a less burdensome single-payer model (rather than the separate
government, private, and government-linked private health insurance mechanisms
we have in the United States), governments like Japan are able to better
streamline their national healthcare delivery.

#### United Kingdom

The United Kingdom is an example of a country with universal coverage and a
single-payer system. Technically speaking, the U.K. model can also be
classified as socialized medicine since the government owns most of the
hospitals and employs the medical providers.

Funding for the UK's National Health Service (NHS) comes from tax revenue.
Residents can purchase private health insurance if they want to. It can be
used for elective procedures in private hospitals or to gain faster access to
care without the waiting period that might otherwise be imposed for non-
emergency situations.

Difference Between Medicaid and Obamacare

Was this page helpful?

Thanks for your feedback!

Sign up for our Health Tip of the Day newsletter, and receive daily tips that
will help you live your healthiest life.

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

What are your concerns?

Other Inaccurate Hard to Understand Submit

Article Sources

    
        * Gallup. U.S. Uninsured Rate Held Steady at 12.2% in Fourth Quarter of 2017. January 16, 2018.
    * Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Measuring Health Coverage. May 2016.
    * U.S. Census Bureau, Health Insurance Coverage in the United States, 2016. published September 2017.
    * U.S. Census Bureau, Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States, 2005. Published August 2006.
    

Continue Reading

    
        * ![Female doctor giving a health insurance card to a patient](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### What to Know About Universal Health Care Coverage

    
        * ![Health insurance helps patients get the medical care they require](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Is Universal Health Care the Same as Socialized Medicine?

    
        * ![Medicare for All universal healthcare](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Medicare for All and Universal Health Care

    
        * ![Medicare for More of Us: An overview of the various proposals](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Expanding Single-Payer Coverage in the United States

    
        * ![Department of Veterans Affairs sign](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### How Socialized Medicine Works

    
        * ![Growing profits](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Are Health Insurance Companies Making Unreasonable Profits?

    
        * ![Frequently asked questions about ColoradoCare universal coverage initiative](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### FAQs About Colorado's Universal Coverage Plan

    
        * !['Medicare For All' Rallies Held Across U.S. Ahead Of Senate Health Care Vote](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Democrat and Republican Legislation Will Impact Your Health Coverage

    
        * ![A woman signs up for public health insurance.](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### The Pros and Cons of Public Option Health Insurance

    
        * ![Crowd of people](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Why Do We Still Not Have Universal Coverage, Even With the ACA?

    
        * ![Medicare Part D drug costs](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### Medicare Pays More for Drugs Than Medicaid or the VA

    
        * ![Your state's health insurance exchange makes it easy to comparsion shop for coverage](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### What Exactly Is a Health Insurance Exchange, Anyway?

    
        * !["Do not enter" sign held by physician: health care rationing.](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### How Health Care Rationing in the United States Affects Even You

    
        * ![The Healthcare.gov website.](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### The Issues of Healthcare Reform Past and Future

    
        * ![Pharmacist helping customer with over-the-counter products](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### How Healthcare Rationing Works

    
        * ![Close up daughter helping senior father fill out insurance paperwork in clinic waiting room](//:0)
    

Health Insurance

#### What's the Difference Between Medicaid and Obamacare?

Verywell Health

Daily Health Tips to Your Inbox

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

Follow Us

    
        * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * Instagram
    * Flipboard
    
    * Health A-Z 
    * Prevention & Treatment 
    * Health Care 
    * Editorial Policy
    * About Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertise
    * Cookie Policy
    * Careers
    * Terms of Use
    * Contact
    

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Fit Verywell Mind Verywell Family

Ⓒ 2019 About, Inc. (Dotdash) — All rights reserved

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information: **verify here**.

Verywell is part of the Dotdash publishing family:

    
        * The Balance
    * Lifewire
    * Trip Savvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

