

Skip to content

![Logo: The Washington Times](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/images/TWTlogo3.5238e37e24b5.png)![Logo: The Washington

Times](//twt-assets.washtimes.com/img/WLogoNoBack.b80e1949f96a.png)  
_Reliable Reporting. The Right Opinion._

**Subscribe**

**Welcome**

**Sign In**

Sign In Today's E-Edition Subscribe

Sign Out Today's E-Edition My Account Subscribe

    
        * News
      * Politics
      * National
      * World
      * Security
      * Business & Economy
      * D.C. Local
      * Faith & Family
      * Inside Politics
      * Inside the Beltway
      * Inside the Ring
      * Culture
      * Entertainment
      * Technology
      * Obituaries
      * Just the Headlines
      * Trump Central
      * Photo Galleries
      * Video
    * Policy
      * Energy & Environment
      * Banking & Finance
      * Health Care Reform
      * Second Amendment
      * Immigration Reform
      * Homeland & Cybersecurity
      * Aerospace & Defense
      * Taxes & Budget
      * Law Enforcement & Intelligence
      * Transportation & Infrastructure
    * Investigations
      * Waste, Fraud & Abuse
      * Media Spotlight
      * Dive Deeper
    * Opinion
      * Opinion Main
      * Commentary
      * Editorials
      * Letters
      * Pruden on Politics
      * Charles Hurt
      * David Keene
      * Tammy Bruce
      * Ralph Z. Hallow
      * Stephen Moore
      * Cal Thomas
      * Clifford D. May
      * Cheryl K. Chumley
      * Joseph Curl
      * Everett Piper
      * Matt Mackowiak
      * Robert Knight
      * Rapid Reactions
      * Tim Constantine
      * Books
      * Cartoons
      * Threat Assessment
      * U.S.-Russia Crosstalk
    * Sports
      * Sports Main
      * Redskins
      * Football
      * Baseball
      * Basketball
      * NCAA
      * Thom Loverro
      * Deron Snyder
      * Tennis
      * Golf
      * Hockey
      * Soccer
      * Horse Racing
      * NASCAR & Racing
    * Special Reports
      * Special Reports Main
      * America's Opioid Addiction
      * Good Intentions Gone Wrong
      * Agricultural Mixed-Use
      * SonoSpineÂ®
      * Commerce Alliance Against China
      * #GreaterKarachi
      * New Africa
      * Rolling Thunder XXXII
      * Qatar
    * Games
      * Games Main
      * Play Sudoku
      * Crossword Puzzle
      * Word Search
      * Quizzes
    * Subscribe
    * Sign In
    

**TRENDING:**

Donald Trump

China

Mexico

Nba

White House

Boston

Senate

Russia

NFL

Robert Mueller

    
        * Home
    * News
    * National
    

# Catholic Church collects $1.6 billion in U.S. contracts, grants since 2012

Follow Us ![](//twt-assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-facebook.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-twitter.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-instagram.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-rss.jpg)

Search Search Keyword:

## Recommended

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2018/11/15/8thGradeQuiz-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Are you smarter than an 8th grader?

![President Donald Trump speaks on the South Lawn at the White House, Monday,

June 10, 2019, in Washington as he honors Team Penske for the 2019

Indianapolis 500 win. \(AP Photo/Patrick Semansky\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Trump_35352.jpg-312fc_c243-0-2356-2113_s85x85.jpg?30538a3a55cf430586487040e0194f903f373a2e)

### 'Tariff man' Trump, Mexico snipe over supposed side deal

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/25/FB-1980MovieQuotes-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Can you guess the 1980s movie from its famous quote?

![Democratic Gov. John Bel Edwards smiles as he describes the end of a

legislative session that saw his teacher pay raise and education spending

plans win final passage, on Thursday, June 6, 2019, in Baton Rouge, La. \(AP

Photo/Melinda Deslatte\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/06/louisiana_session_ends_92011_c456-0-3192-2736_s85x85.jpg?f7d75d8f68f524503fcba1a18d2603bb28ae1c6e)

### Democratic Louisiana governor positioned to fend off GOP challenge:

'We're all a little bit nervous'

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2015/04/21/pistol_c180-0-843-663_s85x85.jpg?75ff37c0864ffe6f9bf163f0d7252dc3cac9e8dc)

### Quiz: How well do you know your guns?

SPONSORED CONTENT

![How To: Fix Your Fatigue And Get More Energy](https://twt-

media.washtimes.com/media/image/2016/08/17/Gundry-85.jpg)

## How To: Fix Your Fatigue And Get More Energy

## Commentary

![staff](https://twt-thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2016/clifford-

may-350_s85x119.jpg?aa9e42ea593811e08acc2f2e2737164ab5d201f0)

### Clifford D. May

Why Trump's brand of nationalism works

![staff](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2013/Keene_David-350_s85x119.jpg?aa9e42ea593811e08acc2f2e2737164ab5d201f0)

### David Keene

Misplaced enthusiasm for sending Trump to jail

![staff](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2014/JOSEPHCURL_s85x128.jpg?16424286286e9939f60f4f4896cfd955df2559c2)

### Joseph Curl

Anatomy of a 'fake news' story

View all __

## Question of the Day

### Is Trump right to say Mexico cares more about the border than Democrats?

Question of the Day

Yes

No

Not sure

View results

## Story TOpics

    
        * Religion_Belief
    * Politics
    * Social Issues
    * Catholic Charities
    * Washington
    

![Amid Pope Francis' first-ever visit to the U.S. this week, some analysts

are digging into the books to note the amount of money the American government

doles out to Catholic charities every year. \(Associated Press\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2015/09/24/9_242015_aptopix-us-pope-

francis8201_c0-365-4940-3245_s885x516.jpg?0e0b76c71a596dbb48b2f0387e8ac6a87078f5d0)__

Amid Pope Francis ' first-ever visit to the U.S. this week, some analysts are
digging into the books to note the amount of money the American government
doles out to Catholic charities every year. (Associated Press) more >

__Print

By Kelly Riddell - The Washington Times - Thursday, September 24, 2015

Not to be lost in the pomp and circumstance of Pope Francis' first visit to
Washington is the reality that the Catholic Church he oversees has become one
of the largest recipients of federal largesse in America.

The Church and related Catholic charities and schools have collected more than
$1.6 billion since 2012 in U.S. contracts and grants in a far-reaching
relationship that spans from school lunches for grammar school students to
contracts across the globe to care for the poor and needy at the expense of
Uncle Sam, a Washington Times review of federal spending records shows.

Former Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York once famously noted in 1980
that the government funded 50 percent of Catholic Charities' budget,
commenting "private institutions really aren't private anymore." Today, those
estimates remain about the same, according to Leslie Lenkowsky, who served as
the chief executive officer of the Corporation for National and Community
Service under George W. Bush.

* * *

**SEE ALSO: Pope Francis beseeches world leaders at U.N. to protect the
environment**

* * *

Catholic Charities USA, the largest charitable organization run by the church,
receives about 65 percent of its annual budget from state and federal
governments, making it an arm of the federal welfare state, said Brian
Anderson, a researcher with the Manhattan Institute.

The federal government came to increasingly rely on the church to help it with
Lyndon B. Johnson's "War on Poverty," and the charities "imbued with their new
faith in the government's potential to solve social problems, eagerly accepted
government money," Mr. Anderson wrote in an essay for the Manhattan Institute.

* * *

* * *

Catholic Charities received nearly a quarter of its funding from government by
the end of the 1960s, more than half by the late 1970s and more than 60
percent by the mid-1980s, the level where it has remained ever since, Mr.
Anderson said.

* * *

**SEE ALSO: Pope's call for immigration leniency unlikely to change debate**

* * *

Today, Catholic charity work is a large part of this nation's social safety
net, according to Mr. Lenkowsky, now a professor of practice in public affairs
and philanthropy at Indiana University.

"A lot of the charity is distributing food, running homeless shelters, most
things considered charitable," said Mr. Lenkowsky. "So what we're not talking
about is federal money being paid for priests and religious activities."

Fifty-seven government agencies are now contracting with the Catholic Church.
If the church were a state, its $1.6 billion in funding would rank it about
43rd out of the 50 states in total federal funding, according to analysis by
Adam Andrzejewski, founder of OpenTheBooks.com. The majority of those funds
are dedicated to refugee services and rehabilitation.

"Churches have generally looked to find common cause with secular goals,
adapting their activities to the secular philanthropic model, if only to
benefit from grants from the U.S. government," Olivier Zunz, a social
historian, wrote in his book "Philanthropy in America." "Catholic Relief
Services and federated Protestant charities have acted not as missions but as
humanitarian institutions combining taxpayer money with their own for carrying
out modernizing projects in many theaters around the world."

However, Mr. Anderson argues, because the Catholic Church and its charities
are so ingrained in the U.S. government's welfare system, it's hard to reform
and better it. For example, in 1996 Catholic Charities lobbied heavily against
welfare-reform law and met with then-President Clinton to help derail it. At
the time, a Jesuit priest, the Rev. Fred Kammer, who is now the director of
the Jesuit Social Research Institute at Loyola University, said the welfare-
reform law would be "a national social catastrophe. No one will be spared the
consequences."

There's also friction between state and church, with Catholic charities taking
on such a prominent role in the government's welfare system.

Conservative Christians, unlike Catholics and some other religious charities
such as those run by Lutherans, have resisted taking federal money to do
charitable work, insisting proselytism and good works go hand in hand and
can't be separated from one another -- which most federal and state grants
require.

"If a religious institution is required to do something that is in conflict of
its religious views, it may opt out from receiving federal funding or make the
pragmatic decision to stay in to get the funding," said Mr. Lenkowsky.

For example, most of the Catholic charities in Illinois have decided to close
down their adoption programs rather than comply with a state requirement that
says they can no longer receive state funding if they turn away same-sex
couples for adoptive services or foster care.

"On one hand the government can't make any laws infringing on someone's civil
liberties, but it also has to protect free expression of religion, and those
are in tension in the age of the welfare state, where you are contracting with
a religious organization to deliver secular social services," Mr. Lenkowsky
said. In many of these cases, it will be up to the courts to decide, he added.

Georgetown University, the nation's oldest Catholic and Jesuit University,
broke with church doctrine in order to accommodate for civil rights.

When faced with the decision to officially recognize a student homosexual
group on its campus, it decided to formally recognize it for fear it would be
in violation of Washington, D.C.'s civil rights law and anti-discrimination
protections. The school wanted to build a new dormitory at the time and needed
municipal bonds to secure it.

For Catholic Charities USA, the priority of helping those in need trumps all,
and they can't fulfill that mission without financial assistance from the
government.

"While Catholic Charities agencies, and many other faith-based non-profits,
will continue to work with families and individuals on the brink, we know that
in order for our nation to truly make a significant change in the numbers of
those in poverty, we need support and commitment from the for-profit sector
and from government. We cannot do this alone," the group said in a statement
to The Times.

The nation is better off having Catholic charities participate in the federal
welfare system than the alternative of having only secular organization and
the government do it, Mr. Lenkowsky said.

"Not only would Catholic charities be hurt, but our society would be much
worse off because these services would be provided by government employees and
secular service agencies run by social workers," Mr. Lenkowsky said. "There's
certain things Catholic charities can do that social workers can't do, like
pastoral counseling -- a minister trained to give counseling to people facing
critical issues like substance abuse."

If Catholic charities were cut out of the federal system, secular social
workers may determine that pastors may not be qualified to give counseling,
eliminating a helpful avenue for some in need, he said.

Copyright (C) 2019 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint
permission.

#### The Washington Times Comment Policy

The Washington Times welcomes your comments on Spot.im, our third-party
provider. Please read our Comment Policy before commenting.

**Click to Read More and View Comments**

**Click to Hide**

## Top Stories

![President Donald Trump stands with Juanita Duggan, president and CEO of

NFIB, before speaking to the National Federation of Independent Businesses

75th anniversary celebration, Tuesday, June 19, 2018, in Washington. \(AP

Photo/Evan Vucci\) ** FILE **](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/AP_18170654681140_c636-0-3987-3351_s85x85.jpg?59ae625777aeb8ddd0f756977ce284c89a5a6a8b)

### 'It's like the Ottoman Empire': Once-powerful business group now 'unseen

and unknown' in D.C.

![Vice President Mike Pence, left, and Secret Service Director Joseph Clancy

stand as President Donald Trump shakes hands with FBI Director James Comey

during a reception for inaugural law enforcement officers and first responders

in the Blue Room of the White House, Sunday, Jan. 22, 2017 in Washington. \(AP

Photo/Alex Brandon\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2017/01/24/trump_78368_c1138-0-4174-3036_s85x85.jpg?5f15660f712c763243df5b9df575e02a94bb1879)

### DOJ reveals scope of Trump campaign surveillance probe

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2014/12/02/122_2014_americanflagpasspor8201_c240-0-1040-800_s85x85.jpg?268321b9ecf14b86741a7ec893e279a0e7482210)

### Quiz: US Citizenship Test - Could You Pass?

![Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II is a family of single-seat, single-engine,

all-weather stealth multirole fighters. The fifth-generation combat aircraft

is designed to perform ground-attack and air-superiority missions. It has

three main models: the F-35A conventional takeoff and landing \(CTOL\)

variant, the F-35B short take-off and vertical-landing \(STOVL\) variant, and

the F-35C carrier-based catapult-assisted take-off but arrested recovery

\(CATOBAR\) variant. The F-35 descends from the Lockheed Martin X-35, the

winning design of the Joint Strike Fighter \(JSF\) program. It is built by

Lockheed and many subcontractors, including Northrop Grumman, Pratt &

Whitney, and BAE Systems. The United States plans to buy 2,663 F-35s, which

will provide the bulk of the crewed tactical airpower of the U.S. Air Force,

Navy, and Marine Corps in coming decades. Deliveries of the F-35 for the U.S.

military are scheduled until 2037 with a projected service life up to

2070](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/03/12/39788632113_aba4b9d2d7_o_c194-0-894-700_s85x85.jpg?652f4c4d4068d2a05b57d8bdccbcd26fa2326b14)

### Pentagon, Lockheed Martin F-35 agreement is largest defense deal in

history

![U.S. Navy and Philippine Coast Guard divers conduct search-and-rescue

operation for the sunken passenger ferry, MV Princess of the Stars, off

Sibuyan Island in central Philippines on Wednesday, June 25, 2008. \(AP

Photo/Bullit Marquez\) ** FILE **](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/AP_08062701004_c0-0-1606-1606_s85x85.jpg?84fb8c463ef7ed3d5a1bf7b1019137ce2cde4e66)

### Pentagon eyes controversial diet in bid to build more lethal warriors

![5632091445_b58c69f551_o](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/03/12/5632091445_b58c69f551_o_c134-0-834-700_s85x85.jpg?c81fcebf420cbdef80d4f3f14c31c522d394b161)

### Fastest combat planes in the US Air Force

![In this May 13, 2019, file photo Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y.,

speaks at the final event for the Road to the Green New Deal Tour at Howard

University in Washington. \(AP Photo/Cliff Owen, File\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/05/congress_green_new_deal_99048_c396-0-1983-1587_s85x85.jpg?7d2f9fa19f0718d8617445356350527451d44889)

### Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez defends pay raises for Congress, calls

opposition 'superficial'

![Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks to members of the media at the State

Department, Monday, June 10, 2019. \(AP Photo/Pablo Martinez

Monsivais\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Pompeo_60842.jpg-c1f33_c822-0-4455-3633_s85x85.jpg?ae392eadde811252d9742867246d4ab8a5083826)

### Mike Pompeo: 45 days to see if U.S.-Mexico border deal is working

![Britain's Prince Harry and Meghan Markle arrive at Nottingham Academy in

Nottingham, England, Dec. 1, 2017. \(AP Photo/Frank Augstein\) ** FILE

**](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/25/britain_american_royal_baby__79495_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Piers Morgan calls out U.K. media silence on 'selfish' Meghan Markle's

Trump snub

![In this May 23, 2019, photo, the U.S. Supreme Court building at dusk on

Capitol Hill in Washington. The Supreme Court is rejecting a challenge to

federal regulation of gun silencers, just days after a gunman used one in a

shooting rampage that killed 12 people in Virginia. The justices did not

comment Monday, June 10, in turning away appeals from two Kansas men who were

convicted of violating federal law regulating silencers \(AP Photo/Patrick

Semansky\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Supreme_Court_Silencers_08931.jpg-e658c_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Justices reject challenge to 'In God We Trust' on U.S. money

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2014/05/16/ap95111701682_c105-0-1209-1104_s85x85.jpg?9e9eb5d2b3b204065b17b6e46e4c560d2e310e29)

### Quiz: Take the political scandals in U.S. history test

![In this Nov. 30, 2017, file photo, Blackwater founder Erik Prince arrives

for a closed meeting with members of the House Intelligence Committee on

Capitol Hill in Washington. \(AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin\) ** FILE

**](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/30/congress_trump_investigations_47325_c1271-0-3864-2593_s85x85.jpg?a7a071a078708d4f1df1d17cfbdfcfb56a4223f8)

### Robert Mueller exploited cellphone GPS to track Trump associates

![In this May 20, 2014, file photo, James Geurts, deputy for Acquisition of

the U.S. Special Operations Command at MacDill Airforce Base, looks at

sketches of the Tactical Assault Light Operator Suit \(TALOS\) during the

Special Operations Forces Industry Conference in Tampa, Fla. \(AP Photo/Tamara

Lush\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/AP_120093493346_c0-274-1958-2232_s85x85.jpg?0be3c68281a23a97b4d10d5908a7837227a21a8b)

### Pentagon's quest for an Iron Man-inspired suit ignites a technological

revolution

![Maxim Defense PDX Pistol](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/01/18/Maxim_Defense_PDX_Pistol_c101-0-801-700_s85x85.jpg?dcca30bcf2ae8cc98edf0abcd34e3b2608411c67)

### Most exciting new handguns for 2019

![Musicians play music next to the U.S. border wall topped with razor wire in

Tijuana, Mexico, Sunday, June 9, 2019. \(AP Photo/Eduardo

Verdugo\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Mexico_Daily_Life_94698.jpg-392d1_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Lawmakers block border wall funds in House version of Pentagon budget

plan

![The words "Tijuana, Mexico" stand on the Mexican side of the

border with the U.S. where migrants wait to be attended to apply for asylum in

the U.S., in Tijuana, Mexico, Sunday, June 9, 2019. The mechanism that allows

the U.S. to send migrants seeking asylum back to Mexico to await resolution of

their process has been running in Tijuana since January, and one element of an

agreement to head off Trump's threat of U.S. tariffs on all imports from

Mexico is to extend that program across the entire border. \(AP Photo/Eduardo

Verdugo\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/APTOPIX_Mexico_Migrants_40284.jpg-77392_c936-0-4092-3156_s85x85.jpg?f942d492131a5cf14a3d9c5ea282f57702a97942)

### Mexico pressured to slow migration or face renewed tariff threat under

Trump deal

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/05/16/2000sEventsQuiz-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Do you remember the 2000s?

!["The American people want change, real change, and we have got to

provide that change," Democratic presidential candidate Bernard Sanders

said. \(Associated Press\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/6_9_2019_election-2020-iowa-28201_c906-0-4535-3629_s85x85.jpg?6d6cfce5f9a6a5078616231ee32e7a9634dee063)

### Sense of urgency: 2020 Democratic candidates fight for Iowa's attention

with absence of Biden

### Newsletters

    
        *  Breaking News
    *  Daily
    *  Weekly
    *  Pruden on Politics
    *  Charles Hurt
    *  Today's Opinion
    

Terms of Use / Privacy Policy

### Find us on Facebook

    
        * The Washington Times
    * Opinion
    * Local
    * Sports
    

### Find us on Twitter

    
        * The Washington Times
    * Opinion
    * Local
    * Sports
    
    * Subscribe
    * Classifieds
    * E-edition
    * Customer Service
    * Careers
    * Terms
    * Privacy
    * RSS
    * Advertise
    * FAQ
    * About
    * Contact
    

###### All site contents (C) Copyright 2019 The Washington Times, LLC | 3600

New York Avenue NE | Washington, DC 20002 | 202-636-3000

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c69_1G6fdlihY.gif)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/878499686/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

