

Skip to main content

Google Tag Manager

    
        * Experts
    * Events
    * Briefing Book
    * Resources
    * About
    * Contact
    * Support
    * Fiscal Facts
    

Twitter

Facebook

RSS

![Logo

Site](https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/sites/all/themes/tpc_theme/logo.png)

Sort by RelevanceDate

Items per page 102550100

    
        * Topics
      * Individual Taxes
      * Business Taxes
      * Federal Budget and Economy
      * State and Local Issues
      * Campaigns, Proposals, and Reforms
    * TaxVox Blog
    * Research & Commentary
    * Laws & Proposals
    * Model Estimates
    * Statistics
    * Features
    

### The Tax Policy Center's

## Briefing Book

A citizen’s guide to the fascinating (though often complex) elements of the US
tax system.

### Tax Policy Center Briefing Book

# Some Background

    
        * Briefing Book
    * Some Background
    * Federal Budget
    * How do US taxes compare internationally?
    
    * Chapters
      * Introduction
        * Introduction
          * Introduction
      * Some Background
        * Federal Budget
          * What are the sources of revenue for the federal government?
          * How does the federal government spend its money?
          * What is the breakdown of tax revenues among federal, state, and local governments?
          * How do US taxes compare internationally?
        * Federal Budget Process
          * How does the federal budget process work?
          * What is the history of the federal budget process?
          * What is the schedule for the federal budget process?
          * What is reconciliation?
          * How is a budget resolution enforced?
          * What is PAYGO?
          * What are rescissions?
        * Federal Budget Outlook
          * How accurate are long-run budget projections?
          * What have budget trends been over the short and long term?
          * How much spending is uncontrollable?
          * What are tax extenders?
          * How did the TCJA affect the federal budget outlook?
          * What options would increase federal revenues?
          * What does it mean for a government program to be off-budget?
        * Taxes and the Economy
          * How do taxes affect the economy in the short run?
          * How do taxes affect the economy in the long run?
          * What are dynamic scoring and dynamic analysis?
          * Do tax cuts pay for themselves?
          * On what do economists agree and disagree about the effects of taxes on economic growth?
          * How might the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act affect economic output?
        * Economic Stimulus
          * What is the role of monetary policy in business cycles?
          * What are automatic stabilizers and how do they work?
          * What characteristics make fiscal stimulus most effective?
        * Distribution of Tax Burdens
          * How are federal taxes distributed?
          * Are federal taxes progressive?
          * How should progressivity be measured?
          * What is the difference between marginal and average tax rates?
          * What criticisms are levied against standard distributional analysis?
          * How should distributional tables be interpreted?
          * Who bears the burden of the corporate income tax?
          * Who bears the burden of federal excise taxes?
          * How do financing methods affect the distributional analyses of tax cuts?
          * How do taxes affect income inequality?
        * Tax Expenditures
          * What are tax expenditures and how are they structured?
          * What is the tax expenditure budget?
          * Why are tax expenditures controversial?
          * What are the largest tax expenditures?
          * How did the TCJA affect tax expenditures?
        * Tax Gap and Tax Shelters
          * What is the tax gap?
          * What does the IRS do and how can it be improved?
          * What is a tax shelter?
        * History of the Tax Code
          * What did the 2008–10 Tax Stimulus Acts do?
          * What did the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 do?
          * How did the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act change personal taxes?
          * How did the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act change business taxes?
      * Key Elements of the U.S. Tax System
        * Individual Income Tax
          * What is the standard deduction?
          * What are itemized deductions and who claims them?
          * How did the TCJA change the standard deduction and itemized deductions?
          * What are personal exemptions?
          * How do federal income tax rates work?
          * What are tax credits and how do they differ from tax deductions?
          * How do phaseouts of tax provisions affect taxpayers?
        * Capital Gains and Dividends
          * How are capital gains taxed?
          * What is the effect of a lower tax rate for capital gains?
          * How might the taxation of capital gains be improved?
          * What is carried interest, and should it be taxed as capital gain?
        * AMT
          * What is the AMT?
          * Who pays the AMT?
          * How much revenue does the AMT raise?
        * Taxes and the Family
          * What is the child tax credit?
          * What is the adoption tax credit?
          * What is the earned income tax credit?
          * How does the tax system subsidize child care expenses?
          * What are marriage penalties and bonuses?
        * Taxes and the Poor
          * How does the federal tax system affect low-income households?
          * What is the difference between refundable and nonrefundable credits?
          * Can poor families benefit from the child tax credit?
          * Why do low-income families use tax preparers?
          * How does the earned income tax credit affect poor families?
          * What are error rates for refundable credits and what causes them?
          * How do IRS audits affect low-income families?
        * Taxes and Retirement Saving
          * What kinds of tax-favored retirement arrangements are there?
          * How large are the tax expenditures for retirement saving?
          * What are defined benefit retirement plans?
          * What are defined contribution retirement plans?
          * What types of nonemployer-sponsored retirement savings accounts are available?
          * What are Roth individual retirement accounts?
          * Who uses individual retirement accounts?
          * How does the availability of tax-favored retirement saving affect national saving?
          * What’s the difference between front-loaded and back-loaded retirement accounts?
          * What is an automatic 401(k)?
          * How might low- and middle-income households be encouraged to save?
        * Taxes and Charitable Giving
          * What is the tax treatment of charitable contributions?
          * What entities are tax-exempt?
          * Who benefits from the deduction for charitable contributions?
          * How would various proposals affect incentives for charitable giving?
          * How large are individual income tax incentives for charitable giving? 
          * How did the TCJA affect incentives for charitable giving?
        * Taxes and Health Care
          * How much does the federal government spend on health care?
          * Who has health insurance coverage?
          * What tax provisions subsidize the cost of health care?
          * How does the tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance work?
          * What are premium tax credits?
          * What is the Cadillac tax?
          * What tax changes did the Affordable Care Act make?
          * How do health savings accounts work?
          * How do flexible spending accounts for health care expenses work?
          * What are health reimbursement arrangements and how do they work?
        * Taxes and Homeownership
          * What are the tax benefits of homeownership?
          * Do existing tax incentives increase homeownership?
        * Taxes and Education
          * What tax incentives exist for higher education?
          * What tax incentives exist to help families pay for college?
          * What tax incentives exist to help families save for education expenses?
          * What is the tax treatment of college and university endowments?
        * Tax Complexity
          * Why are taxes so complicated?
          * What are the benefits of simpler taxes?
          * What policy reforms could simplify the tax code?
        * Wealth Transfer Taxes
          * How do the estate, gift, and generation-skipping transfer taxes work?
          * Who pays the estate tax?
          * How many people pay the estate tax?
          * What is the difference between carryover basis and a step-up in basis?
          * How could we reform the estate tax?
          * How should wealth be taxed?
          * What is an inheritance tax?
        * Payroll Taxes
          * What are the major federal payroll taxes, and how much money do they raise?
          * What is the unemployment insurance trust fund, and how is it financed?
          * What are the Social Security trust funds, and how are they financed?
          * Are the Social Security trust funds real?
          * What is the Medicare trust fund, and how is it financed?
        * Excise Taxes
          * What are the major federal excise taxes, and how much money do they raise?
          * What is the Highway Trust Fund, and how is it financed?
        * Taxes, Energy, and the Environment
          * What tax incentives encourage energy production from fossil fuels?
          * What tax incentives encourage alternatives to fossil fuels?
          * What is a carbon tax?
        * Business Taxes
          * How does the corporate income tax work?
          * What are pass-through businesses?
          * How are pass-through businesses taxed?
          * Is corporate income double-taxed?
        * Tax Incentives for Economic Development
          * What is the new markets tax credit, and how does it work?
          * What is the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit and how does it work?
          * What are Opportunity Zones and how do they work?
        * Taxes and Multinational Corporations
          * How does the current system of international taxation work?
          * How do US corporate income tax rates and revenues compare with other countries’?
          * What are the consequences of the new US international tax system?
          * How does the tax system affect US competitiveness?
          * How would formulary apportionment work?
          * What are inversions, and how will TCJA affect them?
          * What is a territorial tax and does the United States have one now?
          * What is the TCJA repatriation tax and how does it work?
          * What is the TCJA base erosion and anti-abuse tax and how does it work?
          * What is global intangible low-taxed income and how is it taxed under the TCJA?
          * What is foreign-derived intangible income and how is it taxed under the TCJA?
      * How Could We Improve the Federal Tax System?
        * Comprehensive Tax Reform
          * What is comprehensive tax reform?
          * What are the major options for comprehensive tax reform?
        * Broad-Based Income Tax
          * What is it a broad-based income tax?
          * What would and would not be taxed under a broad-based income tax?
          * What would the tax rate be under a broad-based income tax?
        * National Retail Sales Tax
          * What is a national retail sales tax?
          * What would and would not be taxed under a national retail sales tax?
          * What would the tax rate be under a national retail sales tax?
          * What is the difference between a tax-exclusive and a tax-inclusive sales tax rate?
          * Who bears the burden of a national retail sales tax?
          * Would tax evasion and avoidance be a significant problem for a national retail sales tax?
          * What would be the effect of a national retail sales tax on economic growth?
          * What transition rules would be needed for a national retail sales tax?
          * Would a national retail sales tax simplify the tax code?
          * What has been the state and local experience with retail sales taxes?
          * What is the experience of other countries with national retail sales taxes?
          * What did the President’s Advisory Panel on Tax Reform say about the national retail sales tax?
        * Value Added Tax (VAT)
          * What is a VAT?
          * How would a VAT be collected?
          * What would be taxed under a VAT?
          * What would the rate be under a VAT?
          * What is the difference between zero rating and exempting a good in the VAT?
          * Who would bear the burden of a VAT?
          * Is the VAT a money machine?
          * How would small businesses be treated under a VAT?
          * What is the Canadian experience with a VAT
          * Why is the VAT administratively superior to a retail sales tax?
          * What is the history of a VAT?
          * How are different consumption taxes related?
        * Other Comprehensive Tax Reforms
          * What is the flat tax?
          * What is the X-tax?
        * Recent Comprehensive Tax Reform Proposals
          * Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth: Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System, Report of the President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, November 2005
          * The Moment of Truth: Report of the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, December 2010
          * Debt Reduction Task Force, Restoring America's Future, Bipartisan Policy Center, November 2010
          * The Tax Reform Act of 2014: Fixing Our Broken Tax Code So That It Works for American Families and Job Creators, House Ways and Means Committee
          * The Graetz Competitive Tax Plan: Update for 2015
        * Return-Free Tax Filing
          * What is it return-free tax filing and how would it work?
          * What are the benefits of return-free tax filing?
          * What are the drawbacks of return-free tax filing?
          * How would the tax system need to change with return-free tax filing?
          * Who would qualify for return-free tax filing?
          * Would return-free tax filing raise taxes?
          * What was the experience in California with return-free tax filing?
          * What other countries use return-free tax filing?
      * The State of State (and Local) Tax Policy
        * State and Local Revenues
          * What are the sources of revenue for state governments?
          * What are the sources of revenue for local governments?
        * Specific State and Local Taxes
          * How do state and local individual income taxes work?
          * How do state and local sales taxes work?
          * How do state and local property taxes work?
          * How do state and local corporate income taxes work?
          * How do state estate and inheritance taxes work?
          * How do state earned income tax credits work?
          * How do state and local severance taxes work?
          * How do state and local soda taxes work?
          * How do marijuana taxes work?
        * Fiscal Federalism and Fiscal Institutions
          * How does the deduction for state and local taxes work?
          * What are municipal bonds and how are they used?
          * What types of federal grants are made to state and local governments and how do they work?
          * What are state rainy day funds and how do they work?
          * What are tax and expenditure limits?
      * Glossary
        * Glossary
          * Glossary
    

### How do US taxes compare internationally?

### Federal Budget

<4/4

Federal Budget and Economy

Q.

How do US taxes compare internationally?

A.

Total US tax revenue equaled 26 percent of gross domestic product, well below
the 33 percent weighted average for developed countries.

#### Total Tax Revenue

US taxes are low relative to those in other developed countries (figure 1). In
2015, taxes at all levels of US government represented 26 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP), compared with an average of 33 percent for the 35
member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).

Among OECD countries, only Korea, Turkey, Ireland, Chile, and Mexico collected
less than the United States as a percentage of GDP. Taxes exceeded 40 percent
of GDP in seven European countries, including Denmark and France, where taxes
were greater than 45 percent of GDP. But those countries generally provide
more extensive government services than the United States does.

![](/sites/default/files/styles/original_optimized/public/3.1.4_-_figure_1.png?itok=ysJxzzyg)

#### Composition of Tax Revenue

Income and Profits Taxes: Taxes on personal income and business profits made
up 49 percent of US tax revenue in 2015, a higher percentage than in most
other OECD countries, where such taxes averaged 34 percent of the total
(figure 2). Australia, Denmark, and New Zealand topped the United States in
this category, generating over half of their total revenue from such taxes. In
the United States, taxes on income and profits of individuals alone generated
37 percent of total tax revenue, compared with 25 percent on average within
the OECD.

![](/sites/default/files/styles/original_optimized/public/3.1.4_-_figure_2.png?itok=IGJWrTBA)

Social Security Contributions: The United States collected slightly less
revenue from retirement, disability, and other social security programs—24
percent of total tax revenue—than the 26 percent OECD average. Some countries
were well above that average: the Slovak Republic, the Czech Republic, and
Slovenia collected 40 percent or more of their revenue from that source.

Property Taxes: Property taxes provided almost twice as large a share of US
tax revenue—10 percent in 2015—than the OECD average of 6 percent. Almost all
revenue from taxes on property in the United States is collected by state and
local governments.

Goods and Services Taxes: The United States relies less on taxes on goods and
services (including both general consumption taxes and taxes on specific goods
and services) than any other OECD country, collecting 17 percent of tax
revenue this way compared with 32 percent for the OECD. The value-added tax
(VAT)—a type of general consumption tax collected in stages—is the main source
of consumption tax revenue. VAT is employed worldwide in 160 countries,
including in all 34 OECD member countries except the United States. Most
consumption tax revenue in the United States is collected by state and local
governments.

Data Sources

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2015. _OECD Tax
Statistics._ “Revenue Statistics: OECD Countries—Comparative Tables.”

———. 2015. “Consumption Tax Trends 2015.”

Further Reading

Congressional Budget Office. 2017. “International Comparisons of Corporate
Income Tax Rates. “ Publication 52419. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget
Office.

Hoo, Sonya, and Eric Toder. 2006. “The US Tax Burden Is Low Relative to Other
OECD Countries.” _Tax Notes_. May 8.

Federal Budget and Economy

Federal budget

    
        * ‹Read Previous What is the breakdown of tax revenues among federal, state, and local governments?
    *     * Read Next› How does the federal budget process work?
    

![](/sites/all/themes/tpc_theme/logo.png)

    
        * Donate Today
    
    * Topics
    * TaxVox Blog
    * Research & Commentary
    * Laws & Proposals
    * Model Estimates
    * Statistics
    * Privacy Policy
    * Newsletters
    

Twitter

Facebook

RSS

    
        * © Urban Institute, Brookings Institution, and individual authors, 2016.
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

