

Skip Navigation

![CNBC logo](//sc.cnbcfm.com/applications/cnbc.com/staticcontent/img/login-

cnbc-logo.png)

Ã—

    
        * LOG IN
    * SIGN UP
    

Keep Me Logged In

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

    
        * Sign In
    * Pro
    * Watchlist
    * Make It
    * USA
    * INTL
    

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

Markets

    
        * Pre-Markets
    * U.S. Markets
    * Europe Markets
    * China Markets
    * Asia Markets
    * World Markets
    * Currencies
    * Cryptocurrency
    * Futures & Commodities
    * Bonds
    * Funds & ETFs
    

Watchlist

Business

    
        * Economy
    * Finance
    * Health & Science
    * Media
    * Real Estate
    * Energy
    * Transportation
    * Industrials
    * Retail
    * Wealth
    * Small Business
    

Investing

    
        * Invest In You
    * Personal Finance
    * Financial Advisors
    * Trading Nation
    * Futures Now
    * Options Action
    * ETF Street
    * Buffett Archive
    * Earnings
    * Trader Talk
    

Tech

    
        * Cybersecurity
    * Enterprise
    * Internet
    * Media
    * Mobile
    * Social Media
    * Venture Capital
    * Tech Guide
    

Politics

    
        * White House
    * Policy
    * Defense
    * Congress
    * Elections
    * Europe Politics
    * China Politics
    * Asia Politics
    * World Politics
    

CNBC TV

    
        * Live Audio
    * Latest Video
    * Top Video
    * Europe TV
    * Asia TV
    * Digital Originals
    

Menu

SEARCH QUOTES __

Top Stories

Top Stories

### China's loans to other nations are causing 'hidden' debt. That...

China's lending to other countries, often shrouded in secrecy, is thought to
be higher than the amounts that are officially tracked, resulting in much
"hidden debt." That...

World Economyread more __

### Trump to sign executive order streamlining biotech regulations...

The order was viewed as a way to bolster the bottom line of farmers caught in
the crosshairs of Trump's trade war with China, sources said.

Politicsread more __

### Asia Pacific shares trade mixed as Dow winning streak ends

Shares in Asia Pacific traded mixed on Wednesday morning following an
overnight trading session on Wall Street that saw the end of the Dow Jones
Industrial Average's winning...

Asia Marketsread more __

### CrowdStrike prices IPO at $34, above range

CrowdStrike follows several other major tech companies into the public markets
this year.

Technologyread more __

### Elon Musk, at Tesla shareholder meeting, promises '400-mile range...

CEO Elon Musk spoke at Tesla's annual shareholder meeting in Mountain View,
California on Tuesday.

Technologyread more __

### Kudlow says the US economy will maintain 3% pace even without a...

Larry Kudlow says the U.S. economy will keep growing at a strong pace this
year despite the weakness seen in recent economic reports.

Marketsread more __

### Elon Musk says Tesla is waiting on an acquisition before offering...

The idea behind Tesla offering its own insurance would be to lower rates for
drivers, leveraging internal data from Tesla's AutoPilot systems to justify
that.

Technologyread more __

### The stock market is closing in on its all-time high. Here 's what...

The next test for the stock market will be whether the major indexes can break
through their all-time highs, just a short distance away.

Market Insiderread more __

### Coinbase launches its cryptocurrency debit card in six more...

Digital currency exchange Coinbase announced Wednesday its Visa debit card
will launch in Europe after debuting in the U.K. in April.

Cryptocurrencyread more __

### Bill Ackman sent letter opposing United Technologies mega-deal...

Ackman, whose Pershing Square Capital Management owned 5.8 million United
Technologies shares at the end of the first quarter, said in a letter that the
tie-up is ill-advised.

Marketsread more __

### Cramer: 'The bull is fatigued,' and the market is ready to...

"We've had a colossal rally. After this kind of run, the bull is fatigued,"
the "Mad Money" host says.

Mad Money with Jim Cramerread more __

### LaCroix parent company 's stock falls to multiyear low following...

Shares of National Beverage hit their lowest point since 2016 after a former
employee filed a lawsuit alleging he was fired after objecting to a plan to
falsely claims that...

Food & Beverageread more __

Previous Nextopen

Personal Finance

# Employers to spend about $10,000 on health care for each worker

Published Wed, Aug 9 2017 1:13 PM EDT

Sarah O'Brien@sarahtgobrien

Key Points

    
        * Health care benefits per worker will run more than $14,000. 
    * Study shows the average employee will pay $4,200 next year.
    * Biggest driver of increases are high-priced pharmaceuticals.
    

Employees at big companies should be prepared to pay 5 percent more for their
health care next year.

New results from an industry organization's annual study shows that large
employers expect the total average per-employee cost for health insurance
benefits â€” which includes premiums and out-of-pocket costs for employees and
dependents â€” to rise in 2018 to $14,156 from $13,482 this year.

With employers covering about 70 percent of that cost, the average worker will
pay 30 percent of the tab, or about $4,200.

VIDEO0:4900:49

How hospitals could kill the health insurance industry

The Bottom Line

"I think you'll see [the 5 percent rise] in premium increases," said Brian
Marcotte, president and CEO of the Washington, D.C.-based National Business
Group on Health, which released the study this week. "Most people will
probably see minimal changes to deductibles and co-pays unless they move to a
[higher-deductible] plan."

This marks the fifth consecutive year that health care costs are expected to
rise by 5 percent, according to the study. That outpaces the rate of
inflation, which was 2.54 percent in 2016 and 2 percent for the first half of
2017.

Workers' salaries also aren't rising as quickly as health care costs. The most
recent data from the Federal Reserve shows that wages are growing by 3.2
percent annually.

_Source: National Business Group on Health_

The National Business Group of Health's annual study surveyed 148 companies,
79 percent of which have 10,000 or more employees. It shows that employers
rank the cost of "specialty pharmaceuticals" as the top driver of cost
increases, which is unchanged from last year's survey results.

Basically, new treatments for specific conditions ranging from diabetes and
asthma to hemophilia and immune disorders can come with hefty price tags.

"There's a rich pipeline of specialty medicines," Marcotte said. "They can be
thousands or tens of thousands of dollars per treatment."

_Source: National Business Group on Health_

Marcotte said that the cost can vary depending on where the treatment is
administered (i.e., a hospital or doctor's office or even in the home). The
survey shows that 44 percent of companies plan to combat pharma costs in part
by better managing where patients receive those high-price medicines.

Employers also increasingly have been offer high-deductible plans as a way to
control costs. The study shows that by next year, 90 percent of large
companies will offer this option.

Under these plans â€” sometimes called consumer-driven health plans in industry
lingo â€” employees can put away tax-deductible savings in a health savings
account, or HSA. For 2017, contribution limits are $3,400 for individual
coverage and $6,750 for family plans. An extra $1,000 is allowed for people
age 55 or older.

HSA balances can carry over from year to year, and withdrawals are tax-free as
long as they go toward qualified medical expenses.

The survey also says that without such various cost-cutting measures being
implemented by employers, overall costs would increase by 6.6 percent next
year instead of the anticipated 5 percent.

Related Tags

    
        * Personal finance
    

Trending Now

    
        1. ![Tesla CEO Elon Musk speaks during the unveiling of the new Tesla Model Y in Hawthorne, California on March 14, 2019.](https://image.cnbcfm.com/api/v1/image/105797042-1552679396530gettyimages-1130598362.jpeg?v=1559854937&w=100&h=75)Elon Musk at Tesla shareholder meeting: 'It won't be long before we have a 400-mile range car'
    
    2. ![](https://image.cnbcfm.com/api/v1/image/102781166-457981457.jpg?v=1467730979&w=100&h=75)Turns out it's not baby boomers who have taken the most from Social Security
    
    3. ![Democratic candidate for President Joe Biden shakes hands as he leaves after speaking at a campaign event on June 4, 2019 in Concord, NH.](https://image.cnbcfm.com/api/v1/image/105960845-1560276586823gettyimages-1153857605.jpeg?v=1560276665&w=100&h=75)Wall Street expects a Trump win in 2020, but a new poll points to a different outcome
    
    4. ![Cranes stand at a construction site by a Chinese company in Colombo, Sri Lanka.](https://image.cnbcfm.com/api/v1/image/104912817-GettyImages-492821684_1.jpg?v=1560300598&w=100&h=75)China's loans to other countries are causing 'hidden' debt. That may be a problem
    
    5. ![Prospective homebuyers tour a model home in Albuquerque, N.M.](https://image.cnbcfm.com/api/v1/image/103643394-GettyImages-511847692.jpg?v=1532564114&w=100&h=75)The majority of consumers are wildly wrong about what it takes to get a mortgage
    

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

    
        * Subscribe to CNBC PRO
    
    * Licensing & Reprints
    
    * Join the CNBC Panel
    
    * Supply Chain Values
    
    * Advertise With Us
    
    * Closed Captioning
    
    * Digital Products
    
    * Terms of Service
    
    * Privacy Policy
    
    * News Releases
    
    * Internships
    
    * Corrections
    
    * About CNBC
    
    * AdChoices
    
    * Site Map
    
    * Contact
    
    * Careers
    
    * Help
    
    *     *     *     *     *     *     * #### News Tips
    

Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.

Get In Touch

####

CNBC Newsletters

Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox

Sign Up Now

Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and
services. Privacy Policy.

Â© 2019 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal

Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global
Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.

Data also provided by
![Reuters](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyBpZD0iTGF5ZXJfMSIgZGF0YS1uYW1lPSJMYXllciAxIiB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZpZXdCb3g9IjAgMCA2NjIuNTIgMjIxLjkzIj48ZGVmcz48c3R5bGU+LmNscy0xe2ZpbGw6bm9uZTt9LmNscy0ye2ZpbGw6I2ZmZjt9PC9zdHlsZT48L2RlZnM+PHRpdGxlPlJlZmluaXRpdl9oX3RtX3c8L3RpdGxlPjxyZWN0IGNsYXNzPSJjbHMtMSIgd2lkdGg9IjY2Mi41MiIgaGVpZ2h0PSIyMjEuOTMiLz48cGF0aCBjbGFzcz0iY2xzLTIiIGQ9Ik02MDcuNDIsMTY2LjgySDU4OS42OWwtNjItNjJoNzAuODh2MTIuNDFINTU3LjgyWk01OTguNTYsNTUuMUg0ODYuODRWMTY2LjgyaDEyLjQxVjY3LjUxaDk5LjMxWk00NDEuMzUsODQuMjV2OC4wN2gtMVY4NC4yNUg0MzcuN3YtLjg0SDQ0NHYuODRabTExLjU0LDguMDdWODQuMThoMGwtMi41LDguMTRoLS43NmwtMi41LTguMTRoMHY4LjE0aC0uODlWODMuNDFoMS41M2wyLjI3LDcuMmgwbDIuMjQtNy4yaDEuNTV2OC45MVpNODUuMzYsMTM4LjUxaDExTDg0LjE1LDExMy43NWwuNDEtLjEyYzYuNC0xLjgyLDEwLTYuOTMsMTAtMTRDOTQuNDIsODkuMzEsODgsODMuNDEsNzcsODMuNDFINTUuMXY1NS4xaDkuOTVWMTE1Ljc4aDkuNzlaTTY1LjA1LDEwNy44NFY5MS4zNWgxMC4xYzYuMTYsMCw5LjQxLDIuODUsOS40MSw4LjI1LDAsNS44NS0zLjI2LDguMjQtMTEuMjYsOC4yNFptNzEuOSw2LjA5di04LjI1SDExNy44NnYtMTRoMjYuMjhWODMuNDFIMTA3LjkxdjU1LjFIMTQ1di04LjI1SDExNy44NlYxMTMuOTNabTUwLjE4LTguMjVIMTY4LjV2LTE0aDI0Ljg5VjgzLjQxSDE1OC41NXY1NS4xaDkuOTVWMTEzLjkzaDE4LjYzWm0xOC4xOS0yMi4yN3Y1NS4xaDEwVjgzLjQxWm04Ni4yMSwwdjU1LjFoMTBWODMuNDFabTYxLjI5LDBIMzEzLjY0djguMjVoMTQuNjF2NDYuODVoOS45NVY5MS42NmgxNC42MlptMTIuMDgsMHY1NS4xaDEwVjgzLjQxWm0tOTkuNSwwdjM5LjA1aC0uMTVsLTIyLjUzLTM5SDIzMi4xNXY1NS4xaDkuMzNWOTcuNzZoLjE1bDEyLjMsMjEuNDVoMEwyNjUsMTM4LjUxaDkuNzJWODMuNDFabTE1Ni41OCwwLTEyLjkxLDQ0LjY2SDQwOWwtMTIuOS00NC42NmgtOS43NmwxNyw1NS4xaDExLjM3bDE3LTU1LjFaIi8+PC9zdmc+)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

