

Skip to main content

![Congressional Budget Office

logo](/themes/custom/cbo/images/cbo_logo_white_desktop.png)

menu ![Search](/themes/custom/cbo/images/search-icon.png)

## Main menu

    
        * About CBO
    * Topics
    * Cost Estimates
    * Interactives
    * FAQs
    * Blog
    

Enter your keywords

Sort by

Relevancy

Publication Date

# Raising the Age of Eligibility for Medicare to 67: An Updated Estimate of

the Budgetary Effects

October 24, 2013

Report

![](/sites/default/files/styles/480/public/44661-home-

Medicare.png?itok=uq9sYSvq)

CBO's new estimate of the net budgetary savings from adopting this policy is
much lower than its earlier estimates for proposals to raise Medicare’s
eligibility age. This report describes CBO’s new estimate and the reasons for
the change.

View Document

131.99 KB

## Summary

Medicare, one of the federal government’s largest programs, provides health
care benefits primarily to elderly people. The usual age of eligibility for
those benefits is 65, although certain people qualify for the program earlier.
(Medicare is available to people under age 65 who have been eligible for
Social Security disability benefits for at least 24 months or who have end-
stage renal disease.) Outlays for Medicare are projected to increase rapidly
in coming decades because of the retirement of the baby-boom generation and
because growth in per capita spending for health care is expected to continue
to exceed growth in per capita gross domestic product over the long term.
Moreover, increases in life expectancy mean that the average length of time
that people are covered by Medicare has risen significantly since the program
began in 1965. That trend, which increases the program’s costs, will almost
certainly continue.

In the course of preparing its forthcoming report on options for reducing the
budget deficit, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) updated its analysis of
an option to raise the eligibility age for Medicare from 65 to 67. The
agency’s new estimate of the net budgetary savings from that option is much
lower than its earlier estimates for proposals to raise Medicare’s eligibility
age. This report describes CBO’s new estimate and the reasons for the change.

#### What Policy Option Did CBO Analyze?

The option that CBO analyzed would raise the age of eligibility for Medicare
by two months every year, beginning with people who were born in 1951 (who
will turn 65 in 2016), until the eligibility age reached 67 for people born in
1962 (who will turn 67 in 2029). Thereafter, the eligibility age would remain
at 67. Those changes are similar to the ongoing increases in Social Security’s
full retirement age (FRA)—the age at which workers become eligible for full
retirement benefits—except that scheduled increases in the FRA include a
12-year period during which the FRA remains at 66. (Unlike Medicare, which has
a single eligibility age, Social Security allows workers to receive reduced
retirement benefits as early as age 62, and the majority of eligible people
choose to claim Social Security benefits before reaching the FRA.) Under this
option, the eligibility age for Medicare would remain below Social Security’s
FRA until 2029, when both would be 67 for people born in 1962; from that point
on, the two eligibility ages would be identical.

A change in the eligibility age for Medicare would affect people’s sources of
health insurance coverage, including Medicaid. States have the option under
current law to expand their Medicaid programs to people with income below 138
percent of the federal poverty guidelines. Although that optional Medicaid
expansion applies only to people under age 65, for this option, CBO assumed
that the age limit would increase in tandem with Medicare’s eligibility age.

#### What Is CBO's New Estimate?

Implementing this option would reduce federal budget deficits by $19 billion
between 2016 and 2023, according to estimates by CBO and the staff of the
Joint Committee on Taxation (see Table 1). That figure represents the net
effect of a $23 billion decrease in outlays and a $4 billion decrease in
revenues over that period. The decrease in outlays includes a reduction in
federal spending for Medicare as well as a slight reduction in outlays for
Social Security retirement benefits. However, those savings would be
substantially offset by increases in federal spending for Medicaid and for
subsidies to purchase health insurance through the new insurance exchanges and
by the decrease in revenues.

![](/sites/default/files/cbofiles/images/pubs-images/44xxx/44661-Table1.jpg)

Outlays for Medicare would be lower under this option because fewer people
would be eligible for the program than the number projected under current law.
In addition, outlays for Social Security retirement benefits would decline
slightly because raising the eligibility age for Medicare would induce some
people to delay applying for retirement benefits. One reason is that some
people apply for Social Security at the same time that they apply for
Medicare; another reason is that this option would encourage some people to
postpone retirement to maintain their employment-based health insurance
coverage until they became eligible for Medicare. CBO expects that latter
effect would be fairly small, however, because of two considerations: First,
the proportion of people who currently leave the labor force at age 65 is only
slightly larger than the proportion who leave at slightly younger or older
ages, which suggests that maintaining employment-based coverage until the
eligibility age for Medicare is not the determining factor in most people’s
retirement decisions. Second, with the opening of the health insurance
exchanges, workers who give up employment-based insurance by retiring will
have access to an alternative source of coverage (and may qualify for
subsidies if they are not eligible for Medicare). This option could also
prompt more people to apply for Social Security disability benefits so they
could qualify for Medicare before reaching the usual age of eligibility.
However, in CBO’s view, that effect would be quite small, and it is not
included in this estimate.

Other effects of this option would add to budget deficits, but by smaller
amounts. Federal spending for Medicaid would increase for two groups of people
whose age was between 65 and the new eligibility age for Medicare: those who,
under current law, will be dual-eligible beneficiaries (Medicare beneficiaries
who also qualify, on the basis of income and assets, to receive benefits from
Medicaid) and those who will be beneficiaries of Medicaid before turning 65
and will lose that eligibility under current law once they qualify for
Medicare. This option would cause Medicaid to remain the primary source of
coverage for members of both groups until they reached the new eligibility age
for Medicare.

Subsidies for health insurance coverage purchased through the exchanges would
also increase under this option because some of the people whose eligibility
for Medicare would be delayed would instead obtain insurance through the
exchanges and would qualify for subsidies. (Those subsidies take two forms:
tax credits to cover a portion of the premiums for policies bought through the
exchanges and additional subsidies to reduce cost-sharing payments under those
policies. The premium subsidies are structured as refundable tax credits, and
CBO estimates that, in most cases, the amounts of those credits will exceed
the total amount of federal income tax that recipients owe; the amounts that
offset the taxes that recipients owe are classified as revenue losses, and the
amounts that exceed the taxes owed are classified as outlays. Subsidies for
the cost sharing of enrollees in exchange plans are also categorized as
outlays.)

This option would also affect federal revenues, decreasing them by an
estimated $4 billion between 2016 and 2023. That decline is the net result of
several partly offsetting effects, the largest of which would be a reduction
in federal revenues because of the increase in exchange subsidies. A small
portion of those additional subsidies would take the form of reduced revenues
rather than outlays, as discussed above.

Looking farther into the future, CBO estimates that by 2038, spending on
Medicare would be about 3 percent less under this option than it would be
under current law—4.7 percent of gross domestic product rather than 4.9
percent. On the basis of its estimates for 2016 through 2023, CBO projects
that roughly two-thirds of those long-term savings from this option would be
offset by the increases in federal spending for Medicaid and exchange
subsidies and the reduction in revenues described above.

Although CBO anticipates that most people who would lose eligibility for
Medicare under this option would continue their existing health insurance
coverage or switch to other forms of coverage, the number of people without
health insurance would increase slightly. For example, CBO estimates that of
the 5.5 million people who would be affected by this option in 2023, about 50
percent would obtain insurance from their (or their spouse’s) employer or
former employer, about 15 percent would continue to qualify for Medicare on
the basis of their eligibility for disability benefits, about 15 percent would
buy insurance through the exchanges or in the nongroup market, about 10
percent would receive coverage through Medicaid, and about 10 percent would
become uninsured. To develop those estimates, CBO examined data on the
patterns of health insurance coverage among people a few years younger than
Medicare’s current eligibility age. CBO then adjusted those figures to account
for changes in sources of health insurance coverage and in participation in
the labor force as people age.

#### How Much Did CBO's Estimate Change and Why?

CBO’s current estimate of the savings to Medicare from this option is much
lower than its earlier estimates for proposals to raise Medicare’s eligibility
age. For example, in a report published in January 2012, CBO estimated that
such a policy change would produce budgetary savings of $113 billion over 10
years.

The current, lower estimate primarily reflects a new assessment by CBO that
some of the people whose eligibility for Medicare would be delayed under this
option would not cost Medicare as much, under current law, as CBO previously
projected. CBO’s current estimate incorporates a detailed analysis of the cost
of 65- and 66-year-old Medicare beneficiaries.

CBO’s analysis highlighted two points. First, at ages 65 and 66, beneficiaries
who enrolled in Medicare when they turned 65 tend to be in much better
health—and thus are substantially less expensive, on average—than
beneficiaries who were already enrolled upon turning 65 (because of disability
or end-stage renal disease). Second, the many 65- and 66-year-old
beneficiaries who are workers (or workers’ elderly spouses) with employment-
based health insurance are less costly to Medicare, on average, than other
beneficiaries at those ages. For most of those workers, employment-based
health insurance is the primary source of coverage, and Medicare is a
secondary payer—meaning that Medicare’s payments are limited to the cost-
sharing obligations that beneficiaries face under their employment-based
health insurance policies. Moreover, most beneficiaries for whom Medicare is a
secondary payer wait to enroll in Parts B and D of Medicare until they (or
their spouses) stop working. As a result, Medicare spends much less on Part A
services for those beneficiaries than it does for beneficiaries for whom
Medicare is the primary payer, and it does not pay for services covered under
Parts B and D.

Taking into account both of those factors—differences in health status between
beneficiaries who enroll in Medicare at age 65 and those already enrolled by
65, and the effect of secondary-payer status—caused a significant reduction in
CBO’s estimate of Medicare spending under current law for beneficiaries who
would be affected by the increase in the eligibility age. Mostly as a result
of those changes, CBO’s current estimate of the net costs to Medicare of those
beneficiaries under current law is roughly 60 percent lower than CBO’s
previous estimates.

By contrast, CBO’s estimate of the extent to which this option would increase
federal spending for Medicaid and exchange subsidies has not changed
significantly. Compared with previous estimates, a similar proportion of
beneficiaries who would lose Medicare eligibility under this option are
estimated to enroll in Medicaid or the health insurance exchanges.

The much smaller reduction in Medicare spending, combined with a similar
increase in non-Medicare spending, results in a net change in projected
outlays that is much smaller than previously estimated. Additionally, CBO’s
new estimate includes the option’s projected effects on federal revenues,
which was not included in previous estimates.

## Related Publications

    
        * Raising the Ages of Eligibility for Medicare and Social Security
    

January 10, 2012

    
        * Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options
    

March 10, 2011

## Stay Connected

Get CBO’s Email Updates

    
        1. Email Address
    2. Submit
    

![CBO Twitter](/themes/custom/cbo/images/social-icons/twitter-icon.png) ![CBO

Youtube](/themes/custom/cbo/images/social-icons/youtube-icon.png) ![CBO

Slideshare](/themes/custom/cbo/images/social-icons/slideshare-icon.png) ![CBO

RSS](/themes/custom/cbo/images/social-icons/rss-icon.png)

## Footer Menu

    
        * About
    * Topics
    * Cost Estimates
    * FAQs
    * Blog
    

## Footer Menu - Utility

    
        * Work at CBO
    * Business Opportunities
    * Contact CBO
    * Press Center
    * Privacy, Security, and Copyright Policies
    * Sitemap
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

