

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

    
        *     *     *     * Log In or Sign Up
    * Log In
    * Sign Up
    
    * Recode 
    * Explainers 
    * The Highlight 
    * Future Perfect 
    * The Goods 
    * Politics & Policy 
    * Culture 
    * Science & Health 
    * World 
    * Identities 
    * Energy & Environment 
    * Technology 
    * Business & Finance 
    * First Person 
    * Video 
    * Podcasts 
    * More
    
    * Recode 
    * Explainers 
    * The Highlight 
    * Future Perfect 
    * The Goods 
    * Politics & Policy 
    * Culture 
    * Science & Health 
    * World 
    * Identities 
    * Energy & Environment 
    * Technology 
    * Business & Finance 
    * First Person 
    * Video 
    * Podcasts
    

✕

# Under Trump, the number of uninsured Americans has gone up by 7 million

Even in a strong economy, Americans are losing their health coverage.

By Sarah Kliff Jan 23, 2019, 10:00am EST

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Under Trump, the number of uninsured Americans has gone up by 7
million

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/tZk9Iqj4DhCXeF57U29mL5oTBSQ=/0x0:3000x2000/1200x800/filters:focal\(1260x760:1740x1240\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/62891089/1084954282.jpg.0.jpg) Pete
Marovich/Getty Images

The number of Americans without health insurance has increased by 7 million
since President Donald Trump took office, new Gallup data released Wednesday
shows.

The country’s uninsured rate has steadily ticked upward since 2016, rising
from a low of 10.9 percent in late 2016 to 13.7 percent — a four-year high.

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/PCCaB034Qi8G5EuhJGBJfNsCDUM=/0x0:1400x806/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:1400x806\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/13708354/ssv1le24uuapzir9ocd6pq.png)

The uninsured rate is still well below where it was in 2013, before the
Affordable Care Act’s expansion of health insurance coverage began. But under
the Trump administration, a trend of Americans gaining coverage through the
private marketplaces and the Medicaid expansion appears to be reversing.

Certain demographic groups are experiencing a greater loss of coverage than
others. Gallup data shows, for example, that Americans who are younger and
lower-income have seen a greater decline in insurance coverage than those who
are older and wealthier. Women have had insurance rates decline more quickly
than men.

This trend is especially surprising given that over the same time period, the
unemployment rate has been declining. Usually, when more people have jobs, it
means more people with access to employer-sponsored health insurance. But even
during this period of job growth, America’s uninsured rate keeps climbing.

### Trump wasn’t able to repeal Obamacare. So why are uninsured rates going

up?

The Affordable Care Act is still standing law. Republicans weren’t able to
repeal Obamacare when they controlled both houses of Congress. And the one big
change they did accomplish — repealing the individual mandate — didn’t go into
effect until this year. So why was the uninsured rate rising from 2016 through
2018?

There are probably a few factors at play that are worthing thinking about

    
        1. **Obamacare premiums have risen significantly since the law took effect.** This is a challenge that started under the Obama administration and continued through the Trump administration. The Trump administration, however, took steps to make the problem more acute. It rolled back some key subsidies in a way that has made coverage more expensive for middle- and high-income Obamacare enrollees. 
    2. **Funding for Obamacare enrollment and outreach has also been cut significantly.** This means fewer people might be aware of their health insurance options. As the Gallup report notes, sign-ups on Healthcare.gov “peaked in 2016 at 9.6 million consumers [and then] declined by approximately 12.5%, to 8.4 million in 2019, based on recently released figures.”
    3. **The Trump administration has also allowed some states to require low-income residents to work in order to gain health coverage.** Two states, Arkansas and Indiana, recently got the go-ahead from the Trump administration to add work requirements to their state Medicaid programs. There is early evidence that those new regulations are causing a loss of coverage. Arkansas’s state health department, for example, estimates that more than 16,000 people have lost coverage so far under its Medicaid work requirement. 
    4. **A decent number of Americans think that Obamacare was repealed.** A YouGov poll at the end of 2017 found that 31 percent of Americans believed Republicans had successfully repealed the Affordable Care Act. More recent polling from the Kaiser Family Foundation finds that 17 percent of Americans believe the law has been repealed and 14 percent aren’t sure if it’s still standing. With that many Americans believing Obamacare doesn’t exist, it makes sense that you’re seeing lower sign-ups.
    

It’s not totally clear where this trend goes next. On the one hand, multiple
states are beginning to expand Medicaid. Nebraska, Idaho, and Utah all passed
ballot initiatives to expand the program for low-income residents in the 2018
midterms. Maine and Kansas are also likely to join the program this year.
Those changes will increase the number of Americans with health insurance
coverage.

But there are other things happening that will depress those figures. More
states are going to roll out work requirements for Medicaid. The individual
mandate penalty goes away this year, meaning there is no longer a tax for not
carrying health insurance coverage. And the Trump administration isn’t likely
to restore Obamacare’s outreach and enrollment budget anytime soon. All those
trends are likely to decrease the number of Americans who have health
insurance coverage for years to come.

## Next Up In Politics & Policy

    
        * Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for representation
    * How the US women’s team World Cup 13-0 win became about pay equity
    * Alabama’s law forcing sex offenders to get chemically castrated, explained
    * Watch Jon Stewart blast Congress on behalf of 9/11 first responders
    * The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress
    * Pete Buttigieg just gave his first foreign policy speech. He offered 5 clear proposals.
    

### Most Read

    
        1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
    2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.
    3. Mary Meeker’s most important trends on the internet  Here are all the slides, plus analysis.
    

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 15. The sidebar size is medium.

## The Latest

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63990044/Paula_Kerger_and_Yamiche_Alcindor_1.0.0.jpg)

## Apple’s attempts to limit data sharing on kids’ apps is negatively

impacting PBS

By Emily Stewart

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989647/GettyImages_1147791146.165114.0.jpg)

## Vox Sentences: Maine moves to expand abortion access

By Catherine Kim

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989585/Anthony_Noto_2.0.0.jpg)

## Why SoFi would be interested in buying naming rights to the LA football

stadium

By Theodore Schleifer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989470/Rajiv_Shah_1.0.0.jpg)

## Rockefeller Foundation’s Rajiv Shah explains how tech can actually help

save the world

By Rani Molla

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989472/1144683170.jpg.0.jpg)

## Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for

representation

By Li Zhou

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989385/BlackLivesMatterFresnoLawsuit.0.jpg)

## Support for Black Lives Matter cost church its polling place designation,

lawsuit claims

By P.R. Lockhart

Chorus

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * GDPR Commitment
    * Communications Preferences
    * Contact
    * Send Us a Tip
    * Masthead
    * About Us
    * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines
    

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

