

Skip navigation

![Federal Trade Commission Print Header](/sites/all/themes/ftc/images-

business/FTC-printheader.png)

![Federal Trade Commission: Protecting America's

Consumers](/sites/all/themes/ftc/images/FTCLogo_v5.png)

Main Menu

Search

## Utility menu

    
        * Contact
    * Stay Connected
    * Privacy Policy
    * FTC en español
    

Search form

Search

Main Menu

    
        * About the FTC
      * What We Do
        * Enforcement Authority
      * Our History
        * FTC Moments
        * FTC@100 Fireside Chat
        * Our Seal
        * Centennial Dinner & Symposium
        * Presidential Visit
      * Commissioners
        * Joseph J. Simons
        * Noah Joshua Phillips
        * Rohit Chopra
        * Rebecca Kelly Slaughter
        * Christine S. Wilson
      * Bureaus & Offices
        * Bureau of Competition
        * Bureau of Consumer Protection
        * Bureau of Economics
        * Office of Congressional Relations
        * Office of Equal Employment Opportunity and Workplace Inclusion
        * Office of International Affairs
        * Office of the Executive Director
        * Office of the General Counsel
        * Office of Policy Planning
        * Office of Administrative Law Judges
        * Office of Public Affairs
        * Office of the Secretary
        * Regional Offices
      * Biographies
        * Bureau and Office Directors
        * Acting Inspector General
        * Former Commissioners
        * Former Bureau and Office Directors
      * Budgets
        * Financial Documents
        * Other Financial Information
      * Performance
      * Office of Inspector General
        * The Inspector General
        * Reporting Fraud, Waste, Abuse or Mismanagement
        * Whistleblower Protection
        * FTC Imposter Scams
        * Reports and Correspondence
        * Semiannual Reports to Congress
        * Peer Reviews
        * What You Need to Know About the Office of the Inspector General
        * CIGIE Presidential Transition Handbook
        * Oversight.gov
        * Contact the OIG
      * FOIA
        * Frequently Requested Records
        * FOIA Reading Room
        * Make a FOIA Request
        * Will I Be Charged Fees
        * Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
      * Careers at the FTC
        * Work at the FTC
        * Life at the FTC
        * Benefits at the FTC
        * Diversity at the FTC
        * Apply to the FTC
        * Testimonials
    * News & Events
      * Press Releases
      * Commission Actions
      * Media Resources
        * Consumer Finance
        * Mergers and Competition
        * Mobile Technology
        * The Do Not Call Registry
        * Tools for Consumers
        * Truth In Advertising
        * Protecting Consumer Privacy and Security
        * Identity Theft
        * Military Consumer Protection
      * Events Calendar
        * All Events
        * Weekly Calendar
        * Weekly Calendar Archive
      * Speeches
      * Audio/Video
        * Featured Videos
        * FTC Events
        * For Consumers
        * For Business
        * En Español
        * Audio
      * Social Media
        * FTC Social Media Chats
        * Tweeting FTC Events
      * Blogs
        * Competition Matters
        * Tech@FTC
        * Comment Policy
      * Contests
        * IoT Home Inspector Challenge
        * Robocalls: Humanity Strikes Back
        * DetectaRobo
        * Zapping Rachel
    * Enforcement
      * Cases and Proceedings
        * Case Document Search
        * Merits Briefs
        * Refunds
        * Commission Decision Volumes
        * Letters and Statements
        * Petitions to Quash
        * Companies and People Banned From Debt Relief
        * Adjudicative Proceedings
        * Banned Debt Collectors
      * Data and Visualizations
      * Premerger Notification Program
        * Statute, Rules and Formal Interpretations
        * Form and Instructions
        * Informal Interpretations
        * Early Termination Notices
        * Current Thresholds
        * Filing Fee Information
        * Post-Consummation Filings (HSR Violations)
        * HSR Resources
        * Contact Information
        * First Time Filer?
      * Merger Review
      * Anticompetitive Practices
      * Rules
        * eCFR
        * Rules and Guides
        * Retrospective Review of FTC Rules and Guides
      * Statutes
      * Consumer Sentinel Network
        * Members
        * Reports
        * Newsletters
        * Data Contributors
      * Criminal Liaison Unit
        * Results
        * CLU Awards
        * Contact CLU
    * Policy
      * Advocacy
        * Amicus Briefs
        * Advocacy Filings
        * Other Applications, Petitions, and Requests
        * Economic Liberty
        * Military Task Force
      * Advisory Opinions
      * Cooperation Agreements
      * Federal Register Notices
      * Reports
        * Policy Reports
        * Litigation Status Report
        * Magnuson-Moss Warranty Public Audit Filings
        * Rotational Health Warnings
        * Webb-Pomerene Act Filings
      * Public Comments
        * Public Comments Archive
      * Studies
        * Patent Assertion Entities (PAE) Study
        * Remedy Study
      * Testimony
      * Policy Statements
      * International
        * International Competition
        * International Consumer Protection
        * International Technical Assistance Program
        * International Cooperation Agreements
        * Competition & Consumer Protection Authorities Worldwide
        * International Fellows Program
        * FTC International Monthly
      * Hearings on Competition & Consumer Protection
        * Public comment topics and process
    * Tips & Advice
      * For Consumers
      * For Military Consumers
      * Business Center
        * Advertising & Marketing
        * Credit & Finance
        * Guidance
        * Privacy & Security
        * Selected Industries
        * Protecting Small Businesses
        * Legal Resources
        * Business Blog
      * Competition Guidance
    * I Would Like To...
      * Submit a Consumer Complaint to the FTC
      * Apply for a Refund in an FTC Case
      * Report Identity Theft
      * List a Number on the National Do Not Call Registry
      * Get a Free Copy of My Credit Report
      * File a Comment
      * Report An Antitrust Violation
      * File Documents in Adjudicative Proceedings
    

You are here

    
        1. Home » 
    2. Tips & Advice » 
    3. Competition Guidance » 
    4. Guide to Antitrust Laws » 
    5. Dealings with Competitors » 
    6. Price Fixing
    

Guide to Antitrust Laws

# Price Fixing

Price fixing is an agreement (written, verbal, or inferred from conduct) among
competitors that raises, lowers, or stabilizes prices or competitive terms.
Generally, the antitrust laws require that each company establish prices and
other terms on its own, without agreeing with a competitor. When consumers
make choices about what products and services to buy, they expect that the
price has been determined freely on the basis of supply and demand, not by an
agreement among competitors. When competitors agree to restrict competition,
the result is often higher prices. Accordingly, price fixing is a major
concern of government antitrust enforcement.

A plain agreement among competitors to fix prices is almost always illegal,
whether prices are fixed at a minimum, maximum, or within some range. Illegal
price fixing occurs whenever two or more competitors agree to take actions
that have the effect of raising, lowering or stabilizing the price of any
product or service without any legitimate justification. Price-fixing schemes
are often worked out in secret and can be hard to uncover, but an agreement
can be discovered from "circumstantial" evidence. For example, if direct
competitors have a pattern of unexplained identical contract terms or price
behavior together with other factors (such as the lack of legitimate business
explanation), unlawful price fixing may be the reason. Invitations to
coordinate prices also can raise concerns, as when one competitor announces
publicly that it is willing to end a price war if its rival is willing to do
the same, and the terms are so specific that competitors may view this as an
offer to set prices jointly.

Not all price similarities, or price changes that occur at the same time, are
the result of price fixing. On the contrary, they often result from normal
market conditions. For example, prices of commodities such as wheat are often
identical because the products are virtually identical, and the prices that
farmers charge all rise and fall together without any agreement among them. If
a drought causes the supply of wheat to decline, the price to all affected
farmers will increase. An increase in consumer demand can also cause uniformly
high prices for a product in limited supply.

Price fixing relates not only to prices, but also to other terms that affect
prices to consumers, such as shipping fees, warranties, discount programs, or
financing rates. Antitrust scrutiny may occur when competitors discuss the
following topics:

    
        * Present or future prices
    * Pricing policies
    * Promotions
    * Bids
    * Costs
    * Capacity
    * Terms or conditions of sale, including credit terms
    * Discounts
    * Identity of customers
    * Allocation of customers or sales areas
    * Production quotas
    * R&D plans
    

A defendant is allowed to argue that there was no agreement, but if the
government or a private party proves a plain price-fixing agreement, there is
no defense to it. Defendants may _not_ justify their behavior by arguing that
the prices were reasonable to consumers, were necessary to avoid cut-throat
competition, or stimulated competition.

Example: A group of competing optometrists agreed not to participate in a
vision care network unless the network raised reimbursement rates for patients
covered by its plan. The optometrists refused to treat patients covered by the
network plan, and, eventually, the company raised reimbursement rates. The FTC
said that the optometrists' agreement was illegal price fixing, and that its
leaders had organized an effort to make sure other optometrists knew about and
complied with the agreement.

An agreement to restrict production, sales, or output is just as illegal as
direct price fixing, because reducing the supply of a product or service
drives up its price. For example, the FTC challenged an agreement among
competing oil importers to restrict the supply of lubricants by refusing to
import or sell those products in Puerto Rico. The competitors were seeking to
pressure the legislature to repeal an environmental deposit fee on lubricants,
and warned of lubricant shortages and higher prices. The FTC alleged that the
conspiracy was an unlawful horizontal agreement to restrict output that was
inherently likely to harm competition and that had no countervailing
efficiencies that would benefit consumers.

Q: The gasoline stations in my area have increased their prices the same
amount and at the same time. Is that price fixing?

A: A uniform, simultaneous price change could be the result of price fixing,
but it could also be the result of independent business responses to the same
market conditions. For example, if conditions in the international oil market
cause an increase in the price of crude oil, this could lead to an increase in
the wholesale price of gasoline. Local gasoline stations may respond to higher
wholesale gasoline prices by increasing their prices to cover these higher
costs. Other market forces, such as publicly posting current prices (as is
common with most gasoline stations), encourages suppliers to adjust their own
prices quickly in order not to lose sales. If there is evidence that the
gasoline station operators talked to each other about increasing prices and
agreed on a common pricing plan, however, that may be an antitrust violation.

Q: Our company monitors competitors' ads, and we sometimes offer to match
special discounts or sales incentives for consumers. Is this a problem?

A: No. Matching competitors' pricing may be good business, and occurs often in
highly competitive markets. Each company is free to set its own prices, and it
may charge the same price as its competitors as long as the decision was not
based on any agreement or coordination with a competitor.

Previous:  
Dealings with Competitors up Next:  
Bid Rigging

## Dealings with Competitors

    
        * Price Fixing
    * Bid Rigging
    * Market Division or Customer Allocation
    * Group Boycotts
    * Other Agreements Among Competitors
    * Spotlight on Trade Associations
    

## Utility menu

    
        * Contact
    * Stay Connected
    * Privacy Policy
    * FTC en español
    

## About the FTC

    
        * What We Do
    * Our History
    * Commissioners
    * Bureaus & Offices
    * Biographies
    * Budgets
    * Performance
    * Office of Inspector General
    * FOIA
    * Careers at the FTC
    

## News & Events

    
        * Press Releases
    * Commission Actions
    * Media Resources
    * Events Calendar
    * Speeches
    * Audio/Video
    * Social Media
    * Blogs
    * Contests
    

## Enforcement

    
        * Cases and Proceedings
    * Data and Visualizations
    * Premerger Notification Program
    * Merger Review
    * Anticompetitive Practices
    * Rules
    * Statutes
    * Consumer Sentinel Network
    * Criminal Liaison Unit
    

## Policy

    
        * Advocacy
    * Advisory Opinions
    * Cooperation Agreements
    * Federal Register Notices
    * Reports
    * Public Comments
    * Studies
    * Testimony
    * Policy Statements
    * International
    * Hearings on Competition & Consumer Protection
    

## Tips & Advice

    
        * For Consumers
    * For Military Consumers
    * Business Center
    * Competition Guidance
    

## I Would Like To...

    
        * Submit a Consumer Complaint to the FTC
    * Apply for a Refund in an FTC Case
    * Report Identity Theft
    * List a Number on the National Do Not Call Registry
    * Get a Free Copy of My Credit Report
    * File a Comment
    * Report An Antitrust Violation
    * File Documents in Adjudicative Proceedings
    

## Site Information

    
        * Privacy Policy
    * Website Policy
    * No FEAR Act
    * USA.gov
    * Accessibility
    * Digital Government Strategy
    * Open Government
    * Information Quality
    * Small Business Non-Retaliation Policy
    

**Federal Trade Commission** Headquarters:  
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20580  
Contact Us

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * YouTube
    * LinkedIn
    * Stay Connected
    

Stay Connected with the FTC

![Federal Trade Commission Print Footer](/sites/all/themes/ftc/images-

business/FTC-printfooter.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

