

![](https://www.americanprogress.org/content/themes/cap_core/img/c3_CAP_website_header_logo.svg)

    
        *     *     *     *     *     * ESP
    
    * ISSUES
    * EXPERTS
    * EVENTS
    * PRESS
    * ABOUT
    * DONATE
    * FACEBOOK
    * TWITTER
    * INSTAGRAM
    * TUMBLR
    * YOUTUBE
    * ESP
    
    * Trending:
    * Trump Administration
    * DACA
    * China
    * Health Care
    * Taxes
    

Women

# Contraceptive Coverage Under the Affordable Care Act

By Jamila Taylor and Nikita Mhatre Posted on October 6, 2017, 5:09 pm

![Planned Parenthood supporters rally for women's access to reproductive

health care, September 2015.

](https://cdn.americanprogress.org/content/uploads/2017/10/06125513/AP_16352592309322-PREPPEd-1024x683.jpg)

Over the past several months, the Trump-Pence administration, as well as
Congress, have attacked women’s health and rights numerous times. Greater
access to affordable and effective contraception has been one of the hallmark
achievements of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). But now, the current
administration is threatening to limit these gains with the release of
sweeping regulations that would allow any employer, insurance plan, school, or
individual to use the guise of religious or moral objection to deny access to
no-cost contraception.

By requiring coverage for contraceptives with no out-of-pocket costs, the ACA
increased women’s access to a wide range of contraceptives.

The National Women’s Law Center estimates that, as of September 2017, 62.4
million women now have insurance that covers contraception without having to
pay out of pocket. One study estimates that women saved $1.4 billion in out-
of-pocket costs in 2013 alone resulting from the ACA’s contraceptive mandate.
On average, each woman saves $255 every year.

    
        * The ACA mandates that private health plans require coverage for 18 methods of contraception used by women, including female sterilization, along with related counseling and services. It also requires this coverage to be provided with no patient out-of-pocket costs.
    * As of spring 2014, two-thirds of women using oral contraceptives and nearly 75 percent of women using the vaginal ring did not pay out-of-pocket for these methods. Additionally, another survey found that 87 percent of women do not have out-of-pocket costs for intrauterine devices (IUDs).
    * As of 2014, oral contraceptives accounted for 3.6 percent of out-of-pocket spending on health care for women with private insurance. Before the ACA’s contraception mandate, oral contraceptives accounted for nearly 21 percent of out-of-pocket spending. This decrease in the spending for oral contraceptives accounts for 63 percent of the drop in the average out-of-pocket spending on all prescription drugs.
    

Nearly all women have used contraceptives at some point in their lives, and 62
percent of women are currently using at least one method.

    
        * In a survey conducted by the Guttmacher Institute, 56 percent of women reported that access to birth control allowed them to support themselves financially, and 63 percent said that it allowed them to take better care of themselves and their families.
    * According to a recent poll, nearly 75 percent of voters believe that access to affordable birth control affects a family’s financial situation and is a vital component of equality for women.
    * Before the ACA, unless a state had a contraception coverage mandate, individual insurers and employers could choose whether or not to cover contraception. Therefore, contraceptives made up an estimated 30 percent to 44 percent all out-of-pocket health care spending for women.
    

Low-income women and women of color can face additional barriers to
contraception access due to historical and systemic biases; lack of access to
health care facilities; and economic hardship.

    
        * Both Hispanic and black women are less likely to use effective methods of contraception, such as hormonal methods and IUDs, compared with white women.
    * The rate of unintended pregnancies for Latinas is 58 percent, and the rate for black women is 79 percent. The rate for white women is 33 percent.
    * The long history of health disparities among communities of color, including disparities in reproductive health care, calls for increased access to contraception and contraceptive counseling.
    * Women experiencing economic hardship are less likely to take contraception or continue usage due to out-of-pocket costs.
    

So how much does birth control cost exactly? This chart lays it all out.

![](https://www.americanprogress.org/content/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://cdn.americanprogress.org/content/uploads/2017/10/06124050/ContraceptiveCoverage-

table-693.png)

_Jamila Taylor is a Senior Fellow at the Center for American Progress. Nikita
Mhatre is an intern at the Center._

####

    
        *     *     *     * #### Get the Latest on Women's Issues
    

#### Press Contact

Colin Seeberger

‮g​r​o​.​s​s​e​r​g​o​r​p​n​a​c​i​r​e​m​a​&commat;​r​e​g​r​e​b​e​e​s​c‭

#### Government Affairs Contact

Lia Parada

‮g​r​o​.​s​s​e​r​g​o​r​p​n​a​c​i​r​e​m​a​&commat;​a​d​a​r​a​p​l‭

#### Press Room

    
        * RELEASE: 123 Groups Sign Letter Opposing the Nomination of Ken Cuccinelli To Serve as USCIS Director
    * STATEMENT: Neera Tanden Applauds Introduction of Real Emergency Access for Aging and Disability Inclusion and Disaster Relief Medicaid Acts
    * RELEASE: Nearly 6 in 10 Parents Will Make Career Sacrifices for Child Care Needs This Summer
    

More Press

##### Issues

    
        *       * Courts
      * Criminal Justice
      * Democracy and Government
      * Disability
      * Early Childhood
      * Economy
      * Education, K-12
      * Education, Postsecondary
      * Energy and Environment
      * Foreign Policy and Security
      * Gun Violence Prevention
      * Health Care
      * Immigration
      * LGBT
      * Poverty
      * Race and Ethnicity
      * Religion and Values
      * Women
    

##### About

    
        *       * About
      * Board of Directors
      * Staff & Fellows
      * Diversity And Inclusion
      * Events
      * Reports
      * Jobs
      * Internships
      * Our Supporters
      * Privacy Policy
      * Reuse Policy
      * Terms of Use
      * State Notices
    

##### Press Room

    
        *       * Press Room
      * Logos
      * Press Inquiries
    

##### Connect

    
        *       * Contact Us
      * RSS
      * Twitter
      * Instagram
      * Facebook
      * YouTube
      * Tumblr
      * Subscribe
      * Donate
    

![](https://www.americanprogress.org/content/themes/cap_core/img/CAP-logo-

small.png)

(C) 2019 - Center for American Progress

    
        *       * ABOUT CAP
      * BOARD OF DIRECTORS
      * TRUSTEE ADVISORY BOARD
      * STAFF & FELLOWS
      * DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
      * JOBS
      * INTERNSHIPS
    
    *       * COURTS
      * CRIMINAL JUSTICE
      * DEMOCRACY AND GOVERNMENT
      * DISABILITY
      * EARLY CHILDHOOD
      * ECONOMY
      * EDUCATION, K-12
      * EDUCATION, POSTSECONDARY
      * ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
      * FOREIGN POLICY AND SECURITY
      * GUN VIOLENCE PREVENTION
      * HEALTH CARE
      * IMMIGRATION
      * LGBT
      * POVERTY
      * RACE AND ETHNICITY
      * RELIGION AND VALUES
      * WOMEN
    

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

