
    
        * ![Billy Graham Evangelistic Association](/wp-content/themes/billygraham/img/bgea.svg)
    * Give
    * Menu
    
    * Grow your Faith
      *         * Daily Devotion
        * How to Know Jesus
        * How To Share Your Faith
        * Topics
        * Answers
        * Español
        * Mobile App
        * Bookstore
    

#### Read Today's Daily Devotion

#### Get insight and inspiration from Billy Graham

![Today's Daily

Devotion](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2019/06/Devotions-

We-are-Gods-children-180x120.jpg)

    
        * TV & Radio
      *         * Television
          * Television Special
          * Billy Graham TV Classics
          * Videos
        * Radio
          * GPS: God. People. Stories.
          * Billy Graham Audio Archives
          * Decision Minute
          * News & Features
          * The Billy Graham Channel – SiriusXM
          * The Light FM – Listen Live
        * World Wide Pictures
    

#### Watch the Billy Graham TV Special

#### Canvas Cathedral

![Billy Graham TV

Special](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2019/05/1_kyzvee6j-180x101.jpg)

    
        * What We Do
      * #### Billy Graham Library
    

#### Explore the life and legacy of America’s Pastor in Charlotte, North

Carolina.

![Billy Graham Library](/wp-content/themes/billygraham/img/menu/what-we-do-

library.jpg)

    
            * Evangelism & Outreach
          * Festivals & Celebrations
          * Decision America Tour
          * Internet Evangelism
          * My Hope
          * Billy Graham Library
          * Rapid Response Team
          * TV Telephone Ministry
        * Discipleship & Training
          * Online Training
          * Billy Graham Training Center at The Cove
    
    * News
      * #### Decision Magazine
    

#### The Evangelical Voice for Today

![June

2019](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2019/06/FC-

June-2019-USA-135x177.jpg)

    
            * Stories
        * Interviews
        * Press Releases
        * Decision Magazine
        * Videos
        * Photos
        * Media Resources
    
    * About
      * #### What We Believe
    

#### Read our Statement of Faith

![What We Believe](/wp-content/themes/billygraham/img/menu/About-Nav-

Featured.jpg)

    
            * What We Believe
        * Biographies
        * Board of Directors & Key Employees
        * Financial Info
        * Contact Us
        * Careers
        * Internship Program
        * Volunteer
        * Social Media
    
    * Give
    
      * #### Give Online
    

#### Your gift helps share the Gospel

![Give Online](/wp-content/themes/billygraham/img/menu/Donate-Nav-

Featured.jpg)

    
            * Give Online
        * Give by Mail or Phone
        * Legacy Planning
          * Annuities
          * Wills & Estates
          * Stocks & Securities
          * Real Estate
        * Other Ways to Give
          * Honor & Memorial Giving
          * Non-Cash Gifts
          * Foundations
          * Pray
          * Volunteer
    
    * __
    

# How to Know You’re a Christian

By **Greg Laurie** • _October 4, 2010_ • **Topics:** Christian Living,
Salvation

__Share __Tweet

    
        * Home
    * Decision Magazine
    * October 2010
    * How to Know You’re a Christian
    

![](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2010/10/29153229/how-

to-know.jpg)

I heard the story of a man who had been down on his luck and was desperate to
make a little money. After a few other doors had closed to him, he had the
idea of going to the city zoo, hoping to land a job feeding the animals. The
manager at the zoo had no openings, but seeing how big this guy was, he
offered him another position.

"Say," he said, "our gorilla died the other day, and he was one of our most
popular exhibits. If we got you a special gorilla suit, would you put it on
and imitate him for a few days, until the new gorilla arrives? We'll pay you
well for it!"

The man was so desperate for work he agreed. In fact, after a few hours, he
really got into the part--beating his chest and shaking the bars. Huge crowds
were gathering. Maybe this won't be so bad after all, he told himself.

But one day, he was swinging on a trapeze and lost his grip. His momentum
carried him right over a tall chain-link fence into the middle of the lion's
den. Looking up at this intruder in his domain, the huge lion gave a ferocious
roar. The crowds were mesmerized.

What was the gorilla to do? If he cried out for help, it would reveal his true
identity.

He slowly walked backward away from the lion, hoping to climb the fence back
into his own cage. The lion, however, with a hungry look on his face, began to
stalk him step by step. Finally, in desperation, the gorilla hollered, "Help!"

Immediately the lion answered in an annoyed whisper, "Shut up, stupid! You'll
get us both fired!"

You see … things aren't always as they appear!

There are many people today who claim to be Christians--who may even think
they are Christians--but they are not.

## What Does Being a Christian Really Mean?

It's clear that many people really don't have a grasp on what it means to be a
believer. Do you? Are you one? Are you sure? What exactly is a Christian? Are
you born that way? If not, how exactly do you become one?

Let's look together at some clear biblical principles about what must happen
as a result of someone truly finding Jesus Christ as his or her personal Lord
and Savior.

When you ask someone if he or she is Christian, one of the most common
responses you get back is, "Of course I'm a Christian. I go to church, don't
I?" That's like saying I am a golfer because I own a set of golf clubs. Or I'm
a surfer because I own a pair of board shorts. Listen, to be a golfer you need
to golf; to be a surfer you must surf; and to be a Christian you need to walk
with God!

## Don't All Roads Lead to God?

Now you might ask, "Why is it so important that I be a Christian, anyway?
Don't all roads basically lead to God?"

Not according to Jesus!

Jesus said, "Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God" (John 3:3). Only Jesus Christ--and no other--died on
the cross for your sins. Only He promises you the hope of Heaven. Jesus
essentially said the only way you can be certain your sins are forgiven and to
know you will spend eternity in Heaven is by putting your complete trust in
Him. And there will be tangible results to show you have done that.

Don't misunderstand me, I am not suggesting that X amount of good works makes
you a Christian. Far from it. In fact, all the good works on Earth will not
save you.

The Bible says, "He saved us, not because of the righteous things we had done,
but because of his mercy. He washed away our sins, giving us a new birth and
new life through the Holy Spirit" (Titus 3:5, NLT).

This, in fact, is one of the main things that sets apart Christianity from all
other world religions. All other religious systems essentially say Do: "Do
this and you will have good karma, or you will get to Heaven, or paradise, or
nirvana." In contrast, Jesus Christ says, "Done!" That's what it meant when He
cried out on the cross, saying, "It is finished."

The transaction is complete. The price has been paid.

## It's What's Inside That Counts

If you were to ask "the man on the street" what one must do to be a Christian,
he would probably say: "Believe that Jesus is the Son of God. Believe in
miracles, Heaven and hell. Go to church, pray, read the Bible and keep the Ten
Commandments. And--oh yeah--probably be baptized. And start living a good
life."

I am going to make a statement that may be shocking to you: You can do all
those things and not necessarily be a Christian! Don't get me wrong; if you
are a true Christian you should do all of those things. You see, the outward
change is often without the inward. However, the inward change is never
without the outward.

Let's take a closer look at some of the elements of this "outward-inward"
phenomenon.

A person may pray and still not be a Christian.

Most of us pray when we're in trouble. But when the crisis blows over, what
then? God said of Israel, "These people draw near to Me with their mouths and
honor Me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from Me" (Isaiah
29:13).

You may pray with all the passion and regularity in the world, but if you have
not admitted to God that you are a sinner, lost without Him; if you have not
sought His forgiveness and salvation through the Lord Jesus Christ, it won't
do you any good. The psalmist wrote: "If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me" (Psalm 66:18, KJV).

A person may make visible changes in life and still not be a Christian.

People will "get converted" to get what they want. A non-Christian guy asks an
attractive and virtuous Christian girl out on a date. But she turns him down,
saying, "Sorry, I only date Christians."

Suddenly, the nonbeliever is saying, "Oh … praise God! I'm really into this
Christian thing, too." Probably not! And it will only be a matter of time
before the mask falls off and his true motives are revealed.

You can live a good life, be religious and even keep the Ten Commandments to
the best of your ability and still not be a Christian.

Think for a moment of the account of the Rich Young Ruler in the Gospels. One
of the accounts tells us that he came to Jesus and said, "Good Teacher, what
good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life?"

Jesus told him, "If you want to enter into life, keep the commandments." And
then the Lord told him which ones.

The young man said to Him, "All these things I have kept from my youth. What
do I still lack?" (See Matthew 19:16–21.)

Look how far this earnest young man had gone: He not only heard the commands
of God, he kept them. And he had done it since childhood!

But he didn't go far enough--he stopped short of following Jesus.

The story concludes with the young man turning his back on the Lord and
walking away sadly. And there is no record that he ever came back to Jesus.

So let's summarize. The outward without the inward is only an empty shell. You
can pray, believe in miracles, hear the Gospel and even believe in its truth,
and still not be a Christian. You can live an exemplary life, be religious and
keep the commandments of God from earliest memory and still not be a
Christian. You can be in church with other believers, hear the same message,
receive communion, and even believe that Jesus is coming back--and still not
be a Christian.

## Who Then Is a Christian?

The real question before us is one that man has been asking for years. The
Philippian jailer put it so clearly when he cried out, "What must I do to be
saved?"

Paul's response was significant, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you
will be saved" (Acts 16:31).

Fine. But what does "believing" actually mean? The Bible says that even the
demons from hell believe, and tremble at what they know very well to be true
(James 2:19). Here are the essential elements of the Good News that we must
believe and receive to become a born-again child of God:

**Realize You Are a Sinner**  
Romans 3:23 tells us, "All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God." In
other words, sin has infiltrated the human race, and not one of us has escaped
its effects.

The Bible says that prior to coming to faith, we are dead in our trespasses
and sins (Ephesians 2:1). The Greek word used here for "sins" is _hamartias_
-- "to miss the mark." It was a term used in archery. This phrase came to
represent missing or falling short of any goal, standard or purpose.

No human being in his or her own strength has hit that mark. Some of us may
miss the bull's eye farther than others, but not one of us has hit it.

Why? Because God's "mark" is absolute, total, complete, flawless perfection!
Jesus said, "Be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect" (Matthew
5:48).

**Repent of Your Sins**  
To repent means to "change" or to "turn." It's like driving down the highway,
pulling a U-turn and heading the other direction. More than simply being
sorry, it is a word of action. Many people feel remorse for their sin but
never truly repent. Remorse is being sorry; repentance is being sorry enough
to stop.

In the story of the Prodigal Son, the young man knew he was wrong. But nothing
changed until he acted on that knowledge, crawled out of the pigpen and
started down the road toward his father and home. He had a change of mind that
resulted in a change of direction.

**Believe in and Receive Jesus Christ Into Your Life**  
The Bible says, "But as many as received Him [Jesus], to them He gave the
right to become children of God, even to those who believe in His name" (John
1:12).

Jesus said, "For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,
that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life"
(John 3:16).

This is because you realize that Jesus Christ is the very Son of God. He is
the One who loves you so much that He died on a cross for you 2,000 years ago
to pay the penalty for your sin, and then rose from the dead three days later.
You need to believe that, and ask Him into your life.

**Do it Now!**  
Good intentions are not enough. Agreeing with what I have said here is not
enough. You must admit you are a sinner, repent of that sin, and put your
faith in Christ.

The prodigal son could have repeated the words, "I am no longer worthy" over
and over. He could have said it the rest of his life and still remained in the
far country, separated from his father and home.

But he did more than repeat those words. He acted on them. He got up and
started walking. You must do the same.

When? The Bible says, "Now is the day of salvation." As with the prodigal,
that first step might be a difficult one to make. But how glad he was when he
felt his father's arms around him and heard the words, "Welcome home."

_Greg Laurie is senior pastor of Harvest Christian Fellowship, in Riverside,
Calif., and featured speaker for Harvest Crusades._

More from this Issue

    
        * It’s Time to Pray
    
    * You Can’t Be Born a Christian
    
    * The New Birth
    
    * Open Our Eyes, Lord
    
    * A Choice, a Challenge, a Change
    

##### Read Today's Devotion

#### We Are God's Children

![Today's Daily

Devotion](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2019/06/Devotions-

We-are-Gods-children-175x117.jpg)

![Pray for our

leaders](https://static.billygraham.org/sites/billygraham.org/uploads/pro/2019/05/pray-

for-our-leaders-banner.jpg)

    
        * ### Get email updates from the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association.
    

Be the first to know about the BGEA’s work in your community and around the
world. You’ll also receive updates from Franklin Graham, timely spiritual
encouragement and access to Billy Graham’s sermons and My Answer archive.

    
        * *
    

First Name Last Name

    
        * Email*
    
    * *
    

ZIP/Postal Country AfghanistanÅland IslandsAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican
SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntarcticaAntigua and
BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBonaire,
Sint Eustatius and SabaBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswanaBouvet
IslandBrazilBritish Indian Ocean TerritoryBrunei DarrussalamBulgariaBurkina
FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape VerdeCayman IslandsCentral African
RepublicChadChileChinaChristmas IslandCocos IslandsColombiaComorosCongo,
Democratic Republic of theCongo, Republic of theCook IslandsCosta RicaCôte
d'IvoireCroatiaCubaCuraçaoCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican
RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEswatini
(Swaziland)EthiopiaFalkland IslandsFaroe IslandsFijiFinlandFranceFrench
GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern
TerritoriesGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuernseyGuineaGuinea-
BissauGuyanaHaitiHeard and McDonald IslandsHoly SeeHondurasHong
KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsle of
ManIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJerseyJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKuwaitKyrgyzstanLao
People's Democratic
RepublicLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacauMacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall
IslandsMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMicronesiaMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNew
CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNiueNorfolk IslandNorth KoreaNorthern
Mariana IslandsNorwayOmanPakistanPalauPalestine, State ofPanamaPapua New
GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPitcairnPolandPortugalPuerto
RicoQatarRéunionRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint BarthélemySaint HelenaSaint Kitts and
NevisSaint LuciaSaint MartinSaint Pierre and MiquelonSaint Vincent and the
GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome and PrincipeSaudi
ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSint
MaartenSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth GeorgiaSouth
KoreaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSvalbard and Jan Mayen
IslandsSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTaiwanTajikistanTanzaniaThailandTimor-
LesteTogoTokelauTongaTrinidad and TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks and
Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited
StatesUruguayUS Minor Outlying IslandsUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamVirgin
Islands, BritishVirgin Islands, U.S.Wallis and FutunaWestern
SaharaYemenZambiaZimbabwe

    
        *     *     *     * Email
    

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

Sign Me Up

This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms.

#### Billy Graham Evangelistic Association

1 Billy Graham Parkway, Charlotte, NC 28201  
Local: 704-401-2432  
Toll Free: 1-877-247-2426

_BGEA is a registered 501(c)(3) non-profit organization._

(C)2019 BGEA Home Privacy Permissions Contact Us

* * *

* * *

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=644026919132837&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

