

Accessibility links

    
        * Skip to article
    * Skip to navigation
    

![](/template/ver1-0/i/telegraph_print_190.gif)

Telegraph.co.uk

Wednesday 12 June 2019

    
        * Home
    * Video
    * News
    * World
    * Sport
    * Business
    * Money
    * Comment
    * Culture
    * Travel
    * Life
    * Women
    * Fashion
    * Luxury
    * Tech
    * Film
    
    * Politics
    * Investigations
    * Obits
    * Education
    * Science
    * Earth
    * Weather
    * Health
    * Royal
    * Celebrity
    * Defence
    * Scotland
    

Advertisement

    
        1. Home»
    2. News»
    3. Health»
    4. Health News
    

# Six other NHS trusts at risk of 'bankruptcy'

## Six other NHS trusts face joining South London Healthcare in

"administration" as they have taken on projects viewed by ministers as
"unsustainable", it has emerged.

![Twice as many people were kept waiting for more than six weeks for crucial

cancer tests last year than before the Coalition took office, according to

government figures.

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02258/nhs_2258891b.jpg)

Twice as many people were kept waiting for more than six weeks for crucial
cancer tests last year than before the Coalition took office, according to
government figures. Photo: GETTY

![Richard

Alleyne](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01757/Alleyne_60_1757330j.jpg)

By Richard Alleyne

10:26AM BST 26 Jun 2012

South London Healthcare NHS Trust will be the first in the country to be put
under the control of a special administrator tasked with securing its
finances.

The trust, which runs three hospitals, has been criticised over standards of
care after being saddled with large debts from PFI deals.

Despite efforts to improve its financial performance, it is still thought to
be on track to lose between £30 and £75 million a year for the next five
years.

It was formally warned last night that it would be the first NHS body to be
taken over by Whitehall-appointed administrators under the "unsustainable
providers' regime".

## Related Articles

    
        * Taxpayers' £207m bill for failing NHS trust
    

08 Jan 2013

    
        * PFI-related A&E downgrade 'risks patients' safety'
    

07 Dec 2012

    
        * £207m debt at PFI-saddled hospital trust 'should be written off'
    

29 Oct 2012

    
        * Patient care will suffer under budget cuts: NHS finance bosses
    

27 Sep 2012

    
        * 'Hit squads' to take over seven NHS trusts
    

27 Aug 2012

    
        * Private firms ask to bid to run struggling hospital trust
    

23 Aug 2012

Now it has emerged that up to 22 NHS trusts are facing serious financial
difficulties because of expensive PFI schemes, with six thought to have taken
on projects viewed by ministers as "unsustainable".

They all face taking urgent steps to turn around their fortunes.

Among those in jeopardy are Ealing Hospitals Trust, North Cumbria University
Hospital Trust and Surrey and Sussex Healthcare Trust.

Professor Chris Ham, chief executive of the leading health think-tank the
Kings Fund said the "administration" was a sign of things to come.

He said a special administrator would look at a wider range of options,
including splitting up the trust's services and "disposing of them to other
providers".

"South London Healthcare NHS Trust is one of a small number of hospitals
facing serious financial challenges," he said.

"For some of these hospitals, the usual solutions, such as appointing a new
management team or merging with another provider, will not solve their
problems.

"Governments have ducked these issues for too long so this announcement is an
important signal of intent from ministers.

"The first priority must be to ensure continuity of patient care for the
services that must remain at these hospitals.

"For other services more radical options need to be looked at, including
transferring services to other hospitals, or stopping that care altogether."

Labour accused the Government of "losing its grip" on NHS finances.

"After many years of neglect by the Tories, Labour used PFI to deliver the
biggest hospital-building programme in the history of the NHS, benefiting
millions of patients," a spokesman said.

"In contrast, this government has lost its grip on NHS finances and is wasting
billions of pounds on a NHS reorganisation which is opposed by patients and
health professionals."

Meanwhile the trust's chief executive, Dr Chris Streather, welcomed the
appointment of an administrator

"There is a huge gap in our financial plan in order for us to become viable in
the long term," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

"This intervention, if it solves that problem which it is designed to do, is
absolutely welcome and will be helpful.

"It just needs to be done in a way that keeps all those gains in quality that
we have made over the last three and a half years."

The administrator will take over the board and recommend measures to the
Health Secretary to put the trust's finances on a sustainable basis.

The trust runs Queen Mary's in Sidcup, the Queen Elizabeth in Woolwich and the
Princess Royal University Hospital in Bromley.

It released a statement reassuring patients that services would continue as
normal.

They said the hospital's deficit last year - covered by money from elsewhere
in the NHS budget - was equivalent to the salaries of 1,200 nurses or 200 hip
replacements a week.

In his letter the Health secretary Andrew Lansley wrote: "I recognise that
South London Healthcare NHS Trust faces deep and long-standing challenges,
some of which are not of its own making.

"Nonetheless, there must be a point when these problems, however they have
arisen, are tackled. I believe we are almost at this point.

"I have sought to provide NHS organisations with the help and support they
need to provide these high quality, sustainable services to their patients,
which South London Healthcare NHS Trust stands to benefit from.

"However, even after this support has been provided, your organisation still
expects to be in need of significant financial resources from other parts of
the NHS and I cannot permit this to continue. That is why I am considering
using these powers."

He acknowledged the move would be "unsettling for staff" but said the measures
were necessary to ensure hospital services in south east London had "a
sustainable future".

Other NHS trusts that are trying to improve their financial situation may also
face being put in special measures if they do not make progress quickly
enough.

The source close to Mr Lansley said Labour brought the south London trust to
"the brink of bankruptcy".

"Labour turned a blind eye to these problems for years. They burdened it with
two unaffordable PFIs worth £61 million a year and they crippled the
organisation with debt from the beginning," the source said.

"The standard of care that patients receive at the hospital trust is not good
enough, although there have been some improvements in recent months.

"It is crucial that those improvements are not put at risk by the challenge of
finding the huge savings that the trust needs to make."

The trust pointed out that it had one of the lowest mortality rates in England
and infection rates three times lower than the national average.

In a statement, it said: "We have entered into discussions with the Department
of Health and NHS London on the best future for the Trust and our priority,
and that of others involved, is to make sure that our long-standing and well-
known financial issues are resolved.

"Our staff have worked hard for patients and in spite of significant financial
issues, we are extremely proud that we now have among the lowest mortality and
infection rates in the country.

"We expect these discussions to come to a conclusion in the second week in
July when a decision will be taken by the Secretary of State.

"In the meantime we can reassure local patients and the public that our staff
will continue to provide services as normal."

NHS Confederation deputy chief executive David Stout said: "NHS leaders have
made it clear that short term fixes for struggling trusts are no longer
possible.

"More decisive action is going to be needed to help the NHS maintain services
and stay in financial balance during this unprecedented spending squeeze.

"We welcome the secretary of state's actions as a sign that the Government is
beginning to grasp the nettle on some of these difficult issues.

"When taking over a trust, it is important that the administrator looks beyond
hospital care to consider primary and community care in order to make sure
services are placed back on a financially sustainable footing."

**Have you been affected by the financial problems at South London NHS Health
care Trust? Tell us your story at mynews@telegraph.co.uk**

## Health News

    
        * ### News »
    
    * ### UK News »
    
    * ### Richard Alleyne »
    

In Health News

![A young women has had to have a metal spoon fished out of her stomach after
accidentally swallowing it while eating ice cream.

Zhang Weiwei, the 22-year-old varsity student from Wuhan University in Wuhan,
central Chinaâ€™s Hubei Province, was on her way back from a meal with friends
when the incident happened.

Weiwei had bought an ice cream and was chatting and walking back to her dorm
room when another friend saw her and jumped on her back to greet her.

Weiwei got such a fright that she swallowed the entire 14cm metal
spoon.](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03349/spoon-x-
ray-2_potd_3349715g.jpg)

### Weird X-rays

![For the past two years Russian photojournalist Vladimir Yakovlev travelled

around the world, searching for people who have discovered new found hobbies

and pleasure in their older age. With the series The Age Of Happiness,

Yakovlev hopes to change the usual perception of life after retirement and

promote positive ageing. On his travels he met some extraordinary characters

over 60-year-old - some very close to the 100 milestone -   who enjoy each day

and inspire others to make their lives equally

fulfilling.](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03163/happiness-

elderly-_3163688g.jpg)

### Life begins at 70

![A group of men from Caerphilly in South Wales celebrated completing a

pioneering 35-year health study - beating killer diseases by making simple

changes to their lifestyle.

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03091/Caerphilly_health__3091084g.jpg)

### Living proof: the secret of healthy ageing

![Rapeseed: the British olive

oil?](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01412/Rapeseed_1412998g.jpg)

### Why olive oil should be kept out of the frying pan

![ A member of the CG Environmental HazMat team disinfects the entrance to the

residence of a health worker at the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital who has

contracted Ebola in Dallas,

Texas](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03071/Ebola__Texas_healt_3071015g.jpg)

### Ebola outbreak in pictures

Advertisement

![](http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/imp.gif?client=ca-

telegraph_uk_420x200&event=noscript)

Advertisement

Latest Video»

![Rat climbs over

man](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Rat_climbs_over_ma_3602877g.jpg)

### Large rat climbs on sleeping commuter

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/grandad_3602577g.jpg)

### Disabled great-grandfather denied stairlift and forced to crawl

![Old and frail wombat is

rescued](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Wombat-1-e_3602888g.jpg)

### Elderly wombat rescued after being attacked

![Scientist in lab

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03549/scientist-in-

lab_3549159g.jpg)

Sponsored

### When media meets medicine

More from the web

Advertisement

Advertisement

More from the web

Loading

More from The Telegraph

Loading

News

![Progress 17 supply vehicle departs from the International Space

Station](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03285/Progress_17__3285797f.jpg)

### The latest news, opinion and analysis

View

Football

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03101/old-

trafford_3101399f.jpg)

### Catch up on all the latest football news and results

View

Film

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03208/oscars-

summary-2_3208754f.jpg)

### All the latest film trailers, reviews and features

View

Competitions

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03614/Malta-

TD_3614608f.jpg)

### Enter one of our exciting new competitions

View

Back to top

    
        * HOME
    * News
    * UK News
    * Politics
    * Long Reads
    * Wikileaks
    * Jobs
    
    * World News
    * Europe
    * USA
    * China
    * Royal Family News
    * Celebrity news
    * Dating
    
    * Finance
    * Education
    * Defence
    * Weird News
    * Editor's Choice
    * Financial Services
    
    * Pictures
    * Video
    * Matt
    * Alex
    * Comment
    * Blogs
    * Crossword
    
    * Contact us
    * Privacy and Cookies
    * Advertising
    * Fantasy Football
    * Tickets
    * Announcements
    * Reader Prints
    *     * Follow Us
    * Apps
    * Epaper
    * Expat
    * Promotions
    * Subscriber
    * Syndication
    

(C) Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019

Terms and Conditions

Today's News

Archive

Style Book

Weather Forecast

![](//secure-uk.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=uk-101665h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

