

Skip to main content

Close

Search

Search

Popular Searches

    
        * Iran
    * North Korea
    * Turkey
    * Syria
    * China
    * Mexico
    * Russia
    * Venezuela
    * Iraq
    

Logo Logo

Search Close

##### Trending

    
        * Tariffs
    * Russian Hacking
    * European Union
    * Iran
    * China
    
    * Member Login
    
    * ####  Topics
    
      * All Topics
      * Defense & Security
      * Diplomacy & International Institutions
      * Economics
      * Energy & Environment
      * Health
      * Human Rights
      * Politics & Government
      * Social Issues
    
    * ####  Regions
    
      * All Regions
      * Americas
      * Asia
      * Europe & Eurasia
      * Global Commons
      * Middle East & North Africa
      * Oceania
      * Sub-Saharan Africa
    
    * ####  Think Tank
    
      * More Think Tank
      * CFR Experts
      * Centers & Programs
      * Blogs
      * In the News
      * Publications
      * Fellowships
    
    * ####  CFR Presents
    
      * CFR Presents
      * Events
      * Series
      * Explainers
      * Quizzes
      * Podcasts
      * Conference Calls
      * Independent Task Force Program
    
    * ####  CFR Campus
    
      * All CFR Campus
      * About CFR Campus
      * Programs
      * Teaching Notes
      * Model Diplomacy
      * World101
    
    * ####  About CFR
    
      * All About CFR
      * Membership
      * Member Programs
      * Outreach
      * For Media
      * Careers
      * Support CFR
      * Contact
    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

    
        * Member Login
    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

ForeignAffairs.com

ForeignAffairs.com

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print

Share

# Trends in U.S. Military Spending

July 15, 2014

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print

Download PDF

Report

Dinah Walker

Analyst, Geoeconomics

Military budgets are only one gauge of military power. A given financial
commitment may be adequate or inadequate depending on the number and
capability of a nation's adversaries, how well a country invests its funds,
and what it seeks to accomplish, among other factors. Nevertheless, trends in
military spending do reveal something about a country's capacity for coercion.
Policymakers are currently debating the appropriate level of U.S. military
spending given increasingly constrained budgets and the winding down of wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan. The following charts present historical trends in
U.S. military spending and analyze the forces that may drive it lower.

Dinah Walker

Analyst, Geoeconomics

These charts draw on data from the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute (SIPRI) and from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Both
data sets include spending on overseas contingency operations as well as
defense. This distinguishes them from data used in the U.S. budget, which
separates defense spending from spending on overseas operations.

More on:

Wars and Conflict

Budget, Debt, and Deficits

United States

![U.S. Military Spending, $

Billions](/content/publications/July2014/001_military_spending_dollars.png)

    
        * In inflation-adjusted dollars, SIPRI's measure of U.S. military spending rose sharply after the terrorist attacks of 2001.
    * In calendar year 2013, military spending declined from $671 billion to $619 billion, in constant 2011 dollars.
    * In dollar terms, this was the largest decline since 1991.
    * The reduction in U.S. operations in the Middle East and the sequester mean this figure is likely to fall again in 2014.
    

![U.S. Military Spending, % of

World](/content/publications/July2014/002_military_spending_percent_of_world.png)

    
        * When U.S. inflation-adjusted military spending fell by one-third in the 1990s, the U.S. share of global military spending only fell by six percentage points because other countries, particularly Russia, reduced their military spending as well.
    * The 8 percent fall in U.S. military spending in 2013 resulted in a two percentage point fall in the global share, as military spending by the rest of the world increased 2 percent.
    

To see why U.S. military spending is likely to keep falling as a share of
global military spending, it helps to look at the drivers of this ratio. For
any country, a change in military spending as a share of the global total can
be attributed to two factors: changes in income and changes in the allocation
of that income. A rising share of global military expenditure based on a
rising share of global GDP (gross domestic product) is likely to be more
sustainable over the long term than an increase based on a decision to spend
more of GDP on defense at the expense of other priorities. The following
charts distinguish between the impact of growth and the allocation of income
on the U.S. share of global military spending.

More on:

Wars and Conflict

Budget, Debt, and Deficits

United States

![Growth Effects on U.S. Military

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/003_growth_effects_on_us_military_share.png)

    
        * From 1990 to 2000, U.S. growth roughly kept pace with global growth. So the impact of U.S. growth on the nation's share of global military spending (represented by the red bars) offset the impact of rest-of-the-world growth (represented by the purple bars). As a result, the net growth effect, shown by the blue line, was close to zero.
    * Over the past ten years, faster foreign growth has reduced the U.S. share of global military spending.
    

![Policy Effects on U.S. Military

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/004_policy_effects_on_us_military_spending.png)

    
        * The impact of growth on military budgets, shown above, has been disguised by shifting policy on how much of GDP to allocate to defense.
    * In the 1990s, the United States cut the defense budget (shown in the blue bars), whereas from 2000 to 2010, the defense budget increased.
    * Between 1990 and 1995, cuts in foreign allocation of GDP to defense (especially in Russia) boosted the U.S. share of total military spending (the green bar). Since 1995, the rest of the world has spent a fairly stable share of GDP on the military.
    

![U.S. Military Spending Share of Global

Total](/content/publications/July2014/005_us_military_spending_share_of_global_total.png)

    
        * Combining the two previous charts, it is clear that changes in spending as a percentage of GDP have buoyed the U.S. share of world military spending, while changes in GDP have been a headwind.
    * A decline in the U.S. share of world military spending seems likely in the absence of a new sense of insecurity.
    

The next chart consolidates the information from the previous three images.
The black line shows the U.S. share of world military spending at five-year
intervals, while the bars show what drove the change during each five-year
period. The blue bars show how willing the nation has been since 2000 to spend
a rising share of GDP on defense. Even if one assumes this commitment holds
steady in the next two years, and if one uses International Monetary Fund
growth estimates, the U.S. share of military spending is set to decline as
U.S. GDP growth (represented by the red bar) is lower than that of other
military powers (represented by the purple bar).

![U.S. Military Spending, Share of Global

Total](/content/publications/July2014/006_us_military_spending_share_of_global_total.png)

If the United States decided to spend a smaller share of GDP on the military,
the black line on the previous page would decline more sharply still. How
likely is this? The following three charts show how U.S. overseas operations
have been shrinking and that they are likely to continue to do so.

![Troop Levels for Overseas Contingency

Operations](/content/publications/July2014/007_funding_for_OCO.png)

    
        * In fiscal year (FY) 2008, there were 154,000 troops in Iraq and 33,000 troops in Afghanistan.
    * The FY 2015 request is for an average of 11,661 troops to be in Afghanistan over the course of the year.
    * The number of troops in Afghanistan is set to reach 9,800 at the end of December 2014.
    

![Funding for Overseas Contingency

Operations](/content/publications/July2014/008_troop_levels_for_OCO.png)

    
        * Overall funding for overseas contingency operations has declined by just over 70 percent since 2008 as the war in Iraq has wound down.
    * Funding for Iraq and Afghanistan was as high as $187 billion in FY 2008, which represents 30 percent of SIPRI's measure of U.S. military spending for that year.
    * The FY 2015 budget request for overseas contingency operations is $58.7 billion.
    

![Funding for Overseas Contingency Operations by

Category](/content/publications/July2014/0081_OCO%20funding%20by%20category.png)

    
        * The FY 2015 request for funding for overseas contingency operations (OCO) is $26.6 billion less than the 2014 enacted level.
    * The decrease in funding is greatest for operations/force protection in Aghanistan, which will decline $15.2 billion in FY 2015.
    * The FY 2015 request includes funding for two new initiatives, a Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund and funding for the European Reassurance Initiative.
    

The following charts provide some historical perspective on military spending.

![U.S. National Defense

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/009_national_defense_1928.png)

    
        * U.S. national defense spending has ranged widely, from less than 1 percent of GDP in 1929 up to 43 percent in 1944. These extremes illustrate that resource allocation to defense can increase rapidly when a war demands it.
    

![U.S. National Defense

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/010_national_defense_1948.png)

    
        * Focusing just on the post-World War II period, U.S. national defense spending as a percent of GDP has ranged from a high of 15 percent in 1952 (during the Korean War) to a low of 3.7 percent in 2000 (the period of relative tranquility preceding the terrorist attacks of the following year).
    

![U.S. National Defense

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/011_national_defense_1988.png)

    
        * In the post-Cold War world, the U.S. national defense budget has fluctuated within a relatively narrow band. It fell by about three percentage points of GDP as the nation reaped the peace dividend of the 1990s, then rose after the terrorist attacks of 2001.
    * President Barack Obama's budget proposes cutting security spending to 2.3% of GDP in 2024. This would represent the lowest allocation of GDP to defense spending in the post-World War II era.
    

To put U.S. military spending in context, consider GDP and population shares
relative to the rest of the world, as of 2013. The pie charts demonstrate that
the United States accounts for a larger share of global military spending than
of either GDP or population, and would continue to even if military spending
were to revert to 2000 levels as a percent of GDP.

![Military Spending, GDP, and

Population](/content/publications/July2014/012_defense_population_gdp.png)

As noted at the outset, military power depends on multiple factors, including
the military budgets of a country's allies. To get a sense of this factor, the
chart from page four was redone, with spending by NATO, Japan, South Korea,
Israel, and Saudi Arabia added to the analysis. The United States and these
allies account for a formidable 75 percent of global military spending in
1995. However, as the black line in the chart shows, the trend is less
reassuring. The United States' and its allies' share of world military
spending fell from 2005 to 2010. It is projected to fall further, to 63
percent by 2015, even if U.S. spending as a share of GDP holds up at today's
levels. Budgetary pressures in Europe may mean this share falls even more
rapidly.

![U.S. and Allies' Military

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/014_share_with_allies.png)

![Democracies' Military

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/015_democracies_military_spending_percent.png)

    
        * Democracies are generally regarded as friendly to the United States, and this chart delivers a verdict similar to the last one.
    * After the collapse of the Soviet Union, democracies accounted for the vast majority of the world's military spending.
    * However, this share has declined steadily over the past two decades.
    

![U.S. Military Spending % of

Democratic](/content/publications/July2014/016_military_spending_percent_of_democratic.png)

    
        * In 2013, U.S. military spending fell faster than overall military spending by democracies.
    * However, the United States continues to account for almost half of all military spending by democracies.
    * A decline in U.S. military spending is therefore likely to have a large impact on democracies' military spending as a share of the global total.
    

What would happen if the U.S. defense budget were cut? Differences in military
spending among countries tend to have a big influence on equipment procurement
and a far smaller one on personnel count.

![Military Equipment and

Spending](/content/publications/July2014/017_military_equipment.png)

    
        * This chart compares each country's share of spending and share of military equipment. The equipment measure includes twenty-one categories such as tanks, aircraft, and satellites.
    * Spending and equipment levels are correlated. Russia is the exception, perhaps because it still has equipment left over from its period of high spending before 1990.
    

![Personnel and Spending](/content/publications/July2014/018_personnel.png)

    
        * Unlike equipment, personnel is relatively uncorrelated to spending.
    * Because of differences in labor costs, $1 million in the United States will hire fewer soldiers than $1 million in Russia or China.
    * If military budgets were compared in a way that reflected varying personnel costs, U.S. military preeminence would appear smaller than it does using straightforward comparisons based on market exchange rates.
    

![Personnel Payroll

Outlays](/content/publications/July2014/019_personnel_payroll_outlays.png)

    
        * The effect of defense cuts on personnel would depend on which part of personnel spending decreases.
    * Of the $195 billion in Department of Defense payroll outlays in 2009, only $84 billion went to active-duty military pay.
    * Retired military pay, which does not directly increase defense capabilities, accounted for nearly 20 percent of total personnel expenditures in 2009.
    

![DoD Personnel](/content/publications/July2014/020_dod_personnel.png)

    
        * The number of personnel employed by the Department of Defense has declined since the 1960s, while personnel costs have risen rapidly, in part due to rising U.S. health-care costs.
    * In the base budget, the cost of military pay and benefits has risen almost 80 percent since FY 2001, while the active-duty and reserve personnel count has declined by almost 6 percent.
    * Military health care costs have risen from $19 billion in FY 2001 to $47.4 billion in FY 2015.
    

![Cost of Ships vs

Inflation](/content/publications/July2014/021_Cost_of_Ships.png)

    
        * The cost of military hardware has grown more than inflation. Today's spending results in less procurement than did past spending.
    * Although the rising cost of hardware partly reflects rising quality, shipbuilders reported to the RAND Corporation that uncertainty surrounding the number of ships ultimately purchased increases labor costs and reduces the incentive to invest in processes that could reduce costs.
    

* * *

### Explore Our Other Chart Books

**Foreign Ownership of U.S. Assets**

**Foreign Exchange Reserves in the BRICs**

**Economic Recovery**

**Economic Downturn**

Dinah Walker

Analyst, Geoeconomics

### Explore More on Wars and Conflict

Ukraine

Champions for Change: The Power of Women Peacemakers and Peacebuilders in
Ukraine

_Champions for Change is a series highlighting male allies working to advance
equality across the globe. In this post,_ _parting Chief Monitor of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, Ambassador Apakan, reflects on his experiences in
integrating a focus on gender equality issues in matters of peace and
security; from his years in the UN Security Council to experiences on the
ground in Ukraine._

Blog Post by Guest Blogger for the Women and Foreign Policy Program June 3,
2019 Women Around the World

United States

Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of D-Day

by James M. Lindsay, Corey Cooper and Elizabeth Lordi June 3, 2019

United States

Remembering Those Memorial Day Honors

Blog Post by James M. Lindsay May 24, 2019 The Water's Edge

### Top Stories on CFR

Radicalization and Extremism

Hate Speech on Social Media: Global Comparisons

Violence attributed to online hate speech has increased worldwide. Societies
confronting the trend must deal with questions of free speech and censorship
on widely used tech platforms.

Backgrounder by Zachary Laub June 7, 2019

Trade

Will There Be Winners in the U.S.-China Trade War?

With tariffs slowing U.S. trade with China, several countries are hoping their
exports will become more affordable and that their economies will reap the
rewards. __

by Andrew Chatzky June 5, 2019

Thailand

The Military Wins Big in Thailand

Prayuth Chan-ocha led the 2014 military coup and will now lead the country as
civilian prime minister after this week’s parliamentary vote. But the military
will still dominate politics.

by Joshua Kurlantzick June 5, 2019

## Footer

Logo

    
        * About CFR
    * Think Tank
    * Support CFR
    * For Media
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    

Newsletter

Daily News Brief Sign up for a morning roundup of news and analysis from
around the world.

Url

Email Address

Thanks for signing up! Check  
Check your Email Address.

Browse more CFR newsletters

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

©2019 Council on Foreign Relations. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy and
Terms of Use.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

