
    
        * News
    * NBC News NOW
    * Nightly News
    * Meet the Press
    * Dateline
    * MSNBC
    * TODAY
    
    * #Pride50
    * Politics
    * U.S. News
    * Business
    * World
    * Tech & Media
    * THINK
    * Sports
    

##

    
        * Share this --
    *     *     *     *     * Search
    

### Sections

    
        * U.S. News
    * Politics
    * World
    * Local
    * Business
    * Health
    * Investigations
    * Culture Matters
    * Science
    * Sports
    * Tech & Media
    * Trump Effect
    * In Focus
    * Russia Investigation
    * Photos
    * Weather
    

### TV

    
        * Today
    * MSNBC
    * Nightly News
    * Meet The Press
    * Dateline
    

### Featured

    
        * NBC NEWS NOW
    * THINK
    * MACH
    * BETTER
    * NIGHTLY FILMS
    * NBC LEFT FIELD
    * ASIAN AMERICA
    * NBC LATINO
    * NBCBLK
    * NBC OUT
    * STAY TUNED
    * SPECIAL FEATURES
    

### More from NBC

    
        * CNBC
    * NBC.COM
    * NBC LEARN
    * Peacock Productions
    * Next Steps for Vets
    * Parent Toolkit
    * NBC Archives
    * Know Your Value
    

### Follow NBC News

    
        *     *     * Search
    
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Email
    * SMS
    * Print
    * Whatsapp
    * Reddit
    * Pocket
    * Flipboard
    * Pinterest
    * Linkedin
    

## NBCBLK

# Families Reeling After FDA Denies Access to Lifesaving Treatment

![Damon

Woods](https://media1.s-nbcnews.com/j/newscms/2016_04/1389641/damon_52097a4c976dd8eb1d16377dfb10411f.fit-760w.jpg)

Damon WoodsLinda Childers

## Breaking News Emails

Get breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that
matter, delivered weekday mornings.

SUBSCRIBE

Jan. 27, 2016, 1:29 AM UTC / Updated Jan. 27, 2016, 1:29 AM UTC

By Linda Childers

When Damon Woods of San Diego, Calif, was diagnosed four years ago with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a rare and fatal muscle disorder, his mother,
Charaine vowed to do whatever it took to save his life.

This week, Woods and other families were dealt a blow when the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) declined to approve Kyndrisa, generically known as
drisapersen, an experimental drug that had shown promise in treating Woods and
other boys affected by Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

According to the national non-profit, CureDuchenne, Duchenne is the most
common and lethal form of muscular dystrophy. As the leading genetic killer of
young boys, Duchenne affects more than 300,000 patients worldwide, primarily
boys and young men, and there is currently no FDA-approved therapy
specifically designed to treat Duchenne.

**A New Medication Provides Hope**

After her son, Damon, was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy at the
age of nine, Charaine watched helplessly as her once vibrant child became
weaker and began falling. She was only too aware of how most boys diagnosed
with the condition suffer from muscle degeneration that ultimately affects
their heart and breathing muscles, leaving them unable to walk or breathe.

Damon and Charaine Woods with Sen. Joel Anderson's Legislative Director Craig
WilsonLinda Childers / Linda Childers

Then in 2013, Woods learned about a new clinical trial for drisapersen
(Kyndrisa), a high-tech drug designed to fix the underlying genetic defect
causing the progressive muscular decline seen in children with Duchenne.
Manufactured by BioMarin Pharmaceutical in Novato, Calif., the drug underwent
clinical trials at the University of California, Davis, and a handful of other
research centers across the country. Woods made the 500-mile trek with Damon
to Sacramento each week, believing it was worth it if the medication could
give Damon a shot at a long and productive life.

“After a month of being on drisapersen, Damon was able to walk upstairs and he
wasn’t falling anymore,” Woods says. “He was able to be independent and the
drug seemed to be slowing the progression of the disease.”

> “We are physically and emotionally exhausted as we not only fight for a
treatment but as Damon battles every day of his life with this disease.”

Dr. Craig McDonald, professor and chair of the Department of Physical Medicine
Rehabilitation at UC Davis, was quoted in a news release as saying that
drisapersen was “the most exciting treatment approach I have witnessed in my
career for Duchenne muscular dystrophy,” and that he was hopeful “it will
delay many of the disease’s manifestations and ultimately improve life
expectancy for patients.”

Woods was optimistic drisapersen would receive approval from the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). In November, she spoke at the FDA advisory committee’s
hearing regarding the investigational treatment helping her son, and there
wasn’t a dry eye was in the house.

**Rallying After a Setback**

Hope turned to disappointment this past week when the FDA issued a statement
saying they “concluded that the standard of substantial evidence of
effectiveness has not been met” and that the “treatment is not ready for
approval in its current form.”

“I am very disappointed about the FDA drisapersen decision,” says Debra
Miller, co-founder of the Newport Beach, Calif., non-profit, CureDuchenne. “As
a parent and patient advocate, I believe there was ample evidence to approve
this drug on a conditional basis while they confirm the effectiveness and
safety over a longer term study.”

Damon with the Californian FlagLinda Childers / Linda Childers

Woods also expressed sadness at the news.

“We have done everything in our power to beg for a treatment for Damon’s life
and sadly we have been rejected,” Woods says. “We are physically and
emotionally exhausted as we not only fight for a treatment but as Damon
battles every day of his life with this disease.”

BioMarin said Thursday they will continue clinical trials of drisapersen and
“will work with the FDA to determine the appropriate next steps regarding this
application.”

While Damon is still receiving drisapersen from BioMarin as they collect more
data, Woods is uncertain what the future holds for her son and other boys
affected with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

“We have seen the difference this medication makes in Damon's life. I know
that without drisapersen he will become a boy trapped in his own body with
absolutely no control over it, completely paralyzed most likely by the age of
17 or 18,” Woods says. "I plan on doing everything I can to help get
drisapersen approved. It’s not just for Damon, but all the children who are
waiting on a treatment for this life-stealing, devastating disease.”

**Follow NBCBLK onFacebook, Twitter & Instagram**

Linda Childers

Linda Childers is a California-based freelance writer. Her articles have been
featured in O, Minority Nurse, More, Heart Insight and on sites including
CNNMoney.com, and Lifescript.com. Follow her on Twitter at @lindachilders1.

    
        * About
    * Contact
    * Careers
    * Privacy policy
    * Terms of Service
    * NBCNews.COM Site Map
    * Advertise
    * AdChoices
    

(C) 2019 NBC UNIVERSAL

    
        *     *     *
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

