
    
        * Home
    * Topics
      * Disparities Policy
      * Global Health Policy
      * Health Costs
      * Health Reform
      * HIV/AIDS
      * Medicaid
      * Medicare
      * Private Insurance
      * Uninsured
      * Women's Health Policy
    * Polling
    * Perspectives
    * State Health Facts
      * State Health Facts
      * Custom State Reports
    * Graphics & Interactives
    * Charts & Slides
    * Kaiser Health News
    * Media Campaigns
    * Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker
    * Newsroom
      * Newsroom
      * News Releases
      * Events
      * Subscribe to Emails
      * Cite Us/Reprint
      * Media Contacts
    * About Us
      * About Us
      * Our Programs
      * Key Staff
      * Media Fellowships
      * Barbara Jordan Conference Center
      * Contact Us
      * Employment Opportunities
    

![The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation](https://www.kff.org/wp-

content/themes/kaiser-foundation-2016/static/images/kff-logo.png)

Filling the need for trusted information on national health issues

menu

Share on Facebook. Opens in a new window. Share on Twitter. Opens in a new
window. Email. Opens in a new window.

Search KFF.org

Twitter Facebook Instagram Email

Filling the need for trusted information on national health issues

    
        * Abortion
    * Medicare-for-all
    * Prescription Drugs
    

## Health Reform

    
        * Search 
    * Graphics & Interactives 
    * Polls
    
    * Home
    * Health Reform
    * The Coverage Provisions in the Affordable Care Act: An Update
    * Health Insurance Market Reforms
    

## The Coverage Provisions in the Affordable Care Act: An Update

Jennifer Tolbert  
Published: Mar 02, 2015

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print

    
        * Introduction 
    * Issue Brief 
    * Conclusion 
    * Endnotes
    

## Health Insurance Market Reforms

#### Consumer Protections

**On September 23, 2010, a number of ACA provisions took effect, including the
elimination of lifetime limits on coverage, restrictions on annual limits on
coverage, prohibition on rescinding coverage except in cases of fraud, and the
elimination of pre-existing condition exclusions for children.** These early
market reforms were intended to provide immediate relief to consumers,
especially those with high health care needs, who faced limits on coverage or
the potential loss of coverage. Other ACA provisions that took effect six
months after enactment included protections allowing consumers the right to
choose their own doctors, the right to appeal health plan decisions, and the
right to access out-of-network emergency care.1

**All individual and group health plans must provide coverage to any
applicant, regardless of health status, gender, or any other factors**. 2
Prior to the ACA, insurers in the individual market were allowed to deny
people coverage based on their perceived health risk. As a result, those
without access to employer-sponsored insurance who had acute or chronic health
conditions, such as cancer or diabetes, were often unable to purchase
coverage. Even women, especially those of childbearing age, could be denied
coverage because of their expected higher use of health care services. The ACA
required guaranteed issue and renewability of coverage and prohibited insurers
from imposing pre-existing condition exclusions on coverage. These provisions
went into effect on January 1, 2014. Prior to the implementation of the
guaranteed issue requirement, the ACA created the temporary Pre-Existing
Condition Insurance Plan for those who had been denied coverage and who had
been uninsured for at least six months. While this program provide stopgap
coverage for some, the coverage was unaffordable for many.

**On January 1, 2014, new premium rating rules went into effect for plans in
the individual and small group markets**. 3 These rules prohibit insurers from
adjusting premiums based on a person’s health status. Insurers may only adjust
premiums based on the following factors:

    
        * Individual versus family enrollment: insurers may vary rates based on the number of family members enrolled in the plan.
    * Geography: insurers may charge different rates in different areas across the state.
    * Age: insurers may charge older adults more than younger adults; however, the variation in premiums is limited to 3 to 1, meaning insurers can’t charge older adults more than three times what they charge younger adults.
    * Tobacco use: insurers may charge tobacco users up to 1.5 times what they charge those who do not use tobacco products.
    

**To ease the transition to the new market reforms, the ACA exempted certain
plans from some of the new health insurance requirements**. These plans,
referred to as grandfathered plans, are plans that were in place as of March
23, 2010 (the day the ACA was enacted) and have undergone minimal changes over
time. To maintain grandfathered status, plans must not eliminate benefits to
diagnose or treat a condition; increase cost sharing beyond certain specified
limits; or reduce the employer share of the premium by more than five
percentage points. 4 Grandfathered plans are exempt from some of the new
insurance market rules, including those relating to essential health benefits,
the provision of preventive services with no cost-sharing, and review of
premium increases of 10% or more.5 They must, however, extend coverage to
dependents up to age 26 and eliminate lifetime and annual limits on coverage.
In addition, grandfathered group plans can no longer impose pre-existing
condition exclusions on children or adults. According the Kaiser/HRET 2014
Employer Health Benefits Survey, 26% of covered workers were enrolled in
grandfathered plans in 2014, down from 36% in 2013.6

**All group and individual health plans must provide a uniform summary of
benefits and coverage (SBC) to applicants and enrollees**. The ACA requires
insurers and health plans to provide consumers with standardized and easy-to-
read information about the plan using a common form that is intended to make
it easier for consumers to compare plans. The SBC must describe the main
features of the plan, including covered benefits along with any limitations or
exclusions, cost sharing requirements, and whether it meets minimum essential
coverage and value standards. The SBC must also include examples of how the
policy or plan would cover care for certain health conditions or scenarios,
showing hypothetical costs for consumers and how much the plan would pay.
Currently, the form shows coverage examples for a normal delivery and managing
type 2 diabetes. Finally, the SBC includes uniform definitions of common
insurance-related terms. A recently released proposed rule would make some
changes to the SBC effective for plan years and open enrollment periods
beginning after September 1, 2015. 7

#### Coverage of Preventive Services

**Private health insurance plans generally must provide coverage for a range
of preventive health services without requiring any patient cost-sharing (co-
payments, deductibles, or co-insurance)**. These rules apply to all private
plans, including individual, small group, large group, and self-insured plans,
though grandfathered plans are exempt from this requirement. 8 The list of
required preventive services may be divided into three broad categories:

    
        * Evidence-based services rated A or B by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).
    * Routine Immunizations recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, which include coverage for both adult and child immunizations such as influenza, meningitis, hepatitis A and B, human papillomavirus (HPV), measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (chicken pox).
    * Preventive services for children and youth recommended by the Health Resources and Services Administration’s Bright Futures Project, including immunizations, behavioral and development assessments, and screening for autism, vision and hearing impairment, tuberculosis, and certain genetic diseases.
    

**Private health insurance plans generally must provide coverage for an
additional set of preventive health services for women without cost-sharing
requirements**. These services include well-woman visits, all FDA-approved
contraceptives, broader screening and counseling for sexually-transmitted
infections, breastfeeding support and supplies, and domestic violence
screening. Certain religious employers (houses of worship) are specifically
exempt from the contraceptive coverage requirement and are not required to
include coverage for contraceptives in their health plans. An accommodation
was established for certain non-profit religious organizations that object to
providing these services (such as religiously-affiliated hospitals or
universities). Organizations that qualify for the accommodation do not have to
arrange or pay for contraceptive coverage, but must instead send a form to HHS
or their insurance company stating their objection to covering contraceptives.
The insurance company then provides the coverage without cost-sharing. 9 In
June 2014, the Supreme Court held in the _Burwell vs. Hobby Lobby_ decision
that some closely-held for-profit corporations may also exclude contraceptive
coverage from their health plans if their owners have sincerely held religious
objections to this requirement.10 In response to the Court’s decision, the
Obama Administration issued a proposed rule to expand the “accommodation” in
place for non-profit organizations with religious objections to birth control
services to closely-held for-profit companies.11

**Approximately 76 million people (including almost 19 million children) have
received no-cost coverage for preventive health services since the ACA
preventive services coverage rules took effect**. 12 This coverage went into
effect on September 23, 2010 for new individual and employer-based coverage
(grandfathered plans are exempt). Despite the length of time the benefit has
been in place, awareness of the coverage remains low.13

**The ACA improves access to preventive services in Medicare and Medicaid.**
The ACA eliminates cost-sharing for certain Medicare covered preventive
services (those recommended A or B by the USPSTF), waives the Medicare
deductible for colorectal cancer screenings, and provides coverage for
personalized prevention plan services, which include an annual health risk
assessment. In Medicaid, the ACA provides states that offer coverage for
recommended preventive services with no cost sharing a one percentage point
increase in the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) for those
services. As of January 30, 2014, ten states (California, Colorado, Hawaii,
Kentucky, Nevada, New Jersey, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, and Wisconsin)
had submitted State Plan Amendments (SPA) to cover all required preventive
services, and eight SPAs had been approved.14

#### Extension of Dependent Coverage to Young Adults

**The ACA extends** **dependent coverage to young adults up to age 26
beginning in September 2010**. This provision allows young adults to remain on
their parents’ health plans until they turn 26. Young adults can qualify for
this coverage even if they are no longer living with a parent, are not a
dependent on a parent’s tax return, or are no longer a student. While it is
difficult to assess the effect of this dependent coverage provision
independent of other factors, analysis of data from the National Health
Interview Survey indicates that 3.1 million young adults had gained coverage
by December 2011. 15

#### Controlling Premium Growth

##### Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Requirements

**The MLR provisions in the ACA limit the amount of premium dollars insurers
can spend on administration, marketing, and profits**. They require most
health insurers in the small group and individual market to spend at least 80%
of premiums on health care claims and quality improvement. Health insurers in
the large group market face a higher standard and must spend at least 85% of
premiums on health care claims and quality improvement. Insurers were required
to begin reporting MLRs in August 2011. Insurers not meeting the thresholds
must issue rebates to consumers annually, beginning in August 2012. In the
case of employer-sponsored plans, in which the cost of the premium is shared
between employers and employees, insurers must provide a rebate to employees
that is proportionate to their share of the premium. 16

**Insurers issued** **rebates totaling $519 million across all markets in
August 2012 and $332 million in 2013.** The drop in rebates in 2013 suggests
that insurers were coming closer to meeting the MLR thresholds. Analysis of
insurer data indicates this is the case. While most plans sold in the large
and small group markets were already in compliance with the MLR requirements
before the law went into effect, in the individual market, fewer than half of
plans were in compliance. Since implementation of the law, the MRLs in this
market have increased (Figure 2). The full impact of the MLR goes beyond just
the rebates and includes the savings consumers experience from lower premiums
than what would have been charged had the MLR provisions not been in place.
While it is difficult to assess the full impact of the MLR provisions, an
analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation suggested that MLR savings to
consumers totaled $1.2 billion in 2011 and $2.1 billion in 2012, with most of
the savings resulting from lower premiums. 17

![Figure 2: Weighted Average Traditional MLRs, by Market

Segment](https://www.kff.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/02/8701-figure-2.png?w=735&h=551&crop=1)![Figure 2:

Weighted Average Traditional MLRs, by Market Segment](https://www.kff.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/02/8701-figure-2.png?w=735&h=551&crop=1)

Figure 2: Weighted Average Traditional MLRs, by Market Segment

##### Premium Rate Review

**The ACA creates new standards for the review of premium rate increases
proposed by insurers in the individual and small group markets to ensure the
increases are based on accurate and verifiable data and are reasonable**.
While many states had rate review programs in place prior to the ACA, these
programs were variable and set different standards for review. The ACA
established minimum standards for an effective rate review program, permits
federal regulators to review rates in states that do not have effective
programs, and requires states or the federal government to review premium rate
increases of 10% or more beginning September 2011. As of April 2014, 46 states
and DC were deemed to have effective rate review programs in place. The five
states without an effective program are Alabama, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas,
and Wyoming. 18

**An analysis of rate filings before and after the rate review requirements
went into effect suggests these programs have had an impact on premiums**. The
premiums that went into effect in 2011 were, on average, 20% lower than the
rates requested by insurers, though there were differences across states and
markets. 19 In addition, early evidence indicated that insurers were
submitting fewer rate increases above the 10% threshold, and rate requests
above the 10% threshold were more likely to be denied, reduced, or withdrawn
following implementation of the new requirements in September 2011.

##### Risk Adjustment, Reinsurance, and Risk Corridors

**The ACA includes three provisions designed to promote premium stability
during the early years of ACA implementation**. Changes in the insurance
market—guarantee issue, rate restrictions and new subsidies available in the
Marketplaces—make it easier for people with high health needs to purchase
coverage. This possibility for adverse selection—when a disproportionate
number of people with high health needs enroll in a plan—creates uncertainty
for insurers. To encourage insurers to participate in the new Marketplaces and
to compete on the basis of quality and value, rather than avoiding high risk
enrollees, the ACA includes three premium stability programs: risk adjustment,
reinsurance, and risk corridors, collectively known as the “three Rs”. Risk
adjustment is a permanent program that transfers funds from insurers with
lower risk enrollees to plans with higher risk enrollees. The temporary
reinsurance program uses payments from all health insurance issuers and self-
insured plans to partially offset the expenses for high-cost enrollees. The
risk corridors program protects insurers against large losses by limiting
insurers’ gains and losses beyond an allowable range. 20 While the risk
adjustment and reinsurance programs are required to be budget neutral, the
risk corridor program is not. As a result, the risk corridor program has
generated some controversy, with some critics characterizing the program as a
bailout to insurers.

#### Health Plan Benefit Design

**The ACA makes significant changes to health plan benefit design, setting
uniform standards for covered benefits and cost sharing in the individual and
small group markets**. The ACA requires all non-grandfathered plans in the
individual and small group markets, including those sold both inside and
outside the Marketplaces, to cover ten categories of essential health
benefits. 21 These categories include:

    
        * Ambulatory patient services
    * Emergency services
    * Hospitalization
    * Maternity and newborn care
    * Mental health and substance use disorders, including behavioral health treatment
    * Prescription drugs
    * Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices
    * Laboratory services
    * Preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management
    * Pediatric services, including vision and dental care
    

**Rather than establish a uniform benefit package to be offered by all plans,
regulatory guidance required states to select** **an EHB benchmark plan that
would define the essential health benefits that must be offered by plans in
the state**. Any benefits covered by this benchmark plan would be considered
an essential health benefit. In addition, any limits on amount, duration, and
scope of benefits would be included in the definition of the EHB. 22 States
had to select the benchmark plan by December 26, 2012 from among the following
ten plans operating in the state: the three largest small group plans, the
three largest state employee health plans, the three largest federal employee
health plan options, or the largest HMO offered in the state's commercial
market. If a state did not recommend a benchmark plan, the default benchmark
was the largest small group plan in the state. The majority of states (45)
selected or defaulted to a small group plan, while four chose the largest
commercial HMO, and two selected a state employee plan.23

If a state’s EHB benchmark plan did not include services in all of the
required benefit categories, states were required to identify supplemental
coverage to complete their EHB benchmark packages. Except for habilitative
services, the benchmark plan could be supplemented by adding benefits for any
missing categories from another benchmark plan. For habilitative services,
states had the option to define the services to be included in that category
or, if they chose not to make that determination, insurers were required to
provide parity with rehabilitative services or define which habilitative
services to cover and report to HHS.

**Special rules govern coverage for abortion services**. Abortion services are
explicitly excluded from the list of essential health benefits that all health
insurance plans are required to offer. No health plan is required to cover
abortion services. States may allow private insurers to offer a plan in their
state Marketplace that includes coverage of abortions beyond what is allowed
under federal law (to save the life of the woman and in cases of rape and
incest); however, premium payments must be segregated into two separate
accounts – one for the value of the abortion benefit and one for the value of
all other services. States may also prohibit coverage for any abortions by all
plans, and at least one plan within a state Marketplace must offer coverage
that excludes abortions outside those permitted under federal law. 24

**Plans sold in the Marketplaces and in the individual and small group markets
must also fit into one of four metal tiers defined by their actuarial value
(AV), which is the share of health costs covered, on average, by the plan**.
The four metal tiers and their AV are:

    
        * Bronze: 60% AV
    * Silver: 70% AV
    * Gold: 80% AV
    * Platinum: 90% AV
    

Insurers have flexibility to alter the cost-sharing features within metal
tiers, for example setting deductibles at different levels or applying
copayments instead of coinsurance, as long as the overall AV of the plan meets
the required percentage.25

**The ACA establishes a limit on the amount of cost-sharing consumers can be
expected to pay for services covered by the plan**. Once this overall limit is
met, the plan must cover 100% of remaining health care costs for the year. The
maximum out-of-pocket limit for 2014 was set at $6,350 per individual and
$12,700 per family. These limits increased to $6,600 per individual and
$13,200 per family in 2015. The out-of-pocket limits are lower for those with
incomes below 250% FPL who are eligible for cost-sharing reductions. They drop
to $2,250 per individual and $4,500 per family for those with incomes 100-200%
FPL and to $5,200 per individual and $10,400 per family for those with incomes
200-250% FPL.

**While the goal of the benefit changes enacted by the ACA was to improve the
adequacy of coverage offered to consumers, particularly in the individual
market, many people have faced disruptions because their plans were canceled,
either because the plans did not comply with the new ACA requirements or
because insurers chose not to continue offering the plans**. Estimates from
the Urban Institute indicate that about 2.6 million people had their plans
canceled because the plans did not meet the ACA requirements and another
840,000 had plans canceled for other reasons. 26 Many consumers whose plans
were canceled were able to find comparable coverage through the Marketplaces
or in the individual market outside the Marketplaces, though some had to pay
more for the coverage. According to the findings from the Kaiser Survey of
Non-Group Health Insurance Enrollees, of respondents who switched from non-
compliant to compliant plans, similar shares reported paying higher or lower
premiums for the new coverage (39% vs. 46%). However, plan switchers were less
likely to report being satisfied with the plan costs and less likely to
perceive their coverage as a good value, perhaps because about half of plan
switchers reported having their previous plan canceled.27

Introduction Individual and Employer Requirements

#### Topics

    
        * Health Reform
    

#### Tags

    
        * Affordable Care Act
    * Coverage
    * Individual Market
    * Marketplaces
    

### Sections

    
        * Health Insurance Market Reforms 
    * Individual and Employer Requirements 
    * Expanding Coverage
    

### DOWNLOAD

    
        * ISSUE BRIEF
    

### Also of Interest

    
        * The Health-Care Enrollment Story Is in the States 
    * Are Premium Subsidies Available in States with a Federally-run Marketplace? A Guide to the Supreme Court Argument in King v. Burwell
    
    * Nav Group
      * Disparities Policy
      * Global Health Policy
      * Health Costs
      * Health Reform
      * HIV/AIDS
      * Medicaid
      * Medicare
      * Private Insurance
      * Uninsured
      * Women's Health Policy
      * Polling
      * Perspectives
      * State Health Facts
      * Graphics & Interactives
      * Charts & Slides
      * Kaiser Health News
      * Media Campaigns
      * Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker
    * Newsroom
      * News Releases
      * Events
      * Subscribe to Emails
      * Cite Us/Reprint
      * Media Contacts
    * About Us
      * Our Programs
      * Key Staff
      * Media Fellowships
      * Barbara Jordan Conference Center
      * Contact Us
      * Employment Opportunities
      * Privacy Policy
    

**Get the Latest on Health Policy** Sign Up for Email Alerts

Sign Up

(C) 2019 Kaiser Family Foundation

Powered by WordPress.com VIP

Follow Us

Facebook Twitter Instagram Feeds

The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Headquarters: 185 Berry St., Suite 2000,
San Francisco, CA 94170 | Phone 650-854-9400  
Washington Offices and Barbara Jordan Conference Center: 1330 G Street, NW,
Washington, DC 20005 | Phone 202-347-5270

www.kff.org | Email Alerts: kff.org/email |
facebook.com/KaiserFamilyFoundation | twitter.com/KaiserFamFound

**Filling the need for trusted information on national health issues,** the
Kaiser Family Foundation is a nonprofit organization based in San Francisco,
California.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

