
    
        * MyNewMarkets.com
    * Claims Journal
    * Insurance Journal TV
    * Academy of Insurance
    * Carrier Management
    

![Insurance Journal - Property Casualty Industry

News](https://www.insurancejournal.com/img/insurance-journal-logo-680.png)

### Featured Stories

    
        * Large Marine Losses Drop; New Risks Emerge
    * Michigan Overhauls Auto Insurance
    
    * News
    * Markets
    

### Current Magazine

![current

magazine](https://d6zxf491dr98g.cloudfront.net/img/magazines/120/ije_20190603.png)

    
        * Read Online
    * Subscribe
    
    * Front Page
      * National
      * International
      * Most Popular
      * Magazine
      * Forums
      * Blogs
      * Videos/Podcasts
      * Newsletters
    * News
      * Most Popular
      * National
      * International
      * East
      * Midwest
      * South Central
      * Southeast
      * West
    * Magazines
      * East
      * Midwest
      * South Central
      * Southeast
      * West
      * Subscribe
    * Research
    * Directories
    * Jobs
    * Features
      * Events
      * Forums
      * Buyers Guide
      * Insurance Twitter
      * Market Directories
      * Ad Showcase
      * Quotes
      * Polls
    * Subscribe
    

# Number of Americans Without Health Insurance Rose by 3 Million in 2017:

Gallup

By Yasmeen Abutaleb | January 17, 2018

__Email This __Subscribe to Newsletter

Email to a friend Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Print Article

    
        * Article
    * 46 Comments
    

The number of Americans without healthcare insurance rose by 3.2 million
people between 2016 and 2017, or 1.3 percentage points to 12.2 percent,
according to a Gallup poll released on Tuesday, the biggest jump in the
uninsured rate in nearly a decade.

Several factors likely contributed to the jump, Gallup said, including
attempts by Republicans, who control both chambers of Congress and the White
House, to repeal and replace the 2010 Affordable Care Act, commonly called
Obamacare. The law extended health insurance to 20 million Americans.

Republicans have so far failed to make good on President Donald Trump's
campaign promise to end Obamacare, but they repealed the so-called individual
mandate, or requirement that most Americans purchase health insurance or else
pay a fine, in a tax bill that passed in December. The jump in uninsured
followed a consistent decline between 2014 and 2016, the time period when much
of Obamacare was being implemented, after peaking at 18 percent in 2013,
Gallup said. With the repeal of the individual mandateand insurance premiums
that are likely to continue rising, the uninsured rate will likely increase
further in coming years, the pollster said.

The Trump administration has said it was wrong to force Americans to sign up
for healthcare, as Obamacare did. It did not immediately respond to a request
for comment.

The uninsured rate rose among all demographic groups in 2017, except those 65
and older, who qualify for Medicare, the government health insurance program
for the elderly. But young adults, blacks, Hispanics and low-income Americans
saw the biggest rise in the uninsured rate, Gallup found. Young and healthy
consumers, in particular, are needed to help offset the costs of older, sicker
and more expensive patients.

The overall jump in uninsured was the biggest since Gallup began the poll in
2008.

Gallup said media coverage of repeated attempts to repeal and replace
Obamacare, former President Barack Obama's signature domestic policy
achievement, may have caused confusion among consumers. It also pointed to
health insurers who pulled out of the Obamacare individual market due to
uncertainty, leaving consumers with fewer and more expensive choices, which
may have prompted some to forego coverage.

Trump administration decisions to slash the Obamacare advertising budget by 90
percent and cut the sign-up period in half also likely played a role in the
rise of uninsured Americans, Gallup said.

_(Reporting By Yasmeen Abutaleb; Editing by Andrew Hay)_

Copyright 2019 Reuters. Click for restrictions.

Was this article valuable?

Yes No

Thank you! Please tell us what we can do to improve this article.

Submit No Thanks

Thank you! % of people found this article valuable. Please tell us what you
liked about it.

Submit No Thanks

Here are more articles you may enjoy.

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2019/06/walker-kirk-

nationwide-150x150.jpg)Nationwide Taps Insider Walker as CEO to Succeed
Rasmussen

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2019/03/cannabis-

hands-150x150.jpg)Early Cannabis Insurance Claims Experience Differs from
Expectations

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2019/06/home-renovation-

dumpster-150x150.jpg)Repairing Homes After Disasters Requires Planning,
Patience Even with Insurance

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2013/09/medical-malpractice-

tort-reform-liability-150x150.jpg)Ohio Doctor Now Faces Murder Charges in
Painkiller Overdose Deaths

![subscribe](/img/subscribe-background-580x250.png)

#### Want to stay up to date?

Get the latest insurance news  
sent straight to your inbox.

Submit

__Email This __Subscribe to Newsletter

Email to a friend Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Print Article

    
        * **Categories:** National News **Topics:** GOP Obamacare repeal, Obamacare, Republicans Obamacare, rise in uninsured, uninsured Americans
    * _Have a hot lead? Email us atnewsdesk@insurancejournal.com_
    

Advertisers

#### Featured Comment

    
        * January 17, 2018 at 9:14 am
    

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e02cfd16d3b59c12b57ffb20e0861386?s=40&d=mm&r=g)
PolarBeaRepeal says:

Hot debate. What do you think?

![Thumb up](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/plugins/comment-rating-

pro/images/1_16_up.png) 17

![Thumb down](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/plugins/comment-rating-

pro/images/1_16_down.png) 19

This is largely due to CHOICE, not government removing coverage that some
think is a right.

The choice is partially affected by the Death Spiral of ACA, which was
INTENTIONALLY caused by architects of that disasterâ€¦ to lead to Single Slayer,
er, Single Delayer, er, Single Payer Socialistic Health Insurance.

(Anticipated) Removal of the mandate is the key reason some choose to not
insure. Hooray for freedom to chose under the current administration rather
than the out of control Federal Government acting in a manner that violated
the US Constitution!

#### Latest Comments

    
        * January 23, 2018 at 2:30 pm
    

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/abd9b8e03ef289d74dda756eb4f4d3f1?s=40&d=mm&r=g)
Not-a-right-winger says:

mr bob, You're a person with a different view on health care than I have, not
a deplorable. Regarding your question, I would hazard a guess that James
Madison was more concern... read more

    
        * January 23, 2018 at 7:42 am
    

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a8ca6f63d893b42cb6f4b5d3f20457b?s=40&d=mm&r=g)
Ron says:

"When the employment situation improves for all Americans, it improves for
Americans who are Hispanic, black, white, Chinese . . ." I agree. My issue is
that our president is ... read more

    
        * January 22, 2018 at 4:25 pm
    

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2ddd820a35798b425f3be433fc8ad691?s=40&d=mm&r=g)
Craig Cornell says:

When the employment situation improves for all Americans, it improves for
Americans who are Hispanic, black, white, Chinese . . . Get it now? Did it
improve for these people b... read more

### Add a CommentSee All Comments (46)Add a Comment Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Name *

Email *

Comment

Notify me of comments via e-mail

More News

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2013/10/tornado-150x150.jpg)Digital
Billboards in Illinois City to Display Tornado Warnings

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2019/06/AP_texascranecollapse2019-150x150.jpg)Crane
Falls on Dallas Apartments; 1 Killed, 5 Injured

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2018/09/rate-hikes-fees-

approved-150x150.jpg)California Surplus Lines Stamping Fee Goes to 0.25% in
2020

![](https://www.insurancejournal.com/app/uploads/2011/08/debt-

lightning-150x150.jpg)Regulators Warn But Slow to Fix Blind Spots on Rising
Risky Corporate Debt

More News Features

### Read This Next

    
        * Number of Americans Without Health Insurance Rose by 3 Million in 2017: Gallup
    * Crane Falls on Dallas Apartments; 1 Killed, 5 Injured
    * Supreme Court Accepts 3 Cases Seeking to Limit Lawsuits Against Businesses
    * Two Killed When Small Plane Crashes on Long Island
    * How Insurers Are Digitizing Claims with Apps, Photos, Videos, E-Payments and More
    

### Insurance Jobs

    
        * Manager, Medicare Market Sales - Detroit, Michigan
    * Service Center Representative - Keene, NH
    * Vice President of Legal and Compliance - Sarasota, FL
    * Account Executive/Account Manager/Customer Service Rep - Los Angeles and Brentwood, TN
    * Insurance Commercial Lines Surplus Lines Tax Filings / Compliance - Remote
    

![MyNewMarkets](/img/blocks/mynewmarkets-logo-220x38.png)

    
        * MyNewMarkets.com Upgrades with New Features for Agents, Markets
    * Best: Insurers Remain Cautious About Marijuana Insurance Market
    * How Workers' Comp Brokers Can Increase Commissions by 81%
    * Agents Warned About E&O Risks in Claiming Cyber, Cannabis Expertise
    * How to Reverse Engineer Your Insurance Career, Avoid Job Burnout
    

![Claims Journal](/img/blocks/claimsjournal-logo-220x38.png)

    
        * Mass Shootings in the Workplace are Rare and Puzzling
    * Supreme Court to Hear BP Unit's Dispute over Montana Superfund Site
    * Green Groups Sue Trump Administration for Gutting Offshore Oil Safety Rules
    * Da Vinci's $450 Million Masterpiece Is Kept on Saudi Prince's Yacht: Artnet
    * New Groping Claim at Lloyd's of London Agent Deepens Scandal
    

![Academy of Insurance education](/img/blocks/ijacademy-logo-220x38.png)

    
        * June 13 The Latest Scoop on Additional Insureds and Certificates of Insurance
    * June 27 Claims Made and Professional Liability Endorsements
    * July 9 Resolving Claims Disputes: Legal and Contractual Principles - Part 1 of 2
    * July 11 Business Auto Symbols and Endorsements
    

#### Insurance News

    
        * News by Region
    * News by Topic
    * Yesterday
    

#### Site Search

#### Features

    
        * Insurance Markets Directory
    * Forums
    * A.M. Best Company Ratings
    * Industry Events
    * Agencies Wanted / For Sale
    * Buyers Guide
    * Newswire
    * Ad Showcase
    * Insurance Jobs
    

#### Connect with us

    
        * Email Newsletters
    * Magazine Subscriptions
    * For Your Website
    * RSS Feeds
    * __Twitter
    * Facebook
    * LinkedIn
    

#### Insurance Journal

    
        * Submit News
    * Advertise
    * Subscribe
    * Reprints
    * Link to Us
    * Contact Us
    

#### Wells Media Group Network

    
        * Insurance Journal
    * MyNewMarkets.com
    * Claims Journal
    * Insurance Journal TV
    * Academy of Insurance
    * Carrier Management
    

(C) 2019 by Wells Media Group, Inc. Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Site
Map

We have updated our privacy policy to be more clear and meet the new
requirements of the GDPR. By continuing to use our site, you accept our
revised Privacy Policy.

OK  
_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

