

Skip to main content

        
                  * U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
        

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: 1-800-994-9662 9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

Menu

CHANGE

Top Menu

        
                  * Health and Wellness
            * Getting Active
            * Healthy Eating
            * Healthy Living by Age
            * Healthy Weight
            * Mental Health
            * Relationships and Safety
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Caregiver stress
              * Folic acid
              * Heart-healthy eating
              * Iron-deficiency anemia
              * Stress and your health
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Diseases and Conditions
            * Cancer
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Lupus
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Autoimmune diseases
              * Carpal tunnel syndrome
              * Depression
              * Irritable bowel syndrome
              * Migraine
              * Thyroid disease
              * Urinary tract infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Reproductive Health
            * Breastfeeding
            * Menopause
            * Menstrual Cycle
            * Ovulation Calculator
            * Pregnancy
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Bacterial vaginosis
              * Birth control methods
              * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
              * Infertility
              * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
              * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
              * Uterine fibroids
              * Vaginal yeast infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Patient Materials
            * Autoimmune Diseases
            * Breastfeeding
            * Cancer
            * Fitness and Nutrition
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Mental Health
            * Pain
            * Pregnancy
            * Reproductive Health
            * Sexual Health
            * Sexually Transmitted Infections
            * Other A-Z Topics
        

## Browse by resource

        
                      * Fact sheets
              * Infographics
              * Guides
              * Videos
              * Webinars
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * About Us
            * Who we are
            * What we do
            * Programs and activities
            * Work with us
            * Contact Us
            * Blog
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Vision and mission
              * Leadership
              * Programs and activities
              * In your community
              * Funding opportunities
              * Internships and jobs
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * Back to section menu
        

## Pregnancy

        
                  * Before you get pregnant
            * If you are sexually active
            * Preconception health
            * Trying to conceive
            * Knowing if you are pregnant
            * Unplanned pregnancy
          * You're pregnant: Now what?
            * Stages of pregnancy
            * Prenatal care and tests
            * Twins, triplets, and other multiples
            * Staying healthy and safe
            * Body changes and discomforts
            * Pregnancy complications
            * Pregnancy loss
            * Know your pregnancy rights
          * Getting ready for baby
            * Birthing, breastfeeding, and parenting classes
            * Breastfeeding
            * Circumcision
            * Health care for baby
            * Making your home safe for baby
            * Last-minute to-dos
          * Childbirth and beyond
            * Labor and birth
            * Your baby's first hours of life
            * Recovering from birth
            * Newborn care and safety
            * Getting pregnant again
            * Babysitters and child care
          * Features and fact sheets
          * Ovulation calculator
          * View A-Z health topics
        

Search __

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: **1-800-994-9662**  
9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

        
                  * ![Home](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/home_icon.png)
          * Health and Wellness
        
            * ****
            * Getting Active
            * Healthy Eating
            * Healthy Living by Age
            * Healthy Weight
            * Mental Health
            * Relationships and Safety
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Caregiver stress
            * Folic acid
            * Heart-healthy eating
            * Iron-deficiency anemia
            * Stress and your health
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Diseases and Conditions
        
            * ****
            * Cancer
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Lupus
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Autoimmune diseases
            * Carpal tunnel syndrome
            * Depression
            * Irritable bowel syndrome
            * Migraine
            * Thyroid disease
            * Urinary tract infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Reproductive Health
        
            * ****
            * Breastfeeding
            * Menopause
            * Menstrual Cycle
            * Ovulation Calculator
            * Pregnancy
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Bacterial vaginosis
            * Birth control methods
            * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
            * Infertility
            * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
            * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
            * Uterine fibroids
            * Vaginal yeast infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Patient Materials
        
            * ** Browse by health topic  **
        
            *         * Autoimmune Diseases
            * Breastfeeding
            * Cancer
            * Fitness and Nutrition
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Mental Health
        
            * Pain
            * Pregnancy
            * Reproductive Health
            * Sexual Health
            * Sexually Transmitted Infections
            * Other A-Z Topics
        
            * **Browse by resource**
            * Fact sheets
            * Infographics
            * Guides
            * Videos
            * Webinars
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * About Us
        
            * ****
            * Who we are
            * What we do
            * Programs and activities
            * Work with us
            * Contact Us
            * Blog
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Vision and mission
            * Leadership
            * Programs and activities
            * In your community
            * Funding opportunities
            * Internships and jobs
        

**View all pages in this section**

Share Facebook Twitter

        
                  1. Home
          2. Pregnancy
          3. You're pregnant: Now what?
          4. Pregnancy complications
        

## Pregnancy

        
                  * Before you get pregnant
          * You're pregnant: Now what?
            * Stages of pregnancy
            * Prenatal care and tests
            * Twins, triplets, and other multiples
            * Staying healthy and safe
            * Body changes and discomforts
            * Pregnancy complications
            * Pregnancy loss
            * Know your pregnancy rights
          * Getting ready for baby
          * Childbirth and beyond
          * Features and fact sheets
          * Ovulation calculator
          * View A-Z health topics
        

OPA Office of Population Affairs

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Pregnancy email updates

Submit

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/wh_ts-

medfr19994.jpg?itok=5gQ2ZT3T&c=554615003952d2e17292e52178aaf892)

# Pregnancy complications

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/wh_ts-

medfr19994.jpg?itok=5gQ2ZT3T&c=554615003952d2e17292e52178aaf892)

**Complications of pregnancy are health problems that occur during
pregnancy.** They can involve the mother's health, the baby's health, or both.
Some women have health problems before they become pregnant that could lead to
complications. Other problems arise during the pregnancy. Whether a
complication is common or rare, there are ways to manage problems that come up
during pregnancy.

Expand all

|

Collapse all

## Health problems before pregnancy

Before pregnancy, make sure to talk to your doctor about health problems you
have now or have had in the past. If you are receiving treatment for a health
problem, your doctor might want to change the way your health problem is
managed. Some medicines used to treat health problems could be harmful if
taken during pregnancy. At the same time, stopping medicines that you need
could be more harmful than the risks posed should you become pregnant. Be
assured that you are likely to have a normal, healthy baby when health
problems are under control and you get good prenatal care.

Health problems before pregnancy

Condition | How it can affect pregnancy | Where to learn more  
---|---|---  
Asthma | Poorly controlled asthma may increase risk of preeclampsia, poor
weight gain in the fetus, preterm birth, cesarean birth, and other
complications. If pregnant women stop using asthma medicine, even mild asthma
can become severe. |

        
                  * Lung diseases fact sheet
        

Depression | Depression that persists during pregnancy can make it hard for a
woman to care for herself and her unborn baby. Having depression before
pregnancy also is a risk factor for postpartum depression. |

        
                  * Depression fact sheet
          * Depression during and after pregnancy fact sheet
        

Diabetes | High blood glucose (sugar) levels during pregnancy can harm the
fetus and worsen a woman's long-term diabetes complications. Doctors advise
getting diabetes under control at least three to six months before trying to
conceive. |

        
                  * Diabetes fact sheet
        

Eating disorders | Body image changes during pregnancy can cause eating
disorders to worsen. Eating disorders are linked to many pregnancy
complications, including birth defects and premature birth. Women with eating
disorders also have higher rates of postpartum depression. |

        
                  * Anorexia nervosa fact sheet
          * Bulimia nervosa fact sheet
        

Epilepsy and other seizure disorders | Seizures during pregnancy can harm the
fetus, and increase the risk of miscarriage or stillbirth. But using medicine
to control seizures might cause birth defects. For most pregnant women with
epilepsy, using medicine poses less risk to their own health and the health of
their babies than stopping medicine. |

        
                  * About Epilepsy
        

High blood pressure | Having chronic high blood pressure puts a pregnant woman
and her baby at risk for problems. Women with high blood pressure have a
higher risk of preeclampsia and placental abruption (when the placenta
separates from the wall of the uterus). The likelihood of preterm birth and
low birth weight also is higher. |

        
                  * Information on high blood pressure from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
        

HIV | HIV can be passed from a woman to her baby during pregnancy or delivery.
Yet this risk is less than 1 percent if a woman takes certain HIV medicines
during pregnancy. Women who have HIV and want to become pregnant should talk
to their doctors before trying to conceive. Good prenatal care will help
protect a woman's baby from HIV and keep her healthy. |

        
                  * HIV and AIDS
        

Migraine | Migraine symptoms tend to improve during pregnancy. Some women have
no migraine attacks during pregnancy. Certain medicines commonly used to treat
headaches should not be used during pregnancy. A woman who has severe
headaches should speak to her doctor about ways to relieve symptoms safely. |

        
                  * Migraine fact sheet
        

Overweight and Obesity | Recent studies suggest that the heavier a woman is
before she becomes pregnant, the greater her risk of a range of pregnancy
complications, including preeclampsia and preterm delivery. Overweight and
obese women who lose weight before pregnancy are likely to have healthier
pregnancies. |

        
                  * Overweight, obesity, and weight loss fact sheet
        

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) | Some STIs can cause early labor, a
woman's water to break too early, and infection in the uterus after birth.
Some STIs also can be passed from a woman to her baby during pregnancy or
delivery. Some ways STIs can harm the baby include: low birth weight,
dangerous infections, brain damage, blindness, deafness, liver problems, or
stillbirth. |

        
                  * Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet
        

Thyroid disease | Uncontrolled hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) can be
dangerous to the mother and cause health problems such as heart failure and
poor weight gain in the fetus. Uncontrolled hypothyroidism (underactive
thyroid) also threatens the mother's health and can cause birth defects. |

        
                  * Graves' disease fact sheet
          * Hashimoto's disease fact sheet
        

Uterine fibroids | Uterine fibroids are not uncommon, but few cause symptoms
that require treatment. Uterine fibroids rarely cause miscarriage. Sometimes,
fibroids can cause preterm or breech birth. Cesarean delivery may be needed if
a fibroid blocks the birth canal. |

        
                  * Uterine fibroids fact sheet
        

## Pregnancy related problems

Sometimes pregnancy problems arise -- even in healthy women. Some prenatal
tests done during pregnancy can help prevent these problems or spot them
early. Use this chart to learn about some common pregnancy complications. Call
your doctor if you have any of the symptoms on this chart. If a problem is
found, make sure to follow your doctor's advice about treatment. Doing so will
boost your chances of having a safe delivery and a strong, healthy baby.

Health problems during pregnancy Problem | Symptoms | Treatment  
---|---|---  
**Anemia** - Lower than normal number of healthy red blood cells |

        
                  * Feel tired or weak
          * Look pale
          * Feel faint
          * Shortness of breath
        

| Treating the underlying cause of the anemia will help restore the number of
healthy red blood cells. Women with pregnancy related anemia are helped by
taking iron and folic acid supplements. Your doctor will check your iron
levels throughout pregnancy to be sure anemia does not happen again.  
**Depression** - Extreme sadness during pregnancy or after birth (postpartum)
|

        
                  * Intense sadness
          * Helplessness and irritability
          * Appetite changes
          * Thoughts of harming self or baby
        

|

Women who are pregnant might be helped with one or a combination of treatment
options, including:

        
                  * Therapy
          * Support groups
          * Medicines
        

A mother's depression can affect her baby's development, so getting treatment
is important for both mother and baby. Learn more about depression during and
after pregnancy.

**Ectopic (ek-TOP-ihk) pregnancy** - When a fertilized egg implants outside of
the uterus, usually in the fallopian tube |

        
                  * Abdominal pain
          * Shoulder pain
          * Vaginal bleeding
          * Feeling dizzy or faint
        

| With ectopic pregnancy, the egg cannot develop. Drugs or surgery is used to
remove the ectopic tissue so your organs are not damaged.  
**Fetal problems** - Unborn baby has a health issue, such as poor growth or
heart problems |

        
                  * Baby moving less than normal (Learn how to count your baby's movements on our Prenatal care and tests page.)
          * Baby is smaller than normal for gestational age
          * Some problems have no symptoms, but are found with prenatal tests
        

| Treatment depends on results of tests to monitor baby's health. If a test
suggests a problem, this does not always mean the baby is in trouble. It may
only mean that the mother needs special care until the baby is delivered. This
can include a wide variety of things, such as bed rest, depending on the
mother's condition. Sometimes, the baby has to be delivered early.  
**Gestational diabetes** - Too high blood sugar levels during pregnancy |

        
                  * Usually, there are no symptoms. Sometimes, extreme thirst, hunger, or fatigue
          * Screening test shows high blood sugar levels
        

|

Most women with pregnancy related diabetes can control their blood sugar
levels by a following a healthy meal plan from their doctor. Some women also
need insulin to keep blood sugar levels under control. Doing so is important
because poorly controlled diabetes increases the risk of:

        
                  * Preeclampsia
          * Early delivery
          * Cesearean birth
          * Having a big baby, which can complicate delivery
          * Baby born with low blood sugar, breathing problems, and jaundice
        

**High blood pressure** **(pregnancy related)** - High blood pressure that
starts after 20 weeks of pregnancy and goes away after birth |

        
                  * High blood pressure without other signs and symptoms of preeclampsia
        

| The health of the mother and baby are closely watched to make sure high
blood pressure is not preeclampsia.  
**Hyperemesis gravidarum (HEYE-pur-EM-uh-suhss grav-uh-DAR-uhm) (HG)** -
Severe, persistent nausea and vomiting during pregnancy -- more extreme than
"morning sickness" |

        
                  * Nausea that does not go away
          * Vomiting several times every day
          * Weight loss
          * Reduced appetite
          * Dehydration
          * Feeling faint or fainting
        

| Dry, bland foods and fluids together is the first line of treatment.
Sometimes, medicines are prescribed to help nausea. Many women with HG have to
be hospitalized so they can be fed fluids and nutrients through a tube in
their veins. Usually, women with HG begin to feel better by the 20th week of
pregnancy. But some women vomit and feel nauseated throughout all three
trimesters.  
**Miscarriage** - Pregnancy loss from natural causes before 20 weeks. As many
as 20 percent of pregnancies end in miscarriage. Often, miscarriage occurs
before a woman even knows she is pregnant |

Signs of a miscarriage can include:

        
                  * Vaginal spotting or bleeding*
          * Cramping or abdominal pain
          * Fluid or tissue passing from the vagina
        

_* Spotting early in pregnancy doesn 't mean miscarriage is certain. Still,
contact your doctor right away if you have any bleeding._

| In most cases, miscarriage cannot be prevented. Sometimes, a woman must
undergo treatment to remove pregnancy tissue in the uterus. Counseling can
help with emotional healing. See our section on Pregnancy loss.  
**Placenta previa** - Placenta covers part or entire opening of cervix inside
of the uterus |

        
                  * Painless vaginal bleeding during second or third trimester
          * For some, no symptoms
        

| If diagnosed after the 20th week of pregnancy, but with no bleeding, a woman
will need to cut back on her activity level and increase bed rest. If bleeding
is heavy, hospitalization may be needed until mother and baby are stable. If
the bleeding stops or is light, continued bed rest is resumed until baby is
ready for delivery. If bleeding doesn't stop or if preterm labor starts, baby
will be delivered by cesarean section.  
**Placental abruption** - Placenta separates from uterine wall before
delivery, which can mean the fetus doesn't get enough oxygen. |

        
                  * Vaginal bleeding
          * Cramping, abdominal pain, and uterine tenderness
        

| When the separation is minor, bed rest for a few days usually stops the
bleeding. Moderate cases may require complete bed rest. Severe cases (when
more than half of the placenta separates) can require immediate medical
attention and early delivery of the baby.  
**Preeclampsia (pree-ee-CLAMP-see-uh)** - A condition starting after 20 weeks
of pregnancy that causes high blood pressure and problems with the kidneys and
other organs. Also called toxemia. |

        
                  * High blood pressure
          * Swelling of hands and face
          * Too much protein in urine
          * Stomach pain
          * Blurred vision
          * Dizziness
          * Headaches
        

| The only cure is delivery, which may not be best for the baby. Labor will
probably be induced if condition is mild and the woman is near term (37 to 40
weeks of pregnancy). If it is too early to deliver, the doctor will watch the
health of the mother and her baby very closely. She may need medicines and bed
rest at home or in the hospital to lower her blood pressure. Medicines also
might be used to prevent the mother from having seizures.  
**Preterm labor** - Going into labor before 37 weeks of pregnancy |

        
                  * Increased vaginal discharge
          * Pelvic pressure and cramping
          * Back pain radiating to the abdomen
          * Contractions
        

| Medicines can stop labor from progressing. Bed rest is often advised.
Sometimes, a woman must deliver early. Giving birth before 37 weeks is called
"preterm birth." Preterm birth is a major risk factor for future preterm
births.

## Infections during pregnancy

During pregnancy, your baby is protected from many illnesses, like the common
cold or a passing stomach bug. But some infections can be harmful to your
pregnancy, your baby, or both. This chart provides an overview of infections
that can be harmful during pregnancy. Learn the symptoms and what you can do
to keep healthy. Easy steps, such as hand washing, practicing safe sex, and
avoiding certain foods, can help protect you from some infections.

Infections during pregnancy Infection | Symptoms | Prevention and treatment  
---|---|--- 

**Bacterial vaginosis (BV)**

A vaginal infection that is caused by an overgrowth of bacteria normally found
in the vagina.

BV has been linked to preterm birth and low birth weight babies.

|

        
                  * Grey or whitish discharge that has a foul, fishy odor
          * Burning when passing urine or itching
          * Some women have no symptoms
        

|

How to prevent BV is unclear. BV is not passed through sexual contact,
although it is linked with having a new or more than one sex partner.

Women with symptoms should be tested for BV.

Antibiotics are used to treat BV.

**Cytomegalovirus (SEYE-toh-MEG-uh-loh VEYE-ruhss) (CMV)**

A common virus that can cause disease in infants whose mothers are infected
with CMV during pregnancy. CMV infection in infants can lead to hearing loss,
vision loss, and other disabilities.

|

        
                  * Mild illness that may include fever, sore throat, fatigue, and swollen glands
          * Some women have no symptoms
        

|

Good hygiene is the best way to keep from getting CMV.

No treatment is currently available. But studies are looking at antiviral
drugs for use in infants. Work to create a CMV vaccine also is underway.

**Group B strep** **(GBS)**

Group B strep is a type of bacteria often found in the vagina and rectum of
healthy women. One in four women has it. GBS usually is not harmful to you,
but can be deadly to your baby if passed during childbirth.

|

        
                  * No symptoms
        

|

You can keep from passing GBS to your baby by getting tested at 35 to 37
weeks. This simply involves swabbing the vagina and rectum and does not hurt.

If you have GBS, an antibiotic given to you during labor will protect your
baby from infection. Make sure to tell the labor and delivery staff that you
are a group B strep carrier when you check into the hospital.

**Hepatitis B virus** **(HBV)**

A viral infection that can be passed to baby during birth. Newborns that get
infected have a 90 percent chance of developing lifelong infection. This can
lead to liver damage and liver cancer. A vaccine can keep newborns from
getting HBV. But 1 in 5 newborns of mothers who are HBV positive don't get the
vaccine at the hospital before leaving.

|

There may be no symptoms. Or symptoms can include:

        
                  * Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
          * Dark urine and pale bowel movements
          * Whites of eyes or skin looks yellow
        

|

Lab tests can find out if the mother is a carrier of hepatitis B.

You can protect your baby for life from HBV with the hepatitis B vaccine,
which is a series of three shots:

        
                  * First dose of hepatitis B vaccine plus HBIG shot given to baby at birth
          * Second dose of hepatitis B vaccine given to baby at 1-2 months old
          * Third dose of hepatitis B vaccine given to baby at 6 months old (but not before 24 weeks old)
        

**Influenza (flu)**

Flu is a common viral infection that is more likely to cause severe illness in
pregnant women than in women who are not pregnant. Pregnant woman with flu
also have a greater chance for serious problems for their unborn baby,
including premature labor and delivery.

|

        
                  * Fever (sometimes) or feeling feverish/chills
          * Cough
          * Sore throat
          * Runny or stuffy nose
          * Muscle or body aches
          * Headaches
          * Feeling tired
          * Vomiting and diarrhea (sometimes)
        

|

Getting a flu shot is the first and most important step in protecting against
flu. The flu shot given during pregnancy is safe and has been shown to protect
both the mother and her baby (up to 6 months old) from flu. (The nasal spray
vaccine should not be given to women who are pregnant.)

If you get sick with flu-like symptoms call your doctor right away. If needed,
the doctor will prescribe an antiviral medicine that treats the flu.

**Listeriosis (lih-steer-ee-OH-suhss)**

An infection with the harmful bacteria called listeria. It is found in some
refrigerated and ready-to-eat foods. Infection can cause early delivery or
miscarriage.

|

        
                  * Fever, muscle aches, chills
          * Sometimes diarrhea or nausea
          * If progresses, severe headache and stiff neck
        

|

Avoid foods that can harbor listeria.

Antibiotics are used to treat listeriosis.

**Parvovirus B19 (fifth disease)**

Most pregnant women who are infected with this virus do not have serious
problems. But there is a small chance the virus can infect the fetus. This
raises the risk of miscarriage during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. Fifth
disease can cause severe anemia in women who have red blood cell disorders
like sickle cell disease or immune system problems.

|

        
                  * Low-grade fever
          * Tiredness
          * Rash on face, trunk, and limbs
          * Painful and swollen joints
        

| No specific treatment, except for blood transfusions that might be needed
for people who have problems with their immune systems or with red blood cell
disorders. There is no vaccine to help prevent infection with this virus.

**Sexually transmitted infection** **(STI)**

An infection that is passed through sexual contact. Many STIs can be passed to
the baby in the womb or during birth. Some effects include stillbirth, low
birth weight, and life-threatening infections. STIs also can cause a woman's
water to break too early or preterm labor.

|

        
                  * Symptoms depend on the STI. Often, a woman has no symptoms, which is why screening for STIs during pregnancy is so important.
          * For more information, see our Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet.
        

|

STIs can be prevented by practicing safe sex. A woman can keep from passing an
STI to her baby by being screened early in pregnancy.

Treatments vary depending on the STI. Many STIs are treated easily with
antibiotics.

**Toxoplasmosis (TOK-soh-plaz-MOH-suhss)**

This infection is caused by a parasite, which is found in cat feces, soil, and
raw or undercooked meat. If passed to an unborn baby, the infection can cause
hearing loss, blindness, or intellectual disabilities.

|

        
                  * Mild flu-like symptoms, or possibly no symptoms.
        

|

You can lower your risk by:

        
                  * Washing hands with soap after touching soil or raw meat
          * Washing produce before eating
          * Cooking meat completely
          * Washing cooking utensils with hot, soapy water
          * Not cleaning cats' litter boxes
        

Medicines are used to treat a pregnant woman and her unborn baby. Sometimes,
the baby is treated with medicine after birth.

**Urinary tract infection** **(UTI)**

Bacterial infection in urinary tract. If untreated, it can spread to the
kidneys, which can cause preterm labor.

|

        
                  * Pain or burning when urinating
          * Frequent urination
          * Pelvis, back, stomach, or side pain
          * Shaking, chills, fever, sweats
        

| UTIs are treated with antibiotics.

**Yeast infection**

An infection caused by an overgrowth of bacteria normally found in the vagina.
Yeast infections are more common during pregnancy than in other times of a
woman's life. They do not threaten the health of your baby. But they can be
uncomfortable and difficult to treat in pregnancy.

|

        
                  * Extreme itchiness in and around the vagina
          * Burning, redness, and swelling of the vagina and the vulva
          * Pain when passing urine or during sex
          * A thick, white vaginal discharge that looks like cottage cheese and does not have a bad smell
        

| Vaginal creams and suppositories are used to treat yeast infection during
pregnancy.

## When to call the doctor

When you are pregnant, don't wait to call your doctor or midwife if something
is bothering or worrying you. Sometimes physical changes can be signs of a
problem.

Call your doctor or midwife as soon as you can if you:

        
                  * Are bleeding or leaking fluid from the vagina
          * Have sudden or severe swelling in the face, hands, or fingers
          * Get severe or long-lasting headaches
          * Have discomfort, pain, or cramping in the lower abdomen
          * Have a fever or chills
          * Are vomiting or have persistent nausea
          * Feel discomfort, pain, or burning with urination
          * Have problems seeing or blurred vision
          * Feel dizzy
          * Suspect your baby is moving less than normal after 28 weeks of pregnancy (If you count less than 10 movements within two hours. Learn how to count your baby's movements on our Prenatal care and tests page.)
          * Have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby
        
          * **Previous Page** Body changes and discomforts
          * **Next Page** Pregnancy loss
          * OPA Office of Population Affairs
        

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Pregnancy email updates

Submit

All material contained on these pages are free of copyright restrictions and
may be copied, reproduced, or duplicated without permission of the Office on
Women’s Health in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Citation
of the source is appreciated.

Page last updated: April 19, 2019.

# Pregnancy complications

**Complications of pregnancy are health problems that occur during
pregnancy.** They can involve the mother's health, the baby's health, or both.
Some women have health problems before they become pregnant that could lead to
complications. Other problems arise during the pregnancy. Whether a
complication is common or rare, there are ways to manage problems that come up
during pregnancy.

## Health problems before pregnancy

Before pregnancy, make sure to talk to your doctor about health problems you
have now or have had in the past. If you are receiving treatment for a health
problem, your doctor might want to change the way your health problem is
managed. Some medicines used to treat health problems could be harmful if
taken during pregnancy. At the same time, stopping medicines that you need
could be more harmful than the risks posed should you become pregnant. Be
assured that you are likely to have a normal, healthy baby when health
problems are under control and you get good prenatal care.

Health problems before pregnancy

Condition | How it can affect pregnancy | Where to learn more  
---|---|---  
Asthma | Poorly controlled asthma may increase risk of preeclampsia, poor
weight gain in the fetus, preterm birth, cesarean birth, and other
complications. If pregnant women stop using asthma medicine, even mild asthma
can become severe. |

        
                  * Lung diseases fact sheet
        

Depression | Depression that persists during pregnancy can make it hard for a
woman to care for herself and her unborn baby. Having depression before
pregnancy also is a risk factor for postpartum depression. |

        
                  * Depression fact sheet
          * Depression during and after pregnancy fact sheet
        

Diabetes | High blood glucose (sugar) levels during pregnancy can harm the
fetus and worsen a woman's long-term diabetes complications. Doctors advise
getting diabetes under control at least three to six months before trying to
conceive. |

        
                  * Diabetes fact sheet
        

Eating disorders | Body image changes during pregnancy can cause eating
disorders to worsen. Eating disorders are linked to many pregnancy
complications, including birth defects and premature birth. Women with eating
disorders also have higher rates of postpartum depression. |

        
                  * Anorexia nervosa fact sheet
          * Bulimia nervosa fact sheet
        

Epilepsy and other seizure disorders | Seizures during pregnancy can harm the
fetus, and increase the risk of miscarriage or stillbirth. But using medicine
to control seizures might cause birth defects. For most pregnant women with
epilepsy, using medicine poses less risk to their own health and the health of
their babies than stopping medicine. |

        
                  * About Epilepsy
        

High blood pressure | Having chronic high blood pressure puts a pregnant woman
and her baby at risk for problems. Women with high blood pressure have a
higher risk of preeclampsia and placental abruption (when the placenta
separates from the wall of the uterus). The likelihood of preterm birth and
low birth weight also is higher. |

        
                  * Information on high blood pressure from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
        

HIV | HIV can be passed from a woman to her baby during pregnancy or delivery.
Yet this risk is less than 1 percent if a woman takes certain HIV medicines
during pregnancy. Women who have HIV and want to become pregnant should talk
to their doctors before trying to conceive. Good prenatal care will help
protect a woman's baby from HIV and keep her healthy. |

        
                  * HIV and AIDS
        

Migraine | Migraine symptoms tend to improve during pregnancy. Some women have
no migraine attacks during pregnancy. Certain medicines commonly used to treat
headaches should not be used during pregnancy. A woman who has severe
headaches should speak to her doctor about ways to relieve symptoms safely. |

        
                  * Migraine fact sheet
        

Overweight and Obesity | Recent studies suggest that the heavier a woman is
before she becomes pregnant, the greater her risk of a range of pregnancy
complications, including preeclampsia and preterm delivery. Overweight and
obese women who lose weight before pregnancy are likely to have healthier
pregnancies. |

        
                  * Overweight, obesity, and weight loss fact sheet
        

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) | Some STIs can cause early labor, a
woman's water to break too early, and infection in the uterus after birth.
Some STIs also can be passed from a woman to her baby during pregnancy or
delivery. Some ways STIs can harm the baby include: low birth weight,
dangerous infections, brain damage, blindness, deafness, liver problems, or
stillbirth. |

        
                  * Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet
        

Thyroid disease | Uncontrolled hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) can be
dangerous to the mother and cause health problems such as heart failure and
poor weight gain in the fetus. Uncontrolled hypothyroidism (underactive
thyroid) also threatens the mother's health and can cause birth defects. |

        
                  * Graves' disease fact sheet
          * Hashimoto's disease fact sheet
        

Uterine fibroids | Uterine fibroids are not uncommon, but few cause symptoms
that require treatment. Uterine fibroids rarely cause miscarriage. Sometimes,
fibroids can cause preterm or breech birth. Cesarean delivery may be needed if
a fibroid blocks the birth canal. |

        
                  * Uterine fibroids fact sheet
        

## Pregnancy related problems

Sometimes pregnancy problems arise -- even in healthy women. Some prenatal
tests done during pregnancy can help prevent these problems or spot them
early. Use this chart to learn about some common pregnancy complications. Call
your doctor if you have any of the symptoms on this chart. If a problem is
found, make sure to follow your doctor's advice about treatment. Doing so will
boost your chances of having a safe delivery and a strong, healthy baby.

Health problems during pregnancy Problem | Symptoms | Treatment  
---|---|---  
**Anemia** - Lower than normal number of healthy red blood cells |

        
                  * Feel tired or weak
          * Look pale
          * Feel faint
          * Shortness of breath
        

| Treating the underlying cause of the anemia will help restore the number of
healthy red blood cells. Women with pregnancy related anemia are helped by
taking iron and folic acid supplements. Your doctor will check your iron
levels throughout pregnancy to be sure anemia does not happen again.  
**Depression** - Extreme sadness during pregnancy or after birth (postpartum)
|

        
                  * Intense sadness
          * Helplessness and irritability
          * Appetite changes
          * Thoughts of harming self or baby
        

|

Women who are pregnant might be helped with one or a combination of treatment
options, including:

        
                  * Therapy
          * Support groups
          * Medicines
        

A mother's depression can affect her baby's development, so getting treatment
is important for both mother and baby. Learn more about depression during and
after pregnancy.

**Ectopic (ek-TOP-ihk) pregnancy** - When a fertilized egg implants outside of
the uterus, usually in the fallopian tube |

        
                  * Abdominal pain
          * Shoulder pain
          * Vaginal bleeding
          * Feeling dizzy or faint
        

| With ectopic pregnancy, the egg cannot develop. Drugs or surgery is used to
remove the ectopic tissue so your organs are not damaged.  
**Fetal problems** - Unborn baby has a health issue, such as poor growth or
heart problems |

        
                  * Baby moving less than normal (Learn how to count your baby's movements on our Prenatal care and tests page.)
          * Baby is smaller than normal for gestational age
          * Some problems have no symptoms, but are found with prenatal tests
        

| Treatment depends on results of tests to monitor baby's health. If a test
suggests a problem, this does not always mean the baby is in trouble. It may
only mean that the mother needs special care until the baby is delivered. This
can include a wide variety of things, such as bed rest, depending on the
mother's condition. Sometimes, the baby has to be delivered early.  
**Gestational diabetes** - Too high blood sugar levels during pregnancy |

        
                  * Usually, there are no symptoms. Sometimes, extreme thirst, hunger, or fatigue
          * Screening test shows high blood sugar levels
        

|

Most women with pregnancy related diabetes can control their blood sugar
levels by a following a healthy meal plan from their doctor. Some women also
need insulin to keep blood sugar levels under control. Doing so is important
because poorly controlled diabetes increases the risk of:

        
                  * Preeclampsia
          * Early delivery
          * Cesearean birth
          * Having a big baby, which can complicate delivery
          * Baby born with low blood sugar, breathing problems, and jaundice
        

**High blood pressure** **(pregnancy related)** - High blood pressure that
starts after 20 weeks of pregnancy and goes away after birth |

        
                  * High blood pressure without other signs and symptoms of preeclampsia
        

| The health of the mother and baby are closely watched to make sure high
blood pressure is not preeclampsia.  
**Hyperemesis gravidarum (HEYE-pur-EM-uh-suhss grav-uh-DAR-uhm) (HG)** -
Severe, persistent nausea and vomiting during pregnancy -- more extreme than
"morning sickness" |

        
                  * Nausea that does not go away
          * Vomiting several times every day
          * Weight loss
          * Reduced appetite
          * Dehydration
          * Feeling faint or fainting
        

| Dry, bland foods and fluids together is the first line of treatment.
Sometimes, medicines are prescribed to help nausea. Many women with HG have to
be hospitalized so they can be fed fluids and nutrients through a tube in
their veins. Usually, women with HG begin to feel better by the 20th week of
pregnancy. But some women vomit and feel nauseated throughout all three
trimesters.  
**Miscarriage** - Pregnancy loss from natural causes before 20 weeks. As many
as 20 percent of pregnancies end in miscarriage. Often, miscarriage occurs
before a woman even knows she is pregnant |

Signs of a miscarriage can include:

        
                  * Vaginal spotting or bleeding*
          * Cramping or abdominal pain
          * Fluid or tissue passing from the vagina
        

_* Spotting early in pregnancy doesn 't mean miscarriage is certain. Still,
contact your doctor right away if you have any bleeding._

| In most cases, miscarriage cannot be prevented. Sometimes, a woman must
undergo treatment to remove pregnancy tissue in the uterus. Counseling can
help with emotional healing. See our section on Pregnancy loss.  
**Placenta previa** - Placenta covers part or entire opening of cervix inside
of the uterus |

        
                  * Painless vaginal bleeding during second or third trimester
          * For some, no symptoms
        

| If diagnosed after the 20th week of pregnancy, but with no bleeding, a woman
will need to cut back on her activity level and increase bed rest. If bleeding
is heavy, hospitalization may be needed until mother and baby are stable. If
the bleeding stops or is light, continued bed rest is resumed until baby is
ready for delivery. If bleeding doesn't stop or if preterm labor starts, baby
will be delivered by cesarean section.  
**Placental abruption** - Placenta separates from uterine wall before
delivery, which can mean the fetus doesn't get enough oxygen. |

        
                  * Vaginal bleeding
          * Cramping, abdominal pain, and uterine tenderness
        

| When the separation is minor, bed rest for a few days usually stops the
bleeding. Moderate cases may require complete bed rest. Severe cases (when
more than half of the placenta separates) can require immediate medical
attention and early delivery of the baby.  
**Preeclampsia (pree-ee-CLAMP-see-uh)** - A condition starting after 20 weeks
of pregnancy that causes high blood pressure and problems with the kidneys and
other organs. Also called toxemia. |

        
                  * High blood pressure
          * Swelling of hands and face
          * Too much protein in urine
          * Stomach pain
          * Blurred vision
          * Dizziness
          * Headaches
        

| The only cure is delivery, which may not be best for the baby. Labor will
probably be induced if condition is mild and the woman is near term (37 to 40
weeks of pregnancy). If it is too early to deliver, the doctor will watch the
health of the mother and her baby very closely. She may need medicines and bed
rest at home or in the hospital to lower her blood pressure. Medicines also
might be used to prevent the mother from having seizures.  
**Preterm labor** - Going into labor before 37 weeks of pregnancy |

        
                  * Increased vaginal discharge
          * Pelvic pressure and cramping
          * Back pain radiating to the abdomen
          * Contractions
        

| Medicines can stop labor from progressing. Bed rest is often advised.
Sometimes, a woman must deliver early. Giving birth before 37 weeks is called
"preterm birth." Preterm birth is a major risk factor for future preterm
births.

## Infections during pregnancy

During pregnancy, your baby is protected from many illnesses, like the common
cold or a passing stomach bug. But some infections can be harmful to your
pregnancy, your baby, or both. This chart provides an overview of infections
that can be harmful during pregnancy. Learn the symptoms and what you can do
to keep healthy. Easy steps, such as hand washing, practicing safe sex, and
avoiding certain foods, can help protect you from some infections.

Infections during pregnancy Infection | Symptoms | Prevention and treatment  
---|---|--- 

**Bacterial vaginosis (BV)**

A vaginal infection that is caused by an overgrowth of bacteria normally found
in the vagina.

BV has been linked to preterm birth and low birth weight babies.

|

        
                  * Grey or whitish discharge that has a foul, fishy odor
          * Burning when passing urine or itching
          * Some women have no symptoms
        

|

How to prevent BV is unclear. BV is not passed through sexual contact,
although it is linked with having a new or more than one sex partner.

Women with symptoms should be tested for BV.

Antibiotics are used to treat BV.

**Cytomegalovirus (SEYE-toh-MEG-uh-loh VEYE-ruhss) (CMV)**

A common virus that can cause disease in infants whose mothers are infected
with CMV during pregnancy. CMV infection in infants can lead to hearing loss,
vision loss, and other disabilities.

|

        
                  * Mild illness that may include fever, sore throat, fatigue, and swollen glands
          * Some women have no symptoms
        

|

Good hygiene is the best way to keep from getting CMV.

No treatment is currently available. But studies are looking at antiviral
drugs for use in infants. Work to create a CMV vaccine also is underway.

**Group B strep** **(GBS)**

Group B strep is a type of bacteria often found in the vagina and rectum of
healthy women. One in four women has it. GBS usually is not harmful to you,
but can be deadly to your baby if passed during childbirth.

|

        
                  * No symptoms
        

|

You can keep from passing GBS to your baby by getting tested at 35 to 37
weeks. This simply involves swabbing the vagina and rectum and does not hurt.

If you have GBS, an antibiotic given to you during labor will protect your
baby from infection. Make sure to tell the labor and delivery staff that you
are a group B strep carrier when you check into the hospital.

**Hepatitis B virus** **(HBV)**

A viral infection that can be passed to baby during birth. Newborns that get
infected have a 90 percent chance of developing lifelong infection. This can
lead to liver damage and liver cancer. A vaccine can keep newborns from
getting HBV. But 1 in 5 newborns of mothers who are HBV positive don't get the
vaccine at the hospital before leaving.

|

There may be no symptoms. Or symptoms can include:

        
                  * Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
          * Dark urine and pale bowel movements
          * Whites of eyes or skin looks yellow
        

|

Lab tests can find out if the mother is a carrier of hepatitis B.

You can protect your baby for life from HBV with the hepatitis B vaccine,
which is a series of three shots:

        
                  * First dose of hepatitis B vaccine plus HBIG shot given to baby at birth
          * Second dose of hepatitis B vaccine given to baby at 1-2 months old
          * Third dose of hepatitis B vaccine given to baby at 6 months old (but not before 24 weeks old)
        

**Influenza (flu)**

Flu is a common viral infection that is more likely to cause severe illness in
pregnant women than in women who are not pregnant. Pregnant woman with flu
also have a greater chance for serious problems for their unborn baby,
including premature labor and delivery.

|

        
                  * Fever (sometimes) or feeling feverish/chills
          * Cough
          * Sore throat
          * Runny or stuffy nose
          * Muscle or body aches
          * Headaches
          * Feeling tired
          * Vomiting and diarrhea (sometimes)
        

|

Getting a flu shot is the first and most important step in protecting against
flu. The flu shot given during pregnancy is safe and has been shown to protect
both the mother and her baby (up to 6 months old) from flu. (The nasal spray
vaccine should not be given to women who are pregnant.)

If you get sick with flu-like symptoms call your doctor right away. If needed,
the doctor will prescribe an antiviral medicine that treats the flu.

**Listeriosis (lih-steer-ee-OH-suhss)**

An infection with the harmful bacteria called listeria. It is found in some
refrigerated and ready-to-eat foods. Infection can cause early delivery or
miscarriage.

|

        
                  * Fever, muscle aches, chills
          * Sometimes diarrhea or nausea
          * If progresses, severe headache and stiff neck
        

|

Avoid foods that can harbor listeria.

Antibiotics are used to treat listeriosis.

**Parvovirus B19 (fifth disease)**

Most pregnant women who are infected with this virus do not have serious
problems. But there is a small chance the virus can infect the fetus. This
raises the risk of miscarriage during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. Fifth
disease can cause severe anemia in women who have red blood cell disorders
like sickle cell disease or immune system problems.

|

        
                  * Low-grade fever
          * Tiredness
          * Rash on face, trunk, and limbs
          * Painful and swollen joints
        

| No specific treatment, except for blood transfusions that might be needed
for people who have problems with their immune systems or with red blood cell
disorders. There is no vaccine to help prevent infection with this virus.

**Sexually transmitted infection** **(STI)**

An infection that is passed through sexual contact. Many STIs can be passed to
the baby in the womb or during birth. Some effects include stillbirth, low
birth weight, and life-threatening infections. STIs also can cause a woman's
water to break too early or preterm labor.

|

        
                  * Symptoms depend on the STI. Often, a woman has no symptoms, which is why screening for STIs during pregnancy is so important.
          * For more information, see our Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet.
        

|

STIs can be prevented by practicing safe sex. A woman can keep from passing an
STI to her baby by being screened early in pregnancy.

Treatments vary depending on the STI. Many STIs are treated easily with
antibiotics.

**Toxoplasmosis (TOK-soh-plaz-MOH-suhss)**

This infection is caused by a parasite, which is found in cat feces, soil, and
raw or undercooked meat. If passed to an unborn baby, the infection can cause
hearing loss, blindness, or intellectual disabilities.

|

        
                  * Mild flu-like symptoms, or possibly no symptoms.
        

|

You can lower your risk by:

        
                  * Washing hands with soap after touching soil or raw meat
          * Washing produce before eating
          * Cooking meat completely
          * Washing cooking utensils with hot, soapy water
          * Not cleaning cats' litter boxes
        

Medicines are used to treat a pregnant woman and her unborn baby. Sometimes,
the baby is treated with medicine after birth.

**Urinary tract infection** **(UTI)**

Bacterial infection in urinary tract. If untreated, it can spread to the
kidneys, which can cause preterm labor.

|

        
                  * Pain or burning when urinating
          * Frequent urination
          * Pelvis, back, stomach, or side pain
          * Shaking, chills, fever, sweats
        

| UTIs are treated with antibiotics.

**Yeast infection**

An infection caused by an overgrowth of bacteria normally found in the vagina.
Yeast infections are more common during pregnancy than in other times of a
woman's life. They do not threaten the health of your baby. But they can be
uncomfortable and difficult to treat in pregnancy.

|

        
                  * Extreme itchiness in and around the vagina
          * Burning, redness, and swelling of the vagina and the vulva
          * Pain when passing urine or during sex
          * A thick, white vaginal discharge that looks like cottage cheese and does not have a bad smell
        

| Vaginal creams and suppositories are used to treat yeast infection during
pregnancy.

## When to call the doctor

When you are pregnant, don't wait to call your doctor or midwife if something
is bothering or worrying you. Sometimes physical changes can be signs of a
problem.

Call your doctor or midwife as soon as you can if you:

        
                  * Are bleeding or leaking fluid from the vagina
          * Have sudden or severe swelling in the face, hands, or fingers
          * Get severe or long-lasting headaches
          * Have discomfort, pain, or cramping in the lower abdomen
          * Have a fever or chills
          * Are vomiting or have persistent nausea
          * Feel discomfort, pain, or burning with urination
          * Have problems seeing or blurred vision
          * Feel dizzy
          * Suspect your baby is moving less than normal after 28 weeks of pregnancy (If you count less than 10 movements within two hours. Learn how to count your baby's movements on our Prenatal care and tests page.)
          * Have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby
        

_This content is provided by theOffice on Women's Health._

## About Us

        
                  * Who we are
          * What we do
          * Work with us
          * Our vision and mission
        

## Programs and Activities

        
                  * Health Information Gateway
          * It's Only Natural
          * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
          * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
          * National Women's Health Week
          * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
        

## Popular Topics

        
                  * Autoimmune diseases
          * Breastfeeding
          * Carpal tunnel syndrome
          * Depression
          * HIV and AIDS
          * Menstruation
          * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
          * Pregnancy
          * Thyroid disease
          * All A-Z health topics
        

## Find Help

        
                  * Get breastfeeding help
          * Get health care
          * Get health insurance
          * Get help with family planning
          * Get help with mental health
          * Find girls' health information
        

## Stay Connected

        
                  * Blog
          * Contact us
          * Media inquiries
          * Social media
        

## About Us

        
                  * Who we are
          * What we do
          * Work with us
          * Our vision and mission
        

## Programs and Activities

        
                  * Health Information Gateway
          * It's Only Natural
          * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
          * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
          * National Women's Health Week
          * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
        

## Popular Topics

        
                  * Autoimmune diseases
          * Breastfeeding
          * Carpal tunnel syndrome
          * Depression
          * HIV and AIDS
          * Menstruation
          * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
          * Pregnancy
          * Thyroid disease
          * All A-Z health topics
        

## Find Help

        
                  * Get breastfeeding help
          * Get health care
          * Get health insurance
          * Get help with family planning
          * Get help with mental health
          * Find girls' health information
        

## Stay Connected

        
                  * Blog
          * Contact us
          * Media inquiries
          * Social media
        

![Envelope Icon](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png)

![](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png) Subscribe to
receive OWH updates Submit

![Pinterest

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_pinterest_icon.png) ![Youtube

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_youtube_icon.png) ![Twitter

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_twitter_icon.png) ![Facebook

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_facebook_icon.png)

        
                  * HHS Non-Discrimination Notice
          * Language Assistance Available
          * Accessibility
          * Privacy Policy
          * Disclaimers
          * Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
          * USA.gov
          * Use Our Content
        

Language Assistance Available

        
                  * Español
          * 繁體中文
          * Tiếng Việt
          * 한국어
          * Tagalog
          * Русский
          * العربية
          * Kreyòl Ayisyen
          * Français
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Italiano
          * Deutsch
          * 日本語
          * فارسی
          * English
        

A federal government website managed by the Office on Women's Health in the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health at the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.

200 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20201  
1-800-994-9662 • Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET (closed on federal
holidays).

![U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office on Women's

Health.](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/footer_lockup.png)

![Girlshealth.gov. From the Office on Women's

Health.](/files/images/footer_girlshealth.png)

![Up Arrow](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/images/Left-NoCircle-

White.png)Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

