

![](/sites/all/themes/nationalinterest/assets/img/national-interest-logo.png)
1

The National Interest

    
        * Submissions
    * Subscribe
    * Contact
    * Advertising
    * About
    * SearchSubmit
    * Magazine
    * Blogs
    
      * The Skeptics
      * The Buzz
      * Paul Pillar
      * Middle East Watch
      * Korea Watch
    
    * Military
    * Economics
    * Technology
    * Regions
    

![](https://nationalinterest.org/sites/default/files/styles/latest_issue_header__110x157_/public/issue_covers/cover161%201000px.jpg?itok=PRUkWb_p)
Subscribe

Open Menu

    
        * SearchSubmit
    * Magazine
    * BlogsToggle Sub Menu
    
      * The Skeptics
      * The Buzz
      * Paul Pillar
      * Middle East Watch
      * Korea Watch
    
    * Military
    * Economics
    * Technology
    * Regions
    * Submissions
    * Subscribe
    * Contact
    * Advertising
    * About
    

Subscribe to Magazine

# Nearly 10 Percent of America's Stealth F-22 Raptors are Damaged. Here's Why.

![](/sites/default/files/styles/desktop__1486_x_614/public/main_images/F-22s_strike_Da%27esh_targets_150130-F-MG591-002.jpg?itok=gmhqGos6)

    
        * Share on Facebook F
    * Share on Twitter L
    * Share on LinkedIn I
    * Subscribe to RSS R
    * Print
    

October 16, 2018 Topic: Security Blog Brand: The Buzz Tags: F-22F-22
RaptorUSAFU.S. Air Force

# Nearly 10 Percent of America's Stealth F-22 Raptors are Damaged. Here's Why.

One reason: a hurricane.

by David Axe Follow @daxe on Twitter L

Hurricane Michael damaged potentially more than a dozen U.S. Air Force F-22
Raptor stealth fighters at their base on the Florida panhandle on Oct. 10.

That’s nearly 10 percent the Air Force’s F-22s. And if Japan’s own recent
experience is any indication, it could take the flying branch years to recover
from the loss of so many planes — even if the loss is temporary.

![](//pixel.carambo.la/Pixel/thnt83/112176/0/1/0)

Hurricane Michael struck northwest Florida as a category-four storm. As it
roared across the state’s panhandle region, the storm flattened whole towns
and killed at least 18 people.

Tyndall Air Force Base, the main training facility for the Air Force’s
183-strong F-22 force, lay directly in the hurricane’s path. Prior to the
storm, the base housed 55 Raptors. Tyndall’s wing includes several training
units and one combat-ready F-22 squadron that has flown combat missions over
Syria.

At least 33 of the radar-evading jets evacuated to Ohio in the days before the
storm made landfall. Some of the others were unflyable and remained at Tyndall
along with the base’s “stay-behind” staff, who moved grounded aircraft into
hangars, closed the doors and hoped for the best.

The unflyable jets reportedly included one that suffered a mechanical problem
while attempting to take off on its evacuation flight to Ohio. Many of the
others were grounded because they were missing key spare parts.

The Air Force routinely “cannibalizes” a portion of its planes, stripping them
of parts in order to keep others flightworthy. As of March, Air Force
statistics indicated just half of the Raptors were “mission-capable,” _Air
Force Times_reported. The rest had been cannibalized, were grounded for
repairs or lacked key upgrades for frontline duty.

The storm’s winds, which peaked at 150 miles per hour, damaged every hangar at
Tyndall, _The New York Times_ reported. Photos that appeared online showed
hangars missing roof panels — and the distinctive shapes of F-22s inside the
wrecked structures.

Crews quickly began assessing the damage. “What I can say is that today is a
better day than yesterday, and things are going to keep getting better,” Col.
Brian Laidlaw, commander of the base’s 325th Fighter Wing, statedon Oct. 13.
“Each day we recover more of Tyndall Air Force Base.”

The storm damaged as many as 17 F-22s, _Foreign Policy_ reporter Lara Seligman
tweeted on Oct. 14. U.S. taxpayers paid around $380 million apiece, including
development costs, for a total of 195 F-22s. Several of the twin-engine jets
have crashed. The Air Force has retired a few examples that mostly flew test
flights.

**Recommended:What Will the Sixth-Generation Jet Fighter Look Like?**

**Recommended:Imagine a U.S. Air Force That Never Built the B-52 Bomber**

**Recommended:Russia's Next Big Military Sale - To Mexico?**

**Recommended:Would China Really Invade Taiwan?**

For years the Air Force insisted it required 381 F-22s, a figure that the
service said would allow it to fully equip frontline squadrons while also
letting it keep some planes in “attrition reserve” to replace destroyed jets.

But to save money Robert Gates, then the secretary of defense, ended F-22
production in 2011 after Lockheed Martin had built just half as many jets as
the Air Force said it needed.

Now there are no extra Raptors, Dave Deptula, a retired Air Force general,
told The Daily Beast. “No F-22s bought for attrition reserve means every one
lost negates our combat capability.”

The Air Force has indicated that some or all of the Raptors that stayed behind
at Tyndall are repairable. “Our maintenance professionals will do a detailed
assessment of the F-22 Raptors and other aircraft before we can say with
certainty that damaged aircraft can be repaired and sent back into the skies,”
Secretary of the Air Force Heather Wilson, Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David
Goldfein and Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Kaleth Wright said in a
joint statement on Oct. 15. “However, damage was less than we feared and
preliminary indications are promising.”

But the Air Force has long explained that even 183 Raptors is too few, at a
time when China is also developing its own stealth fighters. “We don’t have
enough F-22s,” Gen. Herbert Carlisle, then the head of the Air Force’s Air
Combat Command, said in 2015.

Three years later, China is steadily expanding its own force of J-20 stealth
fighters and the U.S. Air Force could be down to as few as 166 F-22s, at least
temporarily.

And even a short-term reduction in the number of flyable F-22s could have
long-term implications. The Air Force is struggling to both grow its total
number of squadrons from 312 to 386 in order to keep pace with China and to
erase a 2,000-pilot shortfall by training more aircrew, an effort that
requires more training flights.

At the same time, Defense Secretary James Mattis has ordered the armed forces
to boost fighter readiness to 80 percent by September 2019. The F-22 force,
accustomed to keeping just half of its planes mission-ready, could struggle to
improve its overall flightworthiness while also repairing wind- and water-
damaged planes.

This year the Air Force devoted 25,000 man-hours to restoring to flight status
a single F-22 test jet that the service had put into storage in 2012. Fixing
each of Tyndall’s planes could require similar effort. Air Force Secretary
Wilson recently ruled out paying Lockheed Martin billions of dollars to
restart Raptor production.

Japan has suffered through a similar crisis. The tsunami that struck Japan in
2011 flooded an air force training base, inundating 18 of the Japanese air
arm’s 98 high-tech F-2 fighters. The country spent $800 million repairing 13
of the planes, finally fixing the last jet in February after a seven-year
effort.

While working on the water-damaged jets, the Japanese air force had to
relocate its training efforts to Arizona. Tokyo also accelerated a multi-
billion-dollar program to design and build a new fighter, in part to
compensate for the sudden loss of F-2s.

The F-22 is a more sophisticated and delicate aircraft than the F-2 is.
Repairing even a few storm-damaged F-22s could cost billions of dollars,
require years of work and hold back the Air Force’s efforts to grow and
improve its readiness.

_This first appeared in WarIsBoringhere. _

![](https://nationalinterest.org/sites/default/files/styles/related__289x209_/public/main_images/1280px-

Lockheed_Martin_F-22A_Raptor_JSOH_0.jpg?itok=DULIfpOm)

### The U.S. Air Force's Ultimate What If: No F-35 and Many More F-22's

August 14, 2015

by James Hasik

View the discussion thread.

## Connect

    
        * Home
    * Magazine
    * Blogs
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Youtube
    * RSS
    

## Topics

    
        * Security
    * Society
    * Economics
    * Global Governance
    * Military
    * Politics
    

## Regions

    
        * Africa
    * Americas
    * Asia
    * Eurasia
    * Europe
    * Middle East
    * Oceania
    
    * About Us
    * Press Room
    * Subscriptions
    * Contact
    * Jobs and Internships
    * Advertising
    * Submission Guidelines
    * Permissions
    * Masthead
    

![](https://nationalinterest.org/sites/default/files/styles/latest_issue_footer/public/issue_covers/cover161%201000px.jpg?itok=k9jtqHSW)

    
        * About Us
    * Press Room
    * Subscriptions
    * Contact
    * Jobs and Internships
    
    * Advertising
    * Submission Guidelines
    * Permissions
    * Masthead
    

## Connect

    
        * Home
    * Magazine
    * Blogs
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Youtube
    * RSS
    

## Topics

    
        * Security
    * Society
    * Economics
    * Global Governance
    * Military
    * Politics
    

## Regions

    
        * Africa
    * Americas
    * Asia
    * Eurasia
    * Europe
    * Middle East
    * Oceania
    

![Center for the National

Interest](/sites/all/themes/nationalinterest/assets/img/center-for-the-

national-interest.png)

National Interest Newsletter

Email Address

(C) Copyright 2019 Center for the National Interest All Rights Reserved

    
        * Terms & Conditions
    * Privacy Policy
    * TwitterL
    * FacebookF
    * YoutubeX
    * RSSR
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

