

Skip to main content

Twitter LinkedIn

Search

Enclose phrases in quotes. Use a + to require a term in results and - to
exclude terms.  
Example: +water -Europe

## Top Menu

    
        * Fierce-ExL Events
    * FierceBiotech
    * Jobs
    * Resources
    * Webinars
    * Industry Events
    * Subscribe
    

![Home](/themes/custom/tektite_fierce/assets/images/logo/logo-pharma.svg)

![Questex](/themes/custom/tektite/assets/images/logo-questex.svg)

## Main navigation

    
        * Manufacturing
    * Marketing
    * Pharma
      * Pharma Asia
    * Vaccines
    

## Main navigation - Mobile

    
        * Manufacturing
    * Marketing
    * Pharma
      * Pharma Asia
    * Vaccines
    

##

Regulatory

# Does pharma spend more on marketing than R&D? A numbers check

by Tracy Staton |

May 21, 2013 11:46am

So, do drug companies really spend more money on marketing than on R&D? _In
the Pipeline_ takes a look at that contention, and the cold hard facts are
these: Probably not. But it's hard to tell for sure.

Derek Lowe's blog dug up the numbers and calculated spending as a percentage
of revenue. In the case of R&D, that's pretty easy to determine; companies
break that number out as its own line item. As for marketing, sales expenses
are lumped into a category dubbed SG&A, or sales, general and administrative
expenses. And as Lowe notes, that category includes lots more than sales
spending. Executive salaries, for instance.

If you look at the R&D percentages versus those for SG&A, it's apparent that
drugmakers allocate more of their budgets to SG&A than to R&D. For instance,
Lowe found that Merck ($MRK) spends 27% of its revenue on SG&A and 17.3% on
research and development. Pfizer's ($PFE) ratio is even more lopsided, with
33% on SG&A and 14.2% on R&D. Smaller, more biotech-focused companies have
better numbers; Biogen Idec, for one, spends 23% of its revenue on SG&A and
24% on R&D. That's partly because--we suspect--specialty drugs don't require
the armies of sales reps sent out to support primary-care meds.

Lowe then compares these figures with those in another innovation-powered
business: technology. We'll let you peruse that analysis at _In the Pipeline_.
We 'd like to elaborate on the SG &A line item a bit.

SG&A is a sort of catch-all category that does include sales and marketing
expenses, including sales salaries, support and so on. But it also includes
legal and accounting fees, rent and utilities. In an annual industry audit,
_Pharmaceutical Executive_ notes that sales and marketing is a "relatively low
portion of SG &A."

To get a vague idea of the size of that "low portion," let's look at a recent
_FiercePharma_ report on pharma advertising budgets. Pfizer topped that list
with $622.3 million in ad spending last year. Pfizer came in fourth on
_FierceBiotech_ 's list of R &D budgets, with $7.9 billion. That means DTC ads
were less than one-tenth the size of its R&D budget.

DTC spending is only part of the overall sales-and-marketing budget, of
course. Detailing to doctors costs a pretty penny, and that's where drugmakers
spend much of their sales budget. Consumer advertising spending dropped by
11.5% in 2012 to $3.47 billion. Marketing to physicians, according to a Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health study, amounted to $27.7 billion in
2010; that same year, DTC spending was just over $4 billion.

That's a total for 2010 of more than $31 billion, the best guess-timate we can
come up with on short notice. According to _FierceBiotech_ 's 2010 R &D
spending report, the industry shelled out $67 billion on research that year--
more than twice our quick-and-dirty marketing estimate.

But as Lowe notes, quoting numbers at people isn't likely to change their
"pharma spends more on marketing than R&D" chant. As one of _In the Pipeline_
's readers pointed out, the whole debate seems to suggest that people are
uncomfortable with the very idea of drugmaking as a for-profit business. But
then there are the big headlines about marketing violations, guilty pleas,
manufacturing shortfalls and liability lawsuits. If people are predisposed to
mistrust the industry, then it will take a lot of figures to change their
minds--and it might not work even then.

    * read the _In the Pipeline_ post

**Special Reports:** Top 10 Pharma Advertising Budgets - 2012 | Pfizer -
Biopharma's Top R &D Spenders - 2012 | Pfizer - Top Pharma Companies by 2012
Revenues

#### Suggested Articles

![FDA](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercepharma/1524143117/16792957331_fc90a25b3b_o.jpg/16792957331_fc90a25b3b_o.jpg?s9RV2hAhnvietLp0CVeeNcvuXL8IRZrs&itok=qiJMt-

am)

Pharma

## AZ advances toward $3B sales target with first-line Tagrisso nod

The future may be uncertain for AZ’s Imfinzi in first-line lung cancer, but
its targeted med Tagrisso now boasts a green light in that setting.

by Carly Helfand Apr 19, 2018 10:20am

![fda](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercepharma/1524058727/fda2_0.jpg/fda2_0.jpg?5LEVfqkVIPf..HY2djMke_ITdZ00gOIf&itok=uY0eMPpD)

Regulatory

## Ultragenyx nabs FDA nod for $200K-per-year Crysvita

Ultragenyx is back with another FDA nod, this time for Crysvita to treat
X-linked hypophosphatemia in patients one year and older.

by Eric Sagonowsky Apr 18, 2018 11:00am

![Roche](https://qtxasset.com/styles/content_well_thumb/s3/fiercepharma/1523977626/basel_stage.jpg/basel_stage.jpg?npX0rXGkmuG7N9p_0VVo2.sG0hfWoeSc&itok=EaNq-0Um)

Pharma

## Roche gets double dose of good Hemlibra news

Roche got a two pieces of good Hemlibra news early this week—and what's good
for Hemlibra must be good for Roche.

by Carly Helfand Apr 17, 2018 11:25am

## About the Author

![Tracy

Staton](https://qtxasset.com/field/image/tstaton.jpg?ueVlW0PYLevSZZ.YABlg26ybeimkq80D)

Tracy Staton

Editor-in-Chief

[email protected]

https://twitter.com/TracyStaton

![](/themes/custom/tektite/assets/images/footer-questex.svg)

    
        * GENERAL
      * Home
      * Privacy
      * Terms of Use
      * RSS
    * CONTACT
      * Advertise
      * About Us
    * NEWSLETTERS
      * Subscribe
      * Manage Subscriptions
    * Connect
      *       * © 2019 Questex LLC. All rights reserved. 3 Speen Street, Suite 300, Framingham, MA 01701
    

Reproduction in whole or part is prohibited.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

