

Skip Navigation

# Scripting must be enabled to use this site.

Log In Register Ver en Español

![The United States Department of Homeland Security's Official

Seal](/euf/assets/themes/cbp/images/USDHS-seal.png)

# U.S. Customs and Border Protection

#### Securing America's Borders

## CBP Information Center

CBP INFO Center Home > Find an Answer >

Find the answer to your question

    
        * Find an Answer
    * Ports of Entry 
    * Border Patrol Sectors 
    * Pre-Clearance Locations 
    * Deferred Inspection Sites 
    * Border/Airport Wait Times
    

Give Us a Compliment Problem? Complaint?

Report Illegal Activity

## Didn't find what you were looking for?

Try Rephrasing Your Question or E-mail us your Question

## Purchasing medications from a supplier outside the U.S.

###

What are the regulations for mail-order purchases from a medical supplier
outside the U.S.?

The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C) prohibits persons from
importing into the United States any prescription drug that has not been
approved for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), or which is
adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of the Act. Moreover, in those
instances where a U.S. manufacturer makes an FDA-approved prescription drug
and sends it abroad, the Act also prohibits any person other than the original
manufacturer from importing the drug back into the U.S. Thus, in virtually all
instances, individual citizens are prohibited from importing prescription
drugs into the U.S.

Pharmaceutical shipments discovered in the inbound international express
stream or international mail by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) are
referred to the FDA for their examination. If you have ordered prescription
drugs from an overseas source, and have been told by either the courier
service or post office that they are being held at CBP, you should contact the
FDA about the status of the shipment. FDA 1-888-723-3366.

Food and Drug Administration

Division of Import Operations - Policy

12420 Parklawn Drive, ELEM-Rm 3109

Rockville, Maryland 20857

CBP does not track these packages and we are unable to tell you whether or not
your individual package has been referred to FDA for inspection. FDA is
responsible for all pharmaceutical admissibility determinations.

If you have any questions as to whether a specific pharmaceutical may be
imported into the U.S., please visit the FDA Web site. If you would like
information about importing controlled substances which are on the Drug
Enforcement Administration's (DEA) schedule of controlled substances 2-5, you
may contact DEA's Office of Diversion Control, International Drug Unit, at
1-800-882-9539. This is also the office to call if you have questions about
the law allowing limited importations of not more than 50 dosage units by U.S.
residents through our Mexican or Canadian land borders.

If you wish to receive automatic updates to this Q&A, select "Subscribe to
Updates" on the left side of this screen.

Updated 11/12/2015 03:10 PM

    
        * ![](images/Print.png) Print This Page
    * ![](images/Email.png) Email Answer
    

Recipient Email _Required Your Email_ Required Your Name *Required

    
        * ![](images/Share.png) Share Online
    
      * Delicious 
      * Digg 
      * Facebook 
      * Reddit 
      * StumbleUpon 
      * Twitter
    
    * ![](images/Notification.png) Subscribe to Updates
    

Username Password Forgot your username or password?

Was this answer helpful?

Yes No

Please tell us how we can make this answer more useful. Do not submit a
question through this page, it will not be answered.

Email _Required Your Feedback_ Required

## Here is some other information you may find helpful:

    
        * Traveling or living temporarily in the U.S. and need to have my prescription medicine sent to me
    * Regulations for importing CIPRO by land or mail
    * Traveling with Medication
    * Mail - Processing international mail
    * CBP Contact Us Info
    

﻿

## Related Government Sites

    
        * USCIS
    

### U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Working in the U.S.
      * Learn about Permanent Residence
      * Extending your Stay/Change your Non-Immigrant Status
      * Obtaining your citizenship
    
    * FinCEN
    

### FinCEN

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Reporting requirements for bringing money into or out of the U.S
      * The FinCEN 105 form
    
    * DHS
    

### Department of Homeland Security

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Learning about Travelers’ Redress Process
      * Finding Career Opportunities
      * Checking Threat Level
      * Contacting the Department
    
    * ICE
    

### U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Student and Exchange Visitors (SEVP (SEVIS))
      * Homeland Security Investigations
      * Detention Facilities
      * Removal Operations
    
    * TSA
    

### Transportation Security Administration

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Carry on baggage
      * What you can take on a plane
      * Airport Security
      * FAQs from TSA
    
    * State Dept.
    

### Department of State

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Passport Services
      * Travel Advisories
      * Embassy and Consulate Information (Visas)
      * Traveling abroad
    
    * FOIA
    

### Freedom of Information Act

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * How to File a FOIA request
      * Guidelines on filing a FOIA request
      * FAQs on FOIA
    
    * TRIP
    

### Traveler Redress Inquiry Program (DHS TRIP)

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * To File a TRIP Request
      * How to submit a TRIP Request
      * Check the status of a TRIP request
      * FAQs on TRIP requests
    
    * OFAC
    

### U.S. Treasury - Office of Foreign Assets Control

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Sanctions and embargos (ie Iran or Cuba)
    
    * EPA
    

### Environmental Protection Agency

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Importing cars
      * Importing chemicals
    
    * DOT
    

### U.S. Department of Transportation

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Importing vehicles
      * Land Carriers
    
    * USA Jobs
    

### USA Jobs

You might want to visit this site for info regarding:

    
          * Current Vacancy Announcements
    
    * USA.gov
    

### USA.gov

You might want to visit this site for information regarding:

    
          * Government Jobs
      * Benefits
      * Government Auctions
      * Vital Documents
      * A-Z List of Agencies
    
    * ATF
    

### Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives

You might want to visit this site for information regarding:

    
          * The Importation of new or antique Firearms
      * A permit for temporary firearm import for hunting
      * Importing a bb gun or paintball gun
      * Temporary export of firearms and ammunition from the U.S.
    
    * TTB
    

### Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau

You might want to visit this site for information regarding:

Laws, Regulations and Taxes for Importing Beverage Alcohol, Nonbeverage
Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms & Ammunition:

## Most Viewed Pages on CBP.gov

    
        * Forms
    * Ports of Entry
    * Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA)
    * User Fee Decals and Transponders
    * Duty Rates
    * Publications
      * Know Before You Go
      * Importing into the U.S.
      * Importing a Motor Vehicle
      * Exporting a Vehicle
    

DHS Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Report Suspicious Activity to **1-800-BE-
ALERT**

NOTE: The answers provided in this forum are for general information purposes
only. Utilizing this forum does not constitute Reasonable Care under Informed
Compliance guidelines.

U.S. Customs & Border Protection Contact Us Privacy Statement

Inquiries (877) 227-5511 International Callers (202) 325-8000 TTY (866)
880-6582

    
        * CBP Employee Benefits FAQs
    * Get Adobe Reader
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

