
    
        * Skip to main content
    * Skip to FDA Search
    * Skip to in this section menu
    * Skip to footer links
    

![U.S. flag](/themes/custom/preview/assets/images/US_Flag.png) An official
website of the United States government Here’s how you know

![Dot gov](/themes/custom/preview/assets/images/icon-dot-gov.svg)

**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.

![SSL](/themes/custom/preview/assets/images/icon-https.svg)

**The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.

# U.S. Food and Drug Administration

    
        *   Search
    *   Menu
    

Search FDA Submit search

## Featured

    
        * Contact FDA
    * FDA Guidance Documents
    * Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts
    * Press Announcements
    * Warning Letters
    * Advisory Committees
    * En Español
    

## Products

    
        * Food
    * Drugs
    * Medical Devices
    * Radiation-Emitting Products
    * Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics
    * Animal and Veterinary
    * Cosmetics
    * Tobacco Products
    

## Topics

    
        * About FDA
    * Combination Products
    * Regulatory Information
    * Safety
    * Emergency Preparedness
    * International Programs
    * News and Events
    * Training and Continuing Education
    * Inspections and Compliance
    * Science and Research
    

## Information For

    
        * Consumers
    * Patients
    * Industry
    * Health Professionals
    * Federal, State and Local Officials
    

In this section: FDA Basics

    
        * FDA Basics
    
      * FDA Fundamentals
    
      * Preguntas generales sobre la Administración de Medicamentos y Alimentos (FDA, por sus siglas en inglés)
    
    1. Home
    2. About FDA
    3. Transparency
    4. FDA Basics
    5. Is it legal for me to personally import drugs?
    1. Transparency
    

# Is it legal for me to personally import drugs?

    
        * Share
    * Tweet
    * Linkedin
    * Email
    * Print
    

Read this page in

# Is it legal for me to personally import drugs?

En Español

In most circumstances, it is illegal for individuals to import drugs into the
United States for personal use. This is because drugs from other countries
that are available for purchase by individuals often have not been approved by
FDA for use and sale in the United States. For example, if a drug is approved
by Health Canada (FDA’s counterpart in Canada) but has not been approved by
FDA, it is an unapproved drug in the United States and, therefore, illegal to
import. FDA cannot ensure the safety and effectiveness of drugs that it has
not approved.

FDA, however, has a policy explaining that it typically does not object to
personal imports of drugs that FDA has not approved under certain
circumstances, including the following situation:

    
        * The drug is for use for a serious condition for which effective treatment is not available in the United States;
    * There is no commercialization or promotion of the drug to U.S. residents;
    * The drug is considered not to represent an unreasonable risk;
    * The individual importing the drug verifies in writing that it is for his or her own use, and provides contact information for the doctor providing treatment or shows the product is for the continuation of treatment begun in a foreign country; and
    * Generally, not more than a 3-month supply of the drug is imported.
    

## ResourcesForYou

    
        * Publicaciones en EspaÃ±ol
    

##

    
        *     * Meet Margaret A. Hamburg, M.D., Commissioner of Food and Drugs
    * Meet Joshua M. Sharfstein, M.D., Principal Deputy Commissioner
    

## Related Resources

    
        * Frequently Asked Questions About Drugs
    *     * ## Content current as of:
    

03/28/2018

    
        *     * FDA Basics
    
      * FDA Fundamentals
    
      * Preguntas generales sobre la Administración de Medicamentos y Alimentos (FDA, por sus siglas en inglés)
    

## Footer Links

    
        * FDA Archive
    * About FDA
    * Accessibility
    
    * Visitor Information
    * Website Policies / Privacy
    * No FEAR Act
    
    * FOIA
    * HHS.gov
    * USA.gov
    

Contact FDA Follow FDA on Facebook View FDA videos on YouTube Subscribe to FDA
RSS feeds

1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

