

drugcostfacts.org

Menu Home

## Search form

Search

## Key Questions

X

    
        * Are prescription drug costs out of control?
    * Why are some drugs so expensive?
    * How are prescription drug costs really determined?
    * Does increasing out-of-pocket spending reduce premiums?
    * Shouldn't the U.S. Government do more to regulate high drug prices?
    * How does the U.S. maintain its leadership in innovation?
    * How much do innovative new drugs impact overall health care costs?
    * What role does private sector R&D play compared to NIH?
    * Follow the debate...
    
    * See all questions
    * Advocate Toolkit
    * Follow the Debate
    

# Follow the Debate

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

### Importation of Drugs

The American people should be able to import lower-cost prescription drugs
from other countries to save money.

![Elected

Official](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/icons/person02_0.png)

Elected Official

![Elected

Official](https://www.drugcostfacts.org/sites/default/files/icons/person01.png)

Elected Official

    
        * Independent studies by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Task Force on Drug Importation and the U.S. Department of Commerce have concluded that importing prescription drugs from foreign countries poses safety risks to American consumers and does not result in overall net cost savings.
    * According to the HHS study, consumer savings from importing prescription drugs would be negated by the cost of policing such practices to ensure consumer safety.
    * Over many years, both Republican and Democratic Administrations have determined that it is not possible to certify the safety of imported drugs due to the inability to accurately trace the origins of foreign drugs, many of which are counterfeit and are sold through internet pharmacies that engage in highly questionable practices.
    * The United States has a safe and effective closed drug supply system, which the Congress acted to enhance only a few years ago by creating a national and uniform “track and trace” system for domestically distributed drugs. Drug importation would undermine this system and create large “safety loopholes” in it.
    * Four former Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Commissioners who served under both Democratic and Republican administrations recently wrote to Members of Congress expressing strong concerns about the importation of prescription drugs from foreign countries – noting that doing so would pose serious safety risks for U.S. patients. 
    * In 2011, the European Union, whose common market permits cross-border transfer of medicines, issued a “Falsified Medicine Directive.” The Directive noted, “There is an alarming increase of medicinal products detected in the Union which are falsified in relation to their identity, history or source. Those products usually contain sub-standard or falsified ingredients, or no ingredients or ingredients, including active substances, in the wrong dosage thus posing an important threat to public health.”
    

### Additional Reading & Resources

    
        * BIO; The Real Cost of Importation Infographic
    * The Partnership for Safe Medicines; Report of the Potential Impact of Drug Importation Proposals on U.S. Law Enforcement
    * Forbes; Drug Importation Will Not Improve Health Care Affordability
    * Real Clear Health; Canada Cannot Be America's Drugstore
    * Morning Consult; Applying Lessons of ‘Fake News’ to Online Pharmacies, Drug Importation Policies
    * Wall Street Journal; How Other Countries Freeload on U.S. Drug Research
    * Health & Human Services, Task Force on Drug Importation; Report on Prescription Drug Importation
    

### debates

    
        * Direct Government Negotiations on Price
    
    * Profits and R&D
    
    * Rising Insurance Premiums
    

BIO

© BIO 2018 All Rights Reserved

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Linked In
    * Youtube
    
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Contact Us
    * Graphic Library
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

