

# Bodily integrity

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

**Bodily integrity** is the inviolability of the physical body and emphasizes
the importance of personal autonomy and the self-determination of human beings
over their own bodies. In the field of human rights, violation of the bodily
integrity of another is regarded as an unethical infringement, intrusive, and
possibly criminal.[1][2][3][4][5][6]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Government and law
    * 2.1 Ireland
    * 2.2 United States
    * 2.3 Canada
  * 3 Human rights
  * 4 Women's rights
  * 5 Children's rights
    * 5.1 United States
  * 6 Medicine
  * 7 Genital integrity
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References

## Overview[edit]

It is one of Martha Nussbaum's ten principle capabilities (see capabilities
approach). She defines bodily integrity as: "Being able to move freely from
place to place; being able to be secure against violent assault, including
sexual assault ... having opportunities for sexual satisfaction and for choice
in matters of reproduction".[7]

## Government and law[edit]

### Ireland[edit]

In the Republic of Ireland, bodily integrity has been recognised by the courts
as an unenumerated right, protected by the general guarantee of "personal
rights" contained within Article 40 of the Irish constitution. In _Ryan v
Attorney General_ it was pronounced that "you have the right not to have your
body or personhood interfered with. This means that the State may not do
anything to harm your life or health. If you are in custody, you have a right
not to have your health endangered while in prison".[8][9]

In a separate case _M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for
Justice and Equality & ors,_ the Irish Supreme Court ruled that the right to
bodily integrity extended to the unborn.[10] In a summary of the case in
section 5.19, the Supreme Court stated:

> “…the only right of the unborn child as the Constitution now stands which
attracts the entitlement to protection and vindication is that enshrined by
the amendments in Article 40.3.3 namely, the right to life or, in other words,
the right to be born and, possibly, (and this is a matter for future decision)
allied rights such as the right to bodily integrity which are inherent in and
inseparable from the right to life itself”.[11]

### United States[edit]

The United States Constitution does not contain any specific provisions
regarding the rights one has with respect to his or her physical body or the
specific extent to which the state can act upon bodies.[12] However, the U.S.
Supreme Court has upheld right to privacy, which, as articulated by Julie
Lane, often protects rights to bodily integrity. In _Griswold v. Connecticut_
(1965) the Court supported women's rights to obtain birth control (and thus,
retain reproductive autonomy) without marital consent. Similarly, a woman's
right to privacy in obtaining abortions was protected by _Roe v. Wade_ (1973).
In _McFall v. Shimp_ (1978), a Pennsylvania court ruled that a person cannot
be forced to donate bone marrow, even if such a donation would save another
person's life.

Conversely, the Supreme Court has also protected the right of governmental
entities to infringe upon bodily integrity. Examples include laws prohibiting
the use of drugs, laws prohibiting euthanasia, laws requiring the use of
seatbelts and helmets, strip searches of prisoners, and forced blood
tests.[13]

### Canada[edit]

In general, the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms defends personal
liberty and the right not to be interfered with. However, in certain unique
circumstances government may have the right to temporarily override the right
to physical integrity in order to preserve the life of the person. Such action
can be described using the principle of supported autonomy,[14] a concept that
was developed to describe unique situations in mental health (examples include
the forced feeding of a person dying from the eating disorder anorexia
nervosa, or the temporary treatment of a person living with a psychotic
disorder with antipsychotic medication).

One unique example of a Canadian law that promotes bodily integrity is the
Ontario Health Care Consent Act. This Ontario law has to do with the capacity
to consent to medical treatment. The HCCA states that a person has the right
to consent to or refuse treatment if they have mental capacity. In order to
have capacity, a person must have the ability to understand and appreciate the
consequences of the treatment decision. The law says that a person is capable
with respect to a treatment, admission to a care facility or a personal
assistance service if the person is able to _understand_ and _appreciate_ the
information that is relevant to making such a decision.

## Human rights[edit]

Two key international documents protect these rights: the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.

The Human Rights and Constitutional Rights project, funded by Columbia Law
School, has defined four main areas of potential bodily integrity abuse by
governments. These are: Right to Life, Slavery and Forced Labor, Security of
One's Person, Torture and Inhumane, Cruel or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.

## Women's rights[edit]

Though bodily integrity is (according to the capabilities approach) afforded
to every human being, women are more often affected in violations of gender-
based violence. These include sexual assault, unwanted pregnancy, domestic
abuse, and limited access to contraception. These principles were addressed in
the CCL Working Conference on Women's Rights as Human Rights. The conference
defined bodily integrity as a right deserved by all women: "bodily integrity
unifies women and that no woman can say that it does not apply to them".

As defined by the conference participants, the following are bodily integrity
rights that should be guaranteed to women:

  * Freedom of movement
  * Security of persons
  * Reproductive and sexual rights
  * Women's health
  * Breaking women's isolation
  * Education
  * Networking[15]

## Children's rights[edit]

See also: Children's rights and Child grooming

### United States[edit]

The debate over children's rights to bodily integrity has grown in recent
years.[16] In the wake of the highly publicized Jerry Sandusky trial,[17]
parents have been increasingly encouraged to promote their child's sense of
bodily integrity as a method of reducing children's vulnerability to being
victims of sexual violence, human trafficking and child prostitution.[18]

Methods of increasing children's sense of bodily autonomy include:

  * Allowing children to choose when to give hugs/kisses
  * Encouraging children to communicate about boundaries
  * Offer alternative actions (e.g. a high five, handshake, etc.)

## Medicine[edit]

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states the following:
"No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment. In particular, no one shall be subjected without his
free consent to medical or scientific experimentation".[19]

## Genital integrity[edit]

See also: Circumcision controversies, Ethics of circumcision, Female genital
mutilation, Intersex, and Violence against men

Activists who oppose genital modification and mutilation define themselves as
**intactivists** [20] or **genital integrity activists** (a portmanteau of
"intact" and "activist"),[21] who strive to defend the rights of male, female,
and intersex children and babies to keep their sex organs
intact,[20][22][23][24][25][26] and to prohibit genital mutilation and forced
circumcision on children internationally.[23][24][26] Various organisations
have been set up specifically for the purpose,[20][22][23][24] other
organisations have stated their support for the movement. Intactivists
consider themselves to be an LGBT social movement, and have participated in
LGBT pride parades ever since 2006.[27] In North America, the genital
integrity movement primarily focuses on circumcision of male infants and
children and to a lesser but still prevalent extent, intersex surgery.
Intactivists also promote bodily integrity[25][28][29] and tend to have little
or no issue with consenting and informed adults undergoing surgery, since
their main concern is to secure Children's rights from genital
mutilations.[20][22][23][24][26]

## See also[edit]

  * Autonomy
  * Capabilities approach
  * Children's rights
  * Cognitive liberty
  * Human rights
  * Morphological freedom
  * Personal boundaries
  * Security of person
  * Reproductive rights
  * Self-ownership
  * Self-determination
  * McFall v. Shimp
  * Violence against men
  * Violence against women

## References[edit]

  1. **^** The Limits of Bodily Integrity Ruth Austin Miller – 2007
  2. **^** Communication Technology And Social Change Carolyn A. Lin, David J. Atkin – 2007
  3. **^** Civil Liberties and Human Rights Helen Fenwick, Kevin Kerrigan – 2011
  4. **^** Xenotransplantation: Ethical, Legal, Economic, Social, Cultural Brigitte E.s. Jansen, Jürgen W. Simon, Ruth Chadwick, Hermann Nys, Ursula Weisenfeld – 2008
  5. **^** Personal Autonomy, the Private Sphere and Criminal Law Peter Alldridge, Chrisje H. Brants - 2001, retrieved 29 May 2012
  6. **^** Privacy law in Australia Carolyn Doyle, Mirko Bagaric – 2005
  7. **^** Nussbaum, Martha C. _Sex and Social Justice_. Oxford UP, 1999. 41–42. Print.
  8. **^** Ryan v Attorney General [1965] 1 IR 294 at 295. Judgement by Kenny J: "That the general guarantee of personal rights in section 3 (1) of Art. 40 extends to rights not specified in Art. 40. One of the personal rights of the citizen protected by the general guarantee is the right to bodily integrity."
  9. **^** "Right to Bodily Integrity." Citizens Information. 19 Mar. 2008. Citizens Information Board. 4 Apr. 2011 http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/irish_constitution_1/right_to_bodily_integrity.html.
  10. **^** Judgement by the Irish Supreme Court: M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for Justice and Equality  & ors, 7th March 2018.
  11. **^** "M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for Justice and Equality  & ors : Judgments & Determinations : Courts Service of Ireland".
  12. **^** Lane, Julie. "Bodily Integrity, Reproductive Liberty and Legal Personhood authored by Lane, Julie." All Academic Inc. 2005. 5 Apr. 2011 http://www.allacademic.com//meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/0/8/5/5/0/pages85503/p85503-3.php
  13. **^** Lane, Julie. "Bodily Integrity, Reproductive Liberty and Legal Personhood authored by Lane, Julie." All Academic Inc. 2005. 5 Apr. 2011 http://citation.allacademic.com/meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/0/8/5/5/0/pages85503/p85503-14.php
  14. **^** "琪琪布电影网".
  15. **^** Reilly, Niamh. "Bodily Integrity and Security of Person." Women's Human Rights Campaign Ireland. 5 Apr. 2011 http://whr1998.tripod.com/documents/icclbodily.htm.
  16. **^** Alderson, Patricia. _Researching Children's Rights to Integrity_ in _Children's Childhoods: Observed And Experienced_. The Falmer Press, 1994.
  17. **^** "Overheard on CNN.com: Are you a 'huggy' person? Would you make a child hug?". CNN, 20 June 2012.http://news.blogs.cnn.com/2012/06/20/overheard-on-cnn-com-are-you-a-huggy-person-would-you-make-a-child-hug/
  18. **^** Hetter, Katia. "I don't own my child's body". CNN, 20 July 2015. http://www.cnn.com/2012/06/20/living/give-grandma-hug-child/
  19. **^** United Nations. "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights." Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. UN, 23 Mar. 1976. Web. 13 Apr. 2011. http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm Archived July 5, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
  20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Bollinger, Dan (30 August 2006). "About Who We Are". _International Coalition for Genital Integrity_. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
  21. **^** Andrea Peyser (25 January 2016). "Circumcision 'intactivists' don't want you (or your kids) to get snipped". _New York Post_. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
  22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "About NOCIRC". _NOCIRC_. 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Genital Autonomy and Children's rights". _Genital Autonomy America_. San Anselmo, California. 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "About Us". _Intact America_. Tarrytown, New York. 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
  25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Geisheker, John; Hill, George (February 2016). "Male Infant Circumcision: A Brief Overview of The Issues" (PDF). _Doctors Opposing Circumcision_. Seattle. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
  26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ McAteer, Oliver (2 August 2017). "Why America must stop circumcising baby boys and start viewing it as mutilation". _Metro News_. London. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
  27. **^** Georganne Chapin (7 July 2016). "5 Reasons Why LBGTQ Supporters 'Get' Intactivism". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
  28. **^** Boyle, Gregory J.; Svoboda, J. Steven; Price, Christopher P.; Turner, J. Neville (2000). "Circumcision of Healthy Boys: Criminal Assault?". _Journal of Law and Medicine_. **7** : 301–310. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
  29. **^** Denniston, George C.; Grassivaro Gallo, Pia; Hodges, Frederick M.; Milos, Marilyn Fayre; Viviani, Franco, eds. (2006). _Bodily Integrity and the Politics of Circumcision: Culture, Controversy, and Change_. New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-1-4020-4915-6.

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * GND: 4133883-2

\---|---

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bodily_integrity&oldid=900062081"

Categories:

  * Crimes against women
  * Development studies
  * Sociological theories
  * Development economics
  * Autonomy
  * Human body
  * Violence against men
  * Violence against women

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Use dmy dates from March 2019
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Deutsch
  * 日本語
  * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
  * Simple English
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 3 June 2019, at 05:18 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

