

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

    
        * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
    * Skip to main content
    * Skip to navigation
    * Resources
    * How To
    * About NCBI Accesskeys
    

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

    
        * Advanced
    * Journal list
    * Help
    
    * Journal List
    * Ther Clin Risk Manag
    * v.3(1); 2007 Mar
    * PMC1936287
    

![Logo of tcriskman](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-tcriskman.gif)

Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2007 Mar; 3(1): 41–46.

Published online 2007 Mar.

PMCID: PMC1936287

PMID: 18360614

# Drug reimportation practices in the United States

Monali J Bhosle and Rajesh Balkrishnan

Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer

Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administration, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA

Correspondence: Rajesh Balkrishnan Ohio State University College of Pharmacy
and School of Public Health 500 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Tel +1
614 292 6415 Fax +1 614 292 1335 Email ude.uso@1.nanhsirklab

Copyright (C) 2007 Dove Medical Press Limited. All rights reserved

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## Abstract

### Background

Drug reimportation is perceived as a costs-cutting strategy by Americans.
Nonetheless, issues such as drug safety and efficacy prevent legalization of
the practice. With the contradictory views from supporters and opponents,
debate on drug reimportation continues to snowball. The objective of this
commentary is to discuss issues regarding drug reimportation practices in the
United States (US). It also examines policy implications and potential
solutions of the controversy.

### Findings

Comparatively inexpensive drugs available across the border help Americans
relieve the burden of medication costs. Consequently, the volume of reimported
drugs entering the US has considerably increased. However, these practices are
illegal and legalization of drug reimportation is a political debate. While
safety is the most important barrier for legalization, this concern does not
seem to affect growing number of Americans who are getting their prescriptions
filled from across the border. Canadians oppose legalization of reimportation
in the US as it could exacerbate the problem of medication shortage in Canada.

### Summary

Currently, legalization of dug reimportation has wedged between the arguments
by different groups. Until the US government finds a solution to reduce
medication costs, it seems to be impossible to stop Americans from buying the
comparatively inexpensive medications available across the border.

**Keywords:** drug reimportation, drug importation, prescription drug costs,
drugs from Canada

## Background

The increasing expenditure on prescription medications is a big concern for
consumers in the United States (US). Due to the increasing burden of
medication costs, Americans, especially elderly and the uninsured, avoid
taking medications or skip doses. According to a study, 22% of seniors do not
fill their prescriptions because they cannot afford the cost of their
medications (Safran et al 2002). The percentages are higher (32%) for
uninsured population, which account for approximately 10% to 15% of the US
population (Safran et al 2002).

Consequently, a growing number of Americans choose to buy comparatively
inexpensive medications available in other countries such as Canada and
Mexico. Several internet pharmacies help consumers obtain medications from
other countries without requiring them to travel across the borders. Even
though these drugs are often manufactured in the US, the drug price control
acts in countries like Canada keep the prices of prescription medications
lower than the US market prices (Wagner and McCarthy 2004). The practice of
importing back to the US prescription drugs that were originally manufactured
in the US and exported for sale in another country is referred as 'drug
reimportation'. Estimates indicate that buying medicines from a certified
Canadian pharmacy can save Americans 20%-80% on brand name drugs (Vivian
2003). However, economists argue that these estimates could be dubious and are
overestimated considering the complications involved in comparing medication
prices across different nations (Danzon and Kim 1998; Wagner and McCarthy
2004).

Many concerns restrict drug reimportation from being a legal practice in the
US. These include safety, efficacy, and therapeutic equivalency of reimported
drugs. While these drugs are manufactured in the US, the storage and packaging
conditions in countries where drugs were exported cannot be monitored by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Meadows 2002). In addition,
inappropriate storage conditions while reimporting medications back to the US
may degrade the quality of drugs. The most important issue is distinguishing
between drugs that are manufactured in the US from those which were
manufactured elsewhere. Although technically 'reimportation' involves
importing back drugs manufactured in the US, there are no means to check the
originality of drugs. Similarly, it is difficult to determine whether the
drugs purchased from other countries have the same dosage form, potency, and
amount of active ingredient as the prescribed medication. The FDA contends
that legalizing reimportation would increase the entry of counterfeit
medications in the US drug supply chain (Meadows 2002). The pharmaceutical
industry criticizes the reimportation practice due to the potential harm to
the recovery of the research and development (R&D) costs required for new
drugs (Danzon 1998; Danzon and Kim 1998). While these opponents prevent the
legalization of drug reimportation, various consumer advocacy groups support
the practice.

The legalization of drug reimportation remains a controversial issue in the
US. While important, limited work has been done on briefing the legislative
history and current status of drug reimportation. This commentary tries to
explore the perspectives of different groups, emphasizing the role of
healthcare professionals in drug reimportation practices. In addition, the
paper also discusses policy implications of the drug reimportation practice.

## Key findings

### US prescription drug expenditure and drug reimportation

The cost of prescription drugs is the fastest growing sector of US healthcare
costs. In 1980, US prescription drug expenditures were $12 billion, accounting
for 4.9 % of total healthcare spending. By 2003, it had escalated to $184.1
billion or 11.0% of total healthcare expenditures (CMS 2005). The increased
volume of prescription medications have also driven the overall costs of
pharmaceuticals. The increasing number of prescription uilization was
responsible for 42% of the overall increase in prescription spending from
1997-2002 (KFF 2004) (Figure 1).

![An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Object name is
tcrm0301-041-01.jpg](/pmc/articles/PMC1936287/bin/tcrm0301-041-01.jpg)

Open in a separate window

Figure 1

Prescription drug expenditure and % of total healthcare expenditure for
1998-2013 (CMS 2005).

On the other hand, measures such as drug price control acts in other countries
such as Canada significantly reduce the prices of prescription as compared
with the US. Thus in most cases, Americans can buy the same medication at
significantly lower prices from countries like Canada and Mexico. For
instance, the antiretroviral drug ritonavir (Norvir®, Abbott Laboratories),
which is a part of many HIV/AIDS treatments costs as low as $700/per year in
Canada as opposed to $7800/per year in the US (Nelson 2004). According to the
Patented Medicine Review Prices Board of Canada (PMPRB), factory drug prices
in the US exceeded seven nations including Canada and European countries in
the year 2000. Consequently, the volume of reimported drug entering the US has
significantly increased over the past decade (Dalzell 2000)

### Legislative history

Various bills allowing reimportation of drugs have been proposed, but none of
them have been implemented as legislation yet. The practice of reimportation
is illegal in the US (the legal exceptions are those drugs which are
manufactured in the US, and may be reimported by the original manufacturer or
if the prescription drug is required for 'emergency medical care') (Creech
2001). The FDA also allows 90-day supply of reimported drugs for personal use
(Reichertz and Friend 2000). In 2000, the Medicine Equity and Drug Safety Act
of 2000 (MEDS act) was passed to allow pharmacists and wholesalers to reimport
US manufactured, FDA approved drugs, previously exported to foreign countries,
back into the US to sell them to Americans at cheaper prices. However due to
lack of the congressionally required certification by the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS), the MEDS act was terminated at the end of December
2000 (Vogel and Joish, 2000). Before the proposal of this act, the
Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1988 (PDMA) allowed manufacturers to
reimport drugs under FDA regulation (Creech 2001). Several times since 2000,
both the US House of Representatives and the Senate have continuously
discussed this issue in an effort to legalize reimportation practices. On July
25, 2003, the Pharmaceutical Market Access Act of 2003 (H.R. 2427) passed in
the House had provisions to allow drug reimportation from 25 countries,
including Canada, Australia, Japan, South Africa, and the European Union. A
different version of this bill was passed in the Senate in June 2003 that
allowed reimportation of FDA-approved drugs only from Canada (Moskowitz 2000).
As a safety measure, this legislation required that the packaging of
prescription drugs incorporate counterfeit-resistant technology. It also
entailed a certification from the Secretary of Department of Health and Human
Services that the prescription drugs do not expose consumers to any additional
risks.

Currently the debate on drug reimportation practice continues to snowball
although its status is still illegal. The legal status of reimportation may be
misinterpreted by the consumers due to the ambiguous nature of different
amendments and bills. A survey by IMS Health Inc in 2003 revealed that 45% of
the respondents perceived reimportation practices to be legal, and 33% were
unsure (Saatsoglou 2004). These results indicate consumers' unawareness
regarding legality of drug reimportation practices.

### Perspective of the US FDA

The arguments about safety and legitimacy of reimported drugs restrict the
legalization of the practice. The FDA has consistently denied guaranteeing the
safety, efficacy and legitimacy of reimported prescription drugs. The FDA
claims that there are no means to detect the origin of the drugs despite the
fact they are manufactured in the US (Meadows 2002). The FDA argues that they
do not have sufficient financial as well as technological resources to assure
the safety and authenticity of drugs coming from across the border (Thompson
2000). Following are some of the key findings (FDA 2003, 2004; FDA Consumer
2003; Rudolf and Bernstein 2004) that support FDA's positions on drug
reimportation practices:

    
        * The FDA and the Customs and Border Protection carried out a series of "blitz" examinations of 1982 drug packages mailed or shipped to individual recipients from abroad. Approximately 90% of these products were found to be unapproved and to present potentially severe health risks. The examined imports included drugs that had been withdrawn from the US market as unsafe; drugs with restricted distribution programs; drugs requiring initial screening and periodic monitoring of patients to ensure safe use; controlled substances such as codeine; animal drugs sold for human use; and drugs that might cause dangerous drug-drug interactions.
    
    * The majority of the drugs had unknown quality and originated from Third World countries.
    
    * The labeling and packaging of the reimported drugs may not be according to the FDA standards. Some medications with labels and inserts in different languages were found during the FDA inspection.
    
    * In another case, FDA officials examined drugs ordered from a supposed Canadian pharmacy. These drugs, (including insulin) arrived in the regular mail and at room temperature (Insulin loses effectiveness at higher temperatures and is supposed to be shipped overnight to ensure it remains chilled) (Vogel 2002).
    
    * The World Health Organization anticipated that in 2000 about 8% of bulk drugs imported to the US were counterfeit, unapproved, or substandard.
    
    * The FDA claims that the number of counterfeit drugs investigated per year have increased to 20 since 2000 after averaging 5 per year in late 90s.
    

Drug reimportation is considered as a threat to recover the costs required for
the new drug discovery. The pharmaceutical industry depends on patents to fund
the R&D costs for new drug products. Pharmaceutical price controls reduces the
amount of profit available for further R&D, which in turn affects the
innovation (Vogel 2002). The average cost of bringing a new drug to market is
estimated at almost $800 million (DiMasi et al 2003). These costs could be
recovered through branded medications since the prices of generic and over-the
counter medications need to be set according the market competition. To
recover the costs of innovation and to gain profit, companies set prices
according to the different levels of demand and price sensitivity across the
different markets (Danzon 1998; Danzon and Kim 1998).

### Perspective of US consumers on drug reimportation

While reimportation remains a controversial issue, these concerns do not seem
to affect growing number of Americans who chose to buy their prescription
medications from across the border. Currently the estimates available indicate
that 1 to 10 million of Americans purchase drugs from Canada alone, and spend
more than $1.1 billion on these prescription drugs in 2003 (Finkelstein 2003).
Survey results from various organizations reveal some interesting results. A
national survey by researchers at Stony Brook University revealed that around
58% of the consumers perceive Canadian drugs to be safe or somewhat safe and
68% think that the practice should be legalized (SBU 2003). According to a
survey by Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), 63% consumers support drug
reimportation and believe that the federal government should make it easier
for Americans to get access to Canadian drugs (KFF 2003).

### Canadian perspective on US drug reimportation

It is important to consider the drug reimportation issue from the Canadian
perspective as well. A few US drug companies have already cut off drug
supplies to the Canadian pharmacies that sell prescription drugs to US
consumers (Elliott 2003). This has led to serious drug shortages at these
pharmacies. Also, Canada's drug supply is very limited and cannot service the
need of the whole American population (Graham 2003). Considering the lucrative
nature of the drug reimportation business, there is a high possibility that in
fulfilling the increased demand of US consumers, Canadian pharmacists might
order drugs from other countries such as India, Thailand, and Africa where the
rate of drug counterfeiting could be higher. Nonetheless, various Canadian
pharmacies available on the internet could be bogus and ordering medications
from such online pharmacies could be dangerous (Mulligan 2003).

### Is reimportation really a cost beneficial strategy?

While international price comparisons of medications show the comparatively
higher prices in US, economists argue that international comparisons must be
viewed with skepticism (Danzon 1998). Medication prices in other countries
generally reflect the lower incomes in some states and the highly politicized
nature of most foreign healthcare systems. Exchange rate variations also play
a role in setting medication prices. The US has a relatively strong dollar in
comparison with other countries, which could have made medications in some
other countries seem particularly inexpensive. Research by Danzon and Kim
(1998) studied the issues of patent protection, price controls, and continuing
availability of prescription drugs without prescriptions. After adjusting for
such factors as well as the role of generic equivalents, volume discounts, and
frequency of use, they found that the average US consumer would have paid 3%
more in Canada, 27% more in Germany, 30% less in France, 9% less in Italy, 8%
less in Japan, 44% more in Switzerland, 9% more in Sweden, and 24% less in the
UK.

Practices such as reference pricing and parallel trade, which are allowed in
European Union (EU), may erode above-normal profits of the pharmaceutical
industry if allowed in the US. While the concept of parallel trade is
attractive, economic analyses showed that differential pricing is in fact
beneficial for recovering costs of R&D of new drugs (Vogel and Joish 2001).

The medication costs issues in the US are mainly associated with brand name
drugs. According to a new study by the FDA, Americans who buy drugs in Canada
in hopes of saving money could pay significantly more for certain prescription
drugs than if they had purchased generic versions of these drugs in the US.
This study found that out of seven top-selling prescription drugs for chronic
disease, six generic US versions cost significantly less than their Canadian
equivalents (FDA 2003). A Canadian study of 27 top-selling generic
prescription drugs concluded that three-fourths of those drugs cost less in
the US, and Canadians could save millions by access to the US versions
(D'Angelo 2002). These findings are asserted by another study, which found
that US, on average, had higher prices for new originator products, but had
the lowest generic prices compared with countries including Canada, Chile,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, and the UK. The US also had the lowest
over-the-counter drug prices (Danzon and Kim 1998).

Costs involved in legalization of drug reimportation should not be neglected
as well. The major emphasis for legalizing the practice of reimportation in
the US has been the cost savings it offers. However, based on the estimates by
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), enactment of the H.R. 2427 bill that allows
reimporting drugs into the US would reduce total prescription drug spending by
only about 1% or US$40 billion in the next decade (CBO 2003). Few economists
and researchers have concurred that drug reimportation might not be a panacea
for the soaring drug costs (Thompson 2004). To ensure the safety and
authenticity of reimported/imported drugs, researchers have proposed using
anti-counterfeiting technology for medication packages to avoid the entry of
spurious prescription drugs in the US. According to the FDA estimates, this
anti-counterfeiting technology would cost approximately $2 billion.

### Policy implications and suggested potential solutions

Legalizing the reimportation practices might not solve the problem of growing
prescription medication costs. Drug reimportation certainly involves potential
threat of counterfeit drugs, which could result in additional costs to the
healthcare system. The problem of high drug costs should be solved using the
combination of most safe and appropriate treatment strategies wherever
possible. One such strategy may be to promote use of FDA-approved generic
drugs. Policymakers should promote policies allowing easy market entry of
generic drugs and increasing awareness of Americans regarding costs-savings
due to generic drug use.

The Medicare Part D, an enhancement of the Medicare Prescription Drug,
Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003, will be implemented in January
2006. This outpatient prescription drug benefit plan has a potential to
transform American healthcare delivery by significantly reducing the costs of
prescription drugs along with increasing access to medicines. A transitional
drug discount card program that has been ongoing since mid-2004 may be useful
for elderly consumers to manage their prescription drug expenditures.

The major challenge for the US policymakers is to provide an access to
affordable and safe medications to consumers without diminishing revenues
available for pharmaceutical R&D. Although few solutions are suggested in the
literature, an in-depth analysis and effectiveness of these solutions is
required to solve the prescription drug problem. Until then, drug
reimportation will continue to be a conundrum for US policymakers.

## Conclusions

From its inception, the two main objections against reimporting prescription
drugs from across the border have been the safety and authenticity of these
drugs that could jeopardize public health, and that the profits of drug
companies which is used for R&D of new drugs would be seriously hurt. Views on
reimportation are extremely polarized among supporters and opponents with each
trying to justify their own interests. The legislative and administrative
bodies do not take the responsibility of the reimported drugs. On the other
hand, various consumer groups and organizations continue to support the drug
reimportation. The motive for consumers is the direct cost-savings offered by
purchasing drugs from across the border. Increasing support from consumers
might push legislatives to closely ponder over the issue of legality of drug
reimportation practices.

## References

    
        * [CBO] Congressional Budget Office. The Pharmaceutical Market Access Act of 2003 [online] 2003. Accessed 25 September 2005. URL: http://www.cbo.gov/showdoc.cfm?index=4852&sequence=0.
    * [CMS] Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Estimates from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [online] 2005. Accessed on 23 September 2005. URL: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/03_NationalHealthAccountsProjected.asp#TopOfPage.
    * [FDA Consumer] Consumer alert on foreign drugs. FDA Consumer. 2003;37:4. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Creech ML. Make a run for the border: why the United States government is looking to the intentional market for affordable prescription drugs. Emory Int Rev. 2001;15:593. [Google Scholar]
    * Dalzell MD. Prescription drug reimportation: panacea or problem? Managed Care. 2000;9:22–7. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Danzon PM. The economics of parallel trade. Pharmacoeconomics. 1998;13:293–304. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Danzon PM, Kim JD. International price comparisons for pharmaceuticals. Measurement and policy issues. Pharmacoeconomics. 1998;14:115–28. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * D'Angelo P. Generic drug prices: a Canada/US comparison. Ottawa, ON: Palmer D'Angelo Consulting Inc.; 2002. [Google Scholar]
    * DiMasi JA, Hansen RW, Grabowski HG. The price of innovation: new estimates of drug development costs. J Health Econ. 2003;22:151–85. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Elliott R. Canada/US: Competition Bureau will not investigate GSK efforts to stop cross-border sales by internet pharmacies. Canadian HIV AIDS Policy Law Rev. 2003;8:42–4. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * [FDA] US Food and Drug Administration. Generic drug prices in the US are lower than drug prices in Canada. FDA White Paper. 2003. 
    * [FDA] US Food and Drug Administration. FDA crackdown on illegal products. FDA Consumer. 2004;38:2. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Finkelstein JB. Push for drug reimportation gains steam [online] 2003. American Medical News. Accessed 23 September 2005. URL: http://www.ama-assn.org/amednews/2003/10/13/gvsa1013.htm.
    * Graham JR. Prescription drug prices in Canada and the United States-Part 4. Public Policy Sources. 2003. Fraser Institute Occasional Paper Number 70, September 2003.
    * [KFF] Kaiser Family Foundation. Survey by Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and Harvard school of Public Health [online] 2003. Accessed on 23 September 2005. URL: http://www.kff.org/healthpollreport/archive_Sept2003/20.cfm.
    * [KFF] Kaiser Family Foundation. Prescription drug trends [online] 2004. Accessed 20 September 2005. URL: http://www.kff.org/rxdrugs/loader.cfm?url=/commonspot/security/getfile.cfm&PageID=48305.
    * Meadows M. Imported drugs raise safety concerns. FDA Consumer magazine. 2002;36:18–23. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Moskowitz DB. Federal and state laws and regulations affecting managed care. Drug Benefit Trends. 2000;12:20–1. [Google Scholar]
    * Mulligan K. Soaring internet drug sales raise safety, legal concerns. Psychiatric News. 2003;38:1–45. [Google Scholar]
    * Nelson R. Debate over ritonavir price increase gains momentum. Critics seek to reverse the fivefold price hike through legal action and boycott of Abbott's products. Lancet. 2004;363:1369. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Reichertz PS, Friend MS. Hiding behind agency discretion: the Food and Drug Administration's personal use drug importation policy. Cornell J Law Public Policy. 2000;9:493–521. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Rudolf PM, Bernstein IB. Counterfeit drugs. N Eng J Med. 2004;350:1384–6. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Safran DG, Neuman P, Schoen C, et al. Prescription drug coverage and seniors: how well are states closing the gap? Health Aff (Millwood) 2002;Suppl Web Exclusives:W253–68. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Saatsoglou P. Pharmaceutical reimportation: magnitude, trends, and consumers. Manage Care. 2004;13:7–9. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * [SBU] Stony Brook University. Health Pulse of America [online] 2003. Accessed 23 September 2005. URL: http://sunysb.edu/surveys/HPANov03_Pharma.htm.
    * Thompson CA. FDA admits to lacking control over counterfeit drug imports. Am J Health Sys Pharm. 2000;57:1296–7. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Thompson CA. Drug reimportation not the right answer, Nobel economist says. Am J Health Sys Pham. 2004:61. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Vivian JC. Canadian drug imports. US Pharmacists. 2003;28:7. [Google Scholar]
    * Vogel RJ. Pharmaceutical patents and price controls. Clin Ther. 2002;24:1204–22. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Vogel RJ, Joish V. The potential unintended economic consequences of the Medicine Equity and Drug Safety Act of 2000. Clin Ther. 2001;23:629–43. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    * Wagner JL, McCarthy E. International differences in drug prices. Ann Rev Pub Health. 2004;25:475–95. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
    

* * *

Articles from Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management are provided here
courtesy of **Dove Press**

## Formats:

    
        * Article
    

|

    
        * PubReader
    

|

    
        * ePub (beta)
    

|

    
        * PDF (141K)
    

|

    
        * Citation
    

## Share

    
        * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
    * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
    * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+
    

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=tcriskman&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC1936287/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

