

![Top Master's in Healthcare

Administration](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/topmha-logo75.png)

### Top Master's in Healthcare Administration

Rankings of the Best MS in Healthcare Administration Programs

Find A DegreeSelect a Degree LevelSelect a
DegreeAssociate'sBachelor'sMaster'sDoctorateNon-Degree CoursesCertificate /
DiplomaGraduate CertificatesSelect a CategorySelect a CategoryArt &
DesignBusiness & ManagementComputers & TechnologyCriminal Justice &
LegalEducation & TeachingLiberal Arts & HumanitiesNursing &
HealthcarePsychology & CounselingScience & EngineeringTrades & CareersSelect a
SubjectSelect a SubjectAnimationArt & Art HistoryCreative /
DesignFashionFilmGame DesignGraphic DesignInterior DesignLandscape
ArchitectureMultimedia DesignPhotographyVisual CommunicationsWeb
DesignAccountingBusiness AdministrationBusiness
IntelligenceEconomicsEntertainment ManagementEntrepreneurshipFinanceForensic
AccountingHospitality ManagementHotel & Restaurant ManagementHuman
ResourcesInternational BusinessInternet MarketingLogisticsManagementManagement
Information SystemsMarketingNon-Profit ManagementOrganizational
LeadershipProject ManagementPublic RelationsReal EstateRetail & Sales
ManagementRisk ManagementSmall BusinessSports ManagementSupply Chain &
LogisticsTaxationTraining & DevelopmentComputer EngineeringComputer
ForensicsComputer ProgrammingComputer ScienceDatabase ManagementInformation
Systems SecurityInformation TechnologyInternet SecurityMobile
DevelopmentNetwork AdministrationNetwork SecuritySoftware EngineeringWeb
DevelopmentCorrectionsCrime Scene InvestigationCriminal
JusticeCriminologyCyber SecurityForensic ScienceHomeland SecurityLaw
EnforcementLegal StudiesParalegalPublic Safety AdministrationAdult
Education/LearningChild DevelopmentCoachingCurriculum & InstructionEarly
Childhood EducationEducationEducational AdministrationEducational
CounselingEducational LeadershipEducational TechnologyElementary
EducationEnglish Language LearningHigher EducationK-12 EducationLibrary
ScienceMath EducationMusic EducationOnline TeachingReading & LiteracySpecial
EducationTeacher LicensureAnthropologyCommunicationsEnglishGeneral
StudiesGeographyHistoryHuman & Family DevelopmentJournalismLiberal ArtsMedia
CommunicationsMinistryMusicPolitical SciencePublic AdministrationPublic
PolicySocial ScienceSocial WorkSociologyTheologyWritingDental
AssistanceEmergency ManagementGerontologyHealth EducationHealth
InformaticsHealth ScienceHealth ServicesHealthcare AdministrationHealthcare
ManagementHuman ServicesMedical AssistingMedical CodingMedical Office
AdministrationNurse Practitioner (RN Required)Nursing (RN required)Nursing
Education (RN Required)Nutritional SciencesPharmacyPublic HealthRN to BSN (RN
required)Sports MedicineSports Medicine/Physical TherapyVeterinaryX-Ray
TechnicianAddictions & RecoveryBehavioral PsychologyChild and Adolescent
PsychologyCounselingEducational PsychologyFamily CounselingForensic
PsychologyOrganizational PsychologyPsychologyAeronautics/AviationBiomedical
EngineeringCivil EngineeringDraftingElectronics
EngineeringEngineeringEngineering ManagementEnvironmental
ManagementEnvironmental ScienceIndustrial EngineeringMechanical
EngineeringAutomotiveCarpentryConstruction ManagementCulinaryElectrical
TechnicianFire ScienceHeating/CoolingTechnologyTrades

Search Now!Sponsored Schools

### Menu

    
        * Home
    * Rankings
    * Infographics
      * How Monsanto Took Control of Our Food
      * Doctor Feel-Bad: Why Are So Many Doctors Miserable?
      * Children of the Corn
      * How to Eat For Good Health on Less
      * How Much Poison is in Your Food?
      * Mind, Body & Jazz: How Jazz Can Improve Your Health
      * 5 Utterly Disgusting Medical Jobs
      * Is History Repeating Itself with Obamacare?
    * About Us
    

# 30 Most Technologically Advanced Hospitals in the World

__TMIHEditor __Modern Medicine ____ March 24, 2014March 24, 2016 __hospitals,
medical advancements, medical care, technology

![XL Construction, Milpitas,

CA](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/Lead.jpg)

Image Source

by TMHC Staff

Medical research is constantly pushing the boundaries of health care and
redefining what is and isn't possible. Keeping pace with this vigorous
progress, hospitals across the globe are continually updating their equipment
and services in order to offer the latest in high-tech medical care. From
specialist cancer centers with state-of-the-art digital imaging scanners, to
multi-disciplinary mega-hospitals featuring cutting-edge medical robots, these
are 30 of the most technologically advanced hospitals in the world.

## 30. University of Missouri Health System: University Hospital - Columbia,

Missouri

![North side of the University Hospital expansion

project.](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/30.-University-of-Missouri-Health-System-University-

Hospital-%E2%80%93-Columbia-Missouri.jpg)

Image Source

The University of Missouri Health Care network's flagship institution, the
University Hospital, underwent a major $203 million facelift between 2009 and
2013. Consisting of eight floors, the new tower houses the Ellis Fischel
Cancer Center and patient care facility. This ultramodern cancer center boasts
innovative, time saving "smart rooms," which automatically record and
wirelessly convey patients' vitals and additional information to the system's
electronic medical databanks. On top of this, the center offers advanced
imaging services such as 3D mammography and features "intraoperative
teleconferencing technology," which lets operating doctors talk with
pathologists without leaving the room. The patient care tower also uses a
ROBOT-Rx drug-dispensing device capable of supplying as many as 3,000 doses a
day.

## 29. Nuffield Health Bristol Hospital - The Chesterfield - Bristol, U.K.

![29. Nuffield Health Bristol Hospital – The Chesterfield – Bristol,

U.K.](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/29.-Nuffield-Health-Bristol-Hospital-%E2%80%93-The-

Chesterfield-%E2%80%93-Bristol-U.K..jpg)

Opened in October 2013 in Bristol, England, Bristol Hospital - The
Chesterfield is part of the Nuffield Health private hospital network. Complete
with three digital operating rooms and an advanced diagnostic hub, the new
facility is the first totally digital hospital in the region. "The innovative
equipment used in the high-tech digital theaters will allow surgeons to have
complete control over every aspect of their surgery," explained Nuffield
Health. The hospital's imaging technology is up to the minute, featuring
digital mammography, MRI, CT and high-definition endoscopy together with
"five-star, state-of-the-art facilities." According to the _Bristol Post_ ,
the hospital, which cost $32.74 million to develop, has "[attracted] some of
the country's top consultants - a number of whom are leaders in their field."

## 28. Upper River Valley Hospital - New Brunswick, Canada

![28. Upper River Valley Hospital – New Brunswick,

Canada](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/28.-Upper-River-Valley-Hospital-%E2%80%93-New-

Brunswick-Canada.jpg)

The Upper River Valley Hospital in New Brunswick, Canada officially opened its
doors in November 2007. The futuristic facility was set up in place of New
Brunswick hospitals the Carleton Memorial and the Northern Carleton.
Impressively, Upper River Valley is Canada's first LEED-approved all-inclusive
hospital. Adding to its eco credentials, the hospital is designed to be fully
paperless, which means that medical personnel are able to manage patient data
electronically. Outlining its advantages, then-health minister Michael Murphy
said, "This means instant access to patient information to provide quicker
care in an emergency, and an ability to immediately share information and
consult with other health care providers outside the hospital." The Upper
River Valley Hospital - which cost $85 million to complete - is run by
Canadian health authority the Horizon Health Network.

## 27. Hackensack University Medical Center - Hackensack, New Jersey

![27. Hackensack University Medical Center – Hackensack, New

Jersey](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/27.-Hackensack-University-Medical-

Center-%E2%80%93-Hackensack-New-Jersey.jpg)

Based on the number of patients seen, Hackensack University Medical Center is
the fourth biggest hospital in the U.S. Established in 1881, the center is
part of a campus that comprises various buildings and sites. In 2011 the
medical center inaugurated its new $130 million John Theurer Cancer Center
building, which boasts over a dozen specialist departments and a dedicated
staff of radiation therapy experts. New technology at the hospital includes
tomosynthesis 3D mammography - a more precise and comprehensive form of
scanning that helps with earlier cancer detection. In partnership with Citrix
Systems, the Hackensack University Medical Center introduced a wireless system
that medical personnel can use to assess patient data from computers and
mobile devices, creating an improved and more efficient work environment.

## 26. Legacy Salmon Creek Medical Center - Portland, Washington

![26. Legacy Salmon Creek Medical Center – Portland,

Washington](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/26.-Legacy-Salmon-Creek-Medical-

Center-%E2%80%93-Portland-Washington.jpg)

Image Source

Located in Vancouver, Washington, the Legacy Salmon Creek Medical Center is
part of Portland-based non-profit hospital system Legacy Health. According to
Legacy Health, "Legacy Salmon Creek offers the latest medical technology in a
warm, comfortable, family-focused environment." The center is acclaimed for
its top-tier joint replacement and stroke treatment programs. In 2012 the
Joint Commission certified Legacy Salmon Creek's Total Joint Program with a
"Gold Seal of Approval." Boasting a state-of-the-art facility, the program
excels when it comes to shoulder, knee and hip replacement procedures. Along
with Legacy Health's Legacy Meridian Park Medical Center, Legacy Salmon Creek
is one of just two centers in the wider area that employ advanced robotic
MAKOplasty partial knee resurfacing.

## 25. Wooridul Spine Hospital - Seoul, South Korea

![25. Wooridul Spine Hospital – Seoul, South

Korea](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/25.-Wooridul-Spine-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Seoul-South-

Korea.jpg)

Image Source

Offering a "Spine Total Care System," Wooridul Spine Hospital is acknowledged
as being among the top spinal treatment hubs in the world. Founded in 1982,
today Wooridul is staffed by over 1,130 neurospinal specialists and various
other personnel. The hospital network's state-of-the-art central site was
opened in Seoul in 2007; and now, according to Patients Beyond Borders,
Wooridul "manages ten hospitals throughout Korea and has expanded into
Indonesia (Jakarta), the UAE (Dubai and Abu Dhabi), Turkey (Istanbul) and
China (Shanghai)." Wooridul's advanced services cover computer-aided
navigation surgical treatments, biocompatible artificial joint surgery, and
bloodless 5th digital spinal operations - including 3D C-arm, O-arm, X-MR and
CT-guided procedures.

## 24. St. James' Institute of Oncology/Leeds Cancer Centre - West Yorkshire,

U.K.

![24. St. James's Institute of Oncology:Leeds Cancer Centre – West Yorkshire,

U.K](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/24.-St.-James' s-Institute-of-OncologyLeeds-Cancer-

Centre-%E2%80%93-West-Yorkshire-U.K.jpg)

Image Source

In August 2013 the Leeds Cancer Centre in West Yorkshire, England became the
foremost hospital in Britain - and the second worldwide - to commence offering
groundbreaking Elekta Versa HD radiotherapy treatment. The Leeds Cancer Center
is backed by the world-renowned St. James' University Hospital, which was
founded in 1925. The center operates in St. James' Institute of Oncology's
relatively new Bexley Wing, which was opened in December 2007. Since 2009 the
St. James' Institute of Oncology has also featured the pioneering Leeds Gamma
Knife Centre, which boasts the most technologically sophisticated Gamma Knife
in the world - the $4.93 million Leksell Perfexion. Opened in 2012, the St.
James' Institute of Oncology's radiology facility has apparently "been totally
transformed thanks to an £850,000 [$1.4 million] investment" and offers
integrated services and high-tech equipment.

## 23. Houston Methodist Hospital - Houston, Texas

![23. Houston Methodist Hospital – Houston,

Texas](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/23.-Houston-Methodist-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Houston-

Texas.jpg)

Image Source

Founded in 1919, Houston Methodist Hospital is the centerpiece of the Houston
Methodist Hospital System. Situated at the Texas Medical Center - the biggest
facility of its kind in the world - Houston Methodist Hospital is dedicated to
redefining traditional health care practices and regularly places on _U.S.
News & World Report_'s top hospitals in the U.S. lists. According to the
Houston Methodist System's website, its "surgeons perform hundreds of robotic
procedures each year, using robotic technology to treat heart disease,
prostate cancer, uterine tumors, uterine fibroids and other conditions." The
hospital boasts a quartet of sophisticated da Vinci Surgical Systems and
promises "the country's most advanced robotic operating rooms, providing
patients the least invasive, safest surgical treatment for complex conditions
like cardiovascular disease."

## 22. Hartford Hospital - Hartford, Connecticut

![22. Hartford Hospital – Hartford,

Connecticut](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/22.-Hartford-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Hartford-

Connecticut.jpg)

Image Source

Hartford Hospital in Connecticut boasts eight surgical robots, which are used
to carry out robotically assisted prostatectomies, heart surgery, and
urological and gynecological procedures. The hospital also engages robots to
assist with education and innovation as well as research. In October 2012 its
medical staff inserted a right ventricular Impella - described as a "mini
heart" - into a patient for the first time in U.S. history. Besides this, the
facility operates an O-arm surgical imaging system, which is used with
Medtronic StealthStation navigational devices to precisely produce "real-time,
intra-operative imaging of a patient's anatomy with high quality images and a
large field-of-view in both two and three dimensions." Two more high-tech
imaging gadgets at the hospital's disposal are the Sentinelle Breast MRI and
the LightSpeed VCT XTe 64 "slice" CT scanner.

## 21. Vale Hospital - Hensol, South Wales, U.K.

![21. Vale Hospital – Hensol, South Wales,

U.K.](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/21.-Vale-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Hensol-South-

Wales-U.K..jpg)

Image Source

Opened in June 2010, Vale Hospital in Hensol, South Wales is one of the most
technologically progressive hospitals in Britain. Jointly established by Vale
Healthcare and Nuffield Health, the state-of-the-art private facility features
a pair of ultramodern, custom-designed digital operating rooms. Here, high-
definition image resolution allows for a more straightforward and efficient
execution of difficult surgeries, and according to surgeon Tim Havard, it's
also "very helpful to have instant access to x-rays and other patient
informationa¦ displayed on big screens." These advanced operating theaters,
together with the hospital's two dozen private en-suite bedrooms, high
dependency unit, set of consulting rooms and diagnostic imaging services, make
Vale "the most modern private hospital in Wales," according to its official
website.

## 20. University of Pittsburgh Medical Center - Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

![20. University of Pittsburgh Medical Centre – Pittsburgh,

Pennsylvania](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/20.-University-of-Pittsburgh-Medical-

Centre-%E2%80%93-Pittsburgh-Pennsylvania.jpg)

Image Source

The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) comprises a large network
of hospitals and facilities collectively considered to be among America's
leading health care resources. Founded in 1893, the centerpiece of the
enterprise is UPMC Presbyterian, which is recognized for its organ
transplants, cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, neurosurgery, and stroke
care, among other areas of expertise. In 2012 doctors from the center inserted
two electrode grids into the left motor cortex of a patient paralyzed below
the neck, enabling her to control a high-tech robot arm. According to _The
Atlantic_ , "The goal is to create mind-controlled prosthetics to restore some
independence to the paralyzed." UPMC also co-manages the Center for Assistive
Technology. And in July 2013 it was named the aMost Wired' health network in
the U.S. for the fifteenth time in a row.

## 19. University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center - Houston, Texas

![19. University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center – Houston,

Texas](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/19.-University-of-Texas-MD-Anderson-Cancer-

Center-%E2%80%93-Houston-Texas.jpg)

Image Source

The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center is part of the Texas Medical
Center in Houston. It was instituted in 1941 and in 1971 became one of the
original triad of full-service cancer treatment facilities in the U.S. As well
as undertaking cancer research and treatment, the center is a teaching
hospital, offering advanced programs covering subjects such as cytogenetic
technology, histotechnology, cytotechnology, molecular genetic technology,
diagnostic imaging, radiation therapy and molecular genetic technology. In
2013 the school introduced a course in diagnostic genetics, which includes
infectious disease and cancer genetics testing, molecular evolution and
bioinformatics, and prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomics. And in January 2014
pioneering research carried out at the hospital suggested that tumor tissue
testing for data relating to cancer genetics could be supplanted by blood
testing.

## 18. Guy's and St. Thomas' - London, U.K.

![18. Guy's and St. Thomas' – London,

U.K.](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/18.-Guy' s-and-St.-Thomas'-%E2%80%93-London-U.K..jpg)

Image Source

The Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust includes Central London-based
hospitals Guy's and St. Thomas'. According to the trust's official website,
"Guy's and St. Thomas' has pioneered the use of robotic technology in the
U.K." These hospitals are particularly well known for their robot-aided
urological procedures. The trust first introduced da Vinci Surgical Systems in
2004; then in 2011 it updated to the most recent da Vinci "Si" Surgical
System, which has four robotic arms and a dual console - enabling two doctors
to operate simultaneously. In 2012, with the help of Microsoft Kinect for
Windows, Guy's and St. Thomas' became two of the first hospitals to trial
"touchless technology," allowing medical teams to use gestures and vocal
commands to study and manipulate images without ever having to touch them. The
aim of the technology is to minimize threats to the hospitals' sterile
surgical environments.

## 17. UCLA Health: Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center - Los Angeles,

California

![17. UCLA Health - Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center – Los Angeles,

California](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/17.-UCLA-Health-Ronald-Reagan-UCLA-Medical-

Center-%E2%80%93-Los-Angeles-California.jpg)

Image Source

Opened in June 2008, the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center cost more than a
billion dollars to build and equip. It is part of UCLA Health, which claims to
be home to some of the world's most technologically progressive hospitals.
UCLA Health's network offers advanced robotically assisted surgery, virtual
robotic telemedicine, prostate MRI scans, dual-source computed tomography
scanning, and PET/CT imaging. The operating theaters of the Ronald Reagan UCLA
Medical Center itself are filled with the most modern equipment available and
are designed to adapt to changing medical technology. What's more, they are
outfitted with breakthrough audio and video-conferencing resources, which
allow students and doctors to watch surgical procedures as they happen, from
anywhere in the world.

## 16. Mercy San Juan Medical Center - Carmichael, California

![Telemedicine Robots](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/16.-Mercy-San-Juan-Medical-

Center-%E2%80%93-Carmichael-California.jpg)

Image Source

Mercy San Juan Medical Center in Carmichael, California first opened in 1967;
more recently, in late 2009, it added a contemporary, six-floor patient tower
to its facilities. Mercy San Juan is part of non-profit operator Dignity
Health, which also runs Mercy General Hospital, Mercy Hospital of Folsom,
Methodist Hospital of Sacramento, and Sierra Nevada Memorial Hospital, among
others. Dignity Health promises "nationally recognized care and cutting-edge
technology in a wide range of medical services." In 2013 Mercy San Juan got
media tongues wagging when it introduced revolutionary "doctor on wheels" the
RP-VITA robot - which has also enhanced Mercy General Hospital Sacramento and
Mercy Hospital of Folsom's medical armories. Doctors control the robots
remotely using computers or mobile devices such as iPads and in this way can
interact with patients and even make use of instruments like stethoscopes.
This allows specialists to be available, at the touch of a button, from
wherever they happen to be.

## 15. Massachusetts General Hospital - Boston, Massachusetts

![15. Massachusetts General Hospital – Boston,

Massachusetts](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/15.-Massachusetts-General-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Boston-

Massachusetts.jpg)

Image Source

Now the main hospital of Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital is located in Boston. It was established in 1811 and today is
recognized around the world for its pioneering cancer treatment and diagnosis
services. Furthermore, with a yearly budget in excess of $750 million, it's
home to the most extensive hospital-based research setup on the planet. In May
2013 the hospital introduced a state-of-the-art connectome scanner, which
_Discover_ magazine described as "the world's most advanced brain scanner."
The high-tech device creates images that are up to eight times more
comprehensive than those of regular MRI scanners - and in a fraction of the
time. The hospital has also made advances in optical frequency domain imaging,
near-infrared fluorescence imaging, optical coherence tomography, and
sophisticated neurotechnology.

## 14. Ramkhamhaeng Hospital - Bangkok, Thailand

![14. Ramkhamhaeng Hospital – Bangkok,

Thailand](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/14.-Ramkhamhaeng-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Bangkok-

Thailand.jpg)

Image Source

Founded in February 1988, today Ramkhamhaeng Hospital continues to uphold
Bangkok's tradition of providing high-caliber private health care. "Patients
at Bangkok's Ramkhamhaeng Hospital are met by high technology from the moment
they first step inside, when they receive a aguide card' that contains their
data along with a barcode," wrote _The Nation_ journalist Jintana Panyaarvudh.
Medical personnel then scan these cards to ensure that patients' records, IDs,
files and medication needs match up. When doctors have made their diagnoses,
they enter the data electronically, with the prescription being transmitted to
the hospital's pharmaceutical department. For inpatients, Ramkhamhaeng
utilizes a drug-allocating robot, which likewise decreases the risk of human
error and speeds up the process. The hospital's advanced services include
digital mammography, 64-slice CT scanning and carotid ultrasound imaging.

## 13. Stanford Hospital & Clinics - Stanford, California

![13. Stanford Hospital & Clinics – Stanford,

California](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/13.-Stanford-Hospital-Clinics-%E2%80%93-Stanford-

California.jpg)

Image Source

Now a branch of the Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford Hospital &
Clinics was established in San Francisco in 1858, originally serving as the
University of the Pacific's medical department. After its relocation in 1959,
Stanford Hospital was the scene of the first successful adult heart transplant
in U.S. history - carried out in 1968. Then in 1981 humankind's first
successful heart-lung transplant was performed at the institution. In 2010 the
hospital introduced a pioneering all-in-one diagnosis-to-treatment space known
as the hybrid room, which includes "a stereoscopic biplane digital subtraction
angiography system." Stanford Hospital also features the renowned Stanford
Cancer Institute, which boasts state-of-the-art facilities. And in May 2013
work began on a new Stanford Hospital & Clinics building, which is scheduled
to open in 2018.

## 12. Cleveland Clinic - Cleveland, Ohio

![12. Cleveland Clinic – Cleveland,

Ohio](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/12.-Cleveland-Clinic-%E2%80%93-Cleveland-Ohio.jpg)

Established in the city that gives it its name in 1921, the Cleveland Clinic
is recognized as being among America's four best hospitals. It encompasses ten
Northeast Ohio facilities and is also affiliated with others in Florida and
Nevada. Furthermore, a new center in Abu Dhabi is slated to open in 2014. In
May 2013 Cleveland Clinic doctors teamed up with Sheikh Khalifa Medical City
personnel to perform the UAE's first cadaveric organ transplant. Closer to
home, Cleveland Clinic's Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute is one of
the top robot-assisted and laparoscopic prostate surgery facilities in the
U.S. Aside from this, the Cleveland Clinic offers robotic heart surgery. And
since 2000 the Cleveland Clinic Innovations team has been dedicated to helping
pioneer cutting-edge medical devices and inventions.

## 11. Wattanosoth Cancer Hospital - Bangkok, Thailand

![11. Wattanosoth Cancer Hospital – Bangkok,

Thailand](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/11.-Wattanosoth-Cancer-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Bangkok-

Thailand.jpg)

Image Source

The state-of-the-art Wattanosoth Cancer Hospital in Bangkok is part of the
extensive Bangkok Hospital Group. Offering technology together with
innovation, Wattanosoth is the first private Thai hospital dedicated
exclusively to cancer care. By 2001 it had caught the attention of medical
tourists through its non-invasive and affordable Gamma Knife radiosurgery
procedures. Wattanosoth also boasts Novalis radiosurgery, molecular-targeting
therapy, and CT, MRI and PET/CT scanning. "We are committed to improving the
quality of life of our patients and sharing our researches with fellow
scientists and professionals, students and the community at large," promises
the hospital. Wattanosoth adds that it uses "the latest technologies and
equipment available in the field" and that it is "amongst the top hospitals in
the region."

## 10. Asklepios Klinik Barmbek - Hamburg, Germany

![10. Asklepios Klinik Barmbek – Hamburg,

Germany](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/10.-Asklepios-Klinik-Barmbek-%E2%80%93-Hamburg-

Germany.jpg)

Image Source

Asklepios Klinik Barmbek in Hamburg is operated by Europe's biggest private
hospital network, Asklepios. The cutting-edge facility was completed in 2005
and specializes in dealing with complicated diseases. Areas of expertise cover
obstetrics and gynecology, internal medicine, urology, neurology, and general
and abdominal together with trauma and reconstructive surgery. Meanwhile, the
center's more advanced medical technology includes digital subtraction
angiography equipment, a shockwave lithotripter, a CT scanning device, a left
heart catheter-testing unit and MRI scanners. In 2013 a group of doctors at
the hospital made international headlines after they successfully removed
tumors from a patient's liver with the help of an iPad. The innovative tablet-
aided procedure was among the very first of its type in the country.

## 9. Gleneagles Medical Center - Tanglin, Singapore

![9. Gleneagles Medical Center – Tanglin,

Singapore](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/9.-Gleneagles-Medical-Center-%E2%80%93-Tanglin-

Singapore.jpg)

Image Source

According to Patients Beyond Borders, Gleneagles Hospital in Tanglin,
Singapore "is a leading center for the care and treatment of cardiac
patientsa¦ with strong technology resources for imaging and robotic surgery."
Gleneagles is among the most state-of-the-art hospitals in Southeast Asia and
is a pacesetter in spinal surgery, neurosurgery and other robot-assisted
surgical procedures. The hospital was founded in 1957, and in 1994 it
established the pioneering Asian Center for Liver Diseases and Transplantation
- the continent's first private facility wholly focused on the treatment of
every form of liver disease. Gleneagles also holds the distinction of being
Southeast Asia's foremost hospital to carry out a liver transplant from a
living donor. Operated by Asian health care giant Parkway Pantai, Gleneagles
earned a worldwide consensus honor from the Joint Commission International for
quality patient care.

## 8. Clemenceau Medical Center - Beirut, Lebanon

![8. Clemenceau Medical Center – Beirut,

Lebanon](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/8.-Clemenceau-Medical-Center-%E2%80%93-Beirut-

Lebanon.jpg)

Image Source

Completed in 2004, the Clemenceau Medical Center in Beirut has been recognized
as one of the top hospitals in the Middle East. Patients see the benefits of
progressive treatments and technology, explains the center's online statement,
adding that it "is fully equipped with the most modern and advanced medical
equipment." The Clemenceau is associated with the world-renowned Johns Hopkins
Hospital in Baltimore and is able to provide the latest in forward-thinking
health care. Its "Robotic team" offers high-tech, robotically assisted
laparoscopic surgery - a first of its kind in the country. Doctors use the
revolutionary da Vinci Surgical System to carry out procedures in urological,
gynecological, pediatric, cardiothoracic and general surgeries.

## 7. Mayo Clinic Cancer Center - Arizona, Florida, Minnesota

![7. The Mayo Clinic Cancer Center – Arizona, Florida,

Minnesota](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/7.-The-Mayo-Clinic-Cancer-Center-%E2%80%93-Arizona-

Florida-Minnesota.jpg)

Image Source

Founded in Rochester, Minnesota in 1889, the Mayo Clinic is the world's
biggest comprehensive not-for-profit health care network and is also among the
top medical group practices in the U.S. In November 2013 the clinic
collaborated with Northern Arizona University in an innovative approach to
treating players from the college's football team suffering from suspected
concussions. Through the use of a remotely controlled V-Go robot, the players
were to receive real-time assessments from an off-site Mayo Clinic
neurologist. The Mayo Clinic Cancer Center - which has sites in Arizona,
Florida and Minnesota - is acknowledged as one of the principal cancer
facilities worldwide, thanks to its "leading-edge research" and "unparalleled
cancer care." In 2010 its Arizona cancer treatment facility launched a
groundbreaking $182 million proton beam therapy program.

## 6. Bumrungrad International Hospital - Bangkok, Thailand

![6. Bumrungrad International Hospital – Bangkok,

Thailand](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/6.-Bumrungrad-International-

Hospital-%E2%80%93-Bangkok-Thailand.jpg)

Image Source

Bumrungrad International Hospital was established in 1980 in the center of
Bangkok. According to Patients Beyond Borders, it has been a beacon of
technology and innovation since its beginnings. It is presently Southeast
Asia's biggest private hospital and treats over a million patients annually
using state-of-the-art equipment. The hospital's advanced tech includes a
cutting-edge Swisslog Automated Drug Management System, described as "Asia's
first pharmacy robot;" a Siemens Biograph 64 PET/CT medical imaging scanner
that helps to identify cancers in their preliminary stages; image-guided
radiotherapy capabilities; and an R2 CAD ImageChecker used in digital
mammographies. Every year, people from all over the world travel to Bumrungrad
International for modern health care in a "five-star" environment.

## 5. Palomar Medical Center - Escondido, California

![5. Palomar Medical Center – Escondido,

California](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/5.-Palomar-Medical-Center-%E2%80%93-Escondido-

California.jpg)

Image Source

In 2012 Palomar Health opened Palomar Medical Center, a revolutionary new
facility in San Diego that _Bloomberg Businessweek_ dubbed the "billion dollar
hospital of the future." Michael Covert, the president and CEO of parent
company Palomar Health, calls the facility "a living lab." For starters,
eschewing a clipboard and stack of paperwork, registration involves looking
into a biometric registration camera for a matter of seconds. Other futuristic
touches include the world's first wireless vital signs device, a pioneering
new app that transmits patients' waveforms to doctors' special mobile devices,
virtual visit-enabling VGo robots, and groundbreaking UV robotic room
disinfectant machines. "They basically started with a whole clean sheet on how
to design a hospital," explained _Bloomberg Businessweek_ journalist Sam
Grobart.

## 4. Anadolu Medical Center - Kocaeli, Turkey

![4. Anadolu Medical Center – Kocaeli,

Turkey](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/4.-Anadolu-Medical-Center-%E2%80%93-Kocaeli-

Turkey.jpg)

Image Source

Opened in February 2005, the Anadolu Medical Center in Kocaeli, Turkey is
considered one of the world's leading hospitals. Affiliated with the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore, Anadolu is recognized internationally
for its ultramodern technology and top surgeons. It is among only a handful of
European hospitals able to offer pioneering CyberKnife treatment, which is
described as "the most advanced form of radiosurgery." The hospital also
provides TrueBeam radiation therapy, PET/CT medical imaging, telemedicine,
linear accelerator machines, and electronic medical records. According to
Patients Beyond Borders, "AMC prides itself on its marriage of cutting-edge
technology with a patient-friendly environment." Anadolu ranked seventh in
Medical Travel Quality Alliance's World's Best Hospitals for Medical Tourists
list in 2013.

## 3. Johns Hopkins Hospital - Baltimore, Maryland

![3. Johns Hopkins Hospital – Baltimore,

Maryland](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/3.-Johns-Hopkins-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Baltimore-

Maryland.jpg)

The Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore is internationally recognized as one
of the leading hospitals in the world, and it has consistently grabbed top
honors in _U.S. News & World Report_'s Best Hospitals list, across various
specialties. It was first established in 1889 and today is spread out over
around 20 of the Johns Hopkins Medical Campus' 60 buildings. In May 2012 the
hospital opened its new Charlotte R. Bloomberg Children's Center and Sheikh
Zayed Tower facilities, which together cost $1.1 billion dollars to complete.
Dr. Edward D. Miller, Johns Hopkins Medicine dean and CEO, described the
development as "a transformative milestone in the history of Johns Hopkins
Medicine." The hospital provides the most modern surgical technology
available, intra-operative MRI, leading-edge imaging and radiology
capabilities, an automated belowground supplies and waste transportation
setup, and a high-tech equipment- and staff-locating system.

## 2. Fortis Memorial Research Institute - Gurgaon, India

![2. Fortis Memorial Research Institute – Gurgaon,

India](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/2.-Fortis-Memorial-Research-

Institute-%E2%80%93-Gurgaon-India.jpg)

Image Source

With an impressive network of "super specialty hospitals" and a foothold in
three continents, India's Fortis Healthcare is one of the world's leading
hospital groups. Launched in April 2013 and billed as a "next generation
hospital," Fortis Memorial Research Institute in Gurgaon, India represents the
nucleus of the group. The newly opened institute possesses a "complete
spectrum of diagnostic and therapeutic technology, including several state-of
the-art technologies that are first in the world, first in Asia and first in
India," according to its website. Thanks to its 3 Tesla Digital MRI scanner,
Fortis Memorial Research Institute is the first hospital in the world to offer
digital broadband MRI imaging. It's also the first Indian hospital to contain
a stem cell lab. Plus, it has a pair of voice-modulated integrated operating
theaters, a 256-slice Brilliance iCT scanner, and a revolutionary "Brain
Suite" featuring intra-operative CT used for the brain and the spine.

## 1. El Camino Hospital - Mountain View, California

![XL Construction, Milpitas,

CA](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/1.-El-Camino-Hospital-%E2%80%93-Mountain-View-

California.jpg)

Image Source

Since opening in 1961, California's El Camino Hospital has valued the
importance of technological advancement. In 1971 it partnered with Silicon
Valley company Lockheed to launch the original computerized medical
information system. El Camino Hospital's cutting-edge facility in Mountain
View opened to the public in November 2009. Explaining its geographical
advantage, urologist Dr. Sari Levine said, "Not only did we get a robot to do
a lot of the procedures, we get the _newest_ version because the company's
down the street." The hospital's high-tech equipment includes advanced robotic
radiosurgery device the CyberKnife. "Literally all the procedures that you can
imagine that could help patients in radiation therapy are available here under
this roof," said medical director of the radiation oncology department Dr.
Robert Sinha.

    
        * <- Where are the Women in Healthcare?
    * A Career up Close: Navy Healthcare Administrator ->
    

Find A DegreeSelect a Degree LevelSelect a
DegreeAssociate'sBachelor'sMaster'sDoctorateNon-Degree CoursesCertificate /
DiplomaGraduate CertificatesSelect a CategorySelect a CategoryArt &
DesignBusiness & ManagementComputers & TechnologyCriminal Justice &
LegalEducation & TeachingLiberal Arts & HumanitiesNursing &
HealthcarePsychology & CounselingScience & EngineeringTrades & CareersSelect a
SubjectSelect a SubjectAnimationArt & Art HistoryCreative /
DesignFashionFilmGame DesignGraphic DesignInterior DesignLandscape
ArchitectureMultimedia DesignPhotographyVisual CommunicationsWeb
DesignAccountingBusiness AdministrationBusiness
IntelligenceEconomicsEntertainment ManagementEntrepreneurshipFinanceForensic
AccountingHospitality ManagementHotel & Restaurant ManagementHuman
ResourcesInternational BusinessInternet MarketingLogisticsManagementManagement
Information SystemsMarketingNon-Profit ManagementOrganizational
LeadershipProject ManagementPublic RelationsReal EstateRetail & Sales
ManagementRisk ManagementSmall BusinessSports ManagementSupply Chain &
LogisticsTaxationTraining & DevelopmentComputer EngineeringComputer
ForensicsComputer ProgrammingComputer ScienceDatabase ManagementInformation
Systems SecurityInformation TechnologyInternet SecurityMobile
DevelopmentNetwork AdministrationNetwork SecuritySoftware EngineeringWeb
DevelopmentCorrectionsCrime Scene InvestigationCriminal
JusticeCriminologyCyber SecurityForensic ScienceHomeland SecurityLaw
EnforcementLegal StudiesParalegalPublic Safety AdministrationAdult
Education/LearningChild DevelopmentCoachingCurriculum & InstructionEarly
Childhood EducationEducationEducational AdministrationEducational
CounselingEducational LeadershipEducational TechnologyElementary
EducationEnglish Language LearningHigher EducationK-12 EducationLibrary
ScienceMath EducationMusic EducationOnline TeachingReading & LiteracySpecial
EducationTeacher LicensureAnthropologyCommunicationsEnglishGeneral
StudiesGeographyHistoryHuman & Family DevelopmentJournalismLiberal ArtsMedia
CommunicationsMinistryMusicPolitical SciencePublic AdministrationPublic
PolicySocial ScienceSocial WorkSociologyTheologyWritingDental
AssistanceEmergency ManagementGerontologyHealth EducationHealth
InformaticsHealth ScienceHealth ServicesHealthcare AdministrationHealthcare
ManagementHuman ServicesMedical AssistingMedical CodingMedical Office
AdministrationNurse Practitioner (RN Required)Nursing (RN required)Nursing
Education (RN Required)Nutritional SciencesPharmacyPublic HealthRN to BSN (RN
required)Sports MedicineSports Medicine/Physical TherapyVeterinaryX-Ray
TechnicianAddictions & RecoveryBehavioral PsychologyChild and Adolescent
PsychologyCounselingEducational PsychologyFamily CounselingForensic
PsychologyOrganizational PsychologyPsychologyAeronautics/AviationBiomedical
EngineeringCivil EngineeringDraftingElectronics
EngineeringEngineeringEngineering ManagementEnvironmental
ManagementEnvironmental ScienceIndustrial EngineeringMechanical
EngineeringAutomotiveCarpentryConstruction ManagementCulinaryElectrical
TechnicianFire ScienceHeating/CoolingTechnologyTrades

Search Now!Sponsored Schools

### Top Program Rankings

    
        * The Top 10 Best Online Master's in Healthcare Administration Programs (MHA)
    * Top 20 Online MBA in Healthcare Management
    * Top 10 Online Master's in Health Services Administration
    * Top 10 Online Master's in Health Sciences
    * Top 15 Online Ph.D./DHA in Healthcare Administration
    * Top 10 One-Year Online MHA Programs
    * Top 20 Best Online MPH Degree Programs
    * 50 Best Graduate Nursing Schools in America
    * 50 Most Affordable MPH Online Programs
    * 50 Most Affordable Selective Colleges for Healthcare Management
    * Top 10 Best Online MPH Programs
    * Top 20 Affordable Master's Degrees in Healthcare Administration
    * Top 20 Affordable Online Master's Degree in Healthcare Administration Programs
    * 30 Great European Universities for Studying Healthcare Abroad
    * The Top 10 Best Master's Programs in Health Care Administration
    

### Infographics

    
        * How Monsanto Took Control of Our Food
    * Doctor Feel-Bad: Why Are So Many Doctors Miserable?
    * Children of the Corn
    * How to Eat For Good Health on Less
    * How Much Poison is in Your Food?
    * Mind, Body & Jazz: How Jazz Can Improve Your Health
    * 5 Utterly Disgusting Medical Jobs
    * Is History Repeating Itself with Obamacare?
    * America's Battle With Obesity
    * Over Prescribed America
    * Heathcare Jobs Are Booming
    * A Picture of Health in the United States
    * Hospital Room of the Future
    

![masters in healthcare

management](https://topmastersinhealthcare.azureedge.net/wp-

content/uploads/2011/12/masters-in-healthcare-management.jpg)

### Recent Posts

    
        * Stress: the Silent Killer
    * Swipe Right For Your Health: Reducing Hospital Related Infections With Wearable Tech
    * Pay Versus Pain: How the Affordable Care Act Affects Hospital Funding
    * A Loophole Could be Obamacare’s Biggest Enemy
    * To Pay Or Not To Pay?
    

### Site Information

    
        * About Top Master's in Healthcare Administration
    * Contact Us
    * Sitemap
    

Copyright © 2019 Top Master's in Healthcare Administration

    
        * Advertising Disclosure
    * Advertise With Us
    * Privacy Policy
    

__

![Performancing Metrics](//pmetrics.performancing.com/16475ns.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

