

Toggle navigation ![Truelife](/assets/logo-

org-1468ac3f92e70ffdf1c9ace7faf230894e87fa631c2d17ea8c4e74cf877cc9ab.png)

        
                  * Answers
          * Join The Cause
          * About
          * Find a Church
        
          * TRUELIFE.ORG
          * Abortion
        

# Does having an abortion take an innocent human life?

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/truelife1/banners/112/answerbanners/full.jpg?1475985187)

##

Abortion is by far one of the most controversial topics in our society.
Needless to say, there are people on both ends of the spectrum and all in
between when it comes to the question of whether or not abortion constitutes
murder. Since the discussion centers on such an important issue (the issue of
murder), it is incredibly important to give careful thought and consideration
to this all-important question.

First, it is necessary to define the term taking innocent human life. What can
make this issue difficult and confusing is that society accepts various
definitions of the word murder. Mirriam-Webster’s Dictionary defines murder as
“The unlawful killing of another human being with malice aforethought.” In
addition, most legal definitions of the word are similar in nature with
varying degrees which are subdivided into first and second degree murder. This
is where some confusion arises.

It should be noted that under a legal definition of murder, legal abortion
would not fit the requirements. In other words, under the law of man
instituted by civil government, abortion is not unlawful and would not be
defined as murder. However, it should also be noted that the death of an
unborn child can be legally counted as murder if there is premeditation,
malice involved and done without legal authority (see the Unborn Victims Child
Act of 2004- 18 U.S. Code § 1841 - Protection of unborn children).

It is clear that legal definitions change with current law enactments. In
1973, abortion became legal (with some regulating factors) in all of the U.S.
with the passing of the Supreme Court decision of Roe v. Wade (and its
companion case of Doe v. Bolton). Before this time, abortion (with some
limited circumstances) was legally considered a crime in many states. Also,
many states even considered abortion illegal under common law rules. Because
of this, a strict legal definition is not universal, timeless, or absolute. A
problem arises when these legal definitions change the undeniable and accepted
principles of “morality.” For example, at one time, slavery was legal in the
U.S. That does not mean that it was morally okay, or that it should have been
legal. However, at one time in the U.S., black people were considered by many
to just be property, and without the same rights as non-blacks. But does this
mean that the very nature of slaves actually changed depending on the legal
determination? Of course not!

It should be clear, then, that there is a far greater and more accurate
definition of murder. This definition transcends the law of man, and is
determined by the law of nature, nature’s true God, and His Word. Throughout
all history, virtually every civilization understood that there was a
universal moral law that all reasonable people intuitively understood. Acts
such as lying, stealing, and murder are written on the hearts of men. They are
irrefutable, universal, and absolute evils. But how do we know these things
are wrong? If there is an undeniable moral law, there must be a moral law
giver, one who must set the standard. Who could this be, if not God?

**  
**

Not surprisingly, the Holy Bible declares this very same truth. Romans 2:12-15
explains how all human beings have this moral compass imbedded in their
conscious minds. It is the Almighty God of the universe that has placed it
there.

**  
**

Before humans ever wrote down civil law, God determined what defines murder.
Based on Scripture, a proper definition would be the willful unjustified
killing of an innocent human being. From the very beginning, God called it
murder when Jesus described Satan as a “murderer from the beginning” (John
8:44). Later, God instructed Moses to write down this law of the heart very
plainly when He commanded, “You shall not murder” (Exodus 20:13). In light of
this, it is clear that from God’s perspective murder has existed from the
beginning of creation and is a universal moral wrong that applies to all
people, in all cultures, and in every age in human history.

**  
**

It could be argued that the term murder is still a legal term in a biblical
sense and perhaps in some sense, it is. In other words, God as the supreme
law-giver has said, from the beginning that murder was a violation of His law
even before it was written down in the Law of Moses.

**  
**

Of course, it must be noted that not all killing is murder. This is true both
in human civil law, and the law of God. In the Bible, God both commanded and
allowed killing in areas such as war (Genesis 10-12; Deuteronomy 2:33-34), and
the death penalty in civil and moral law (Genesis 9:5-6). Killing is a broader
term than murder.

**  
**

Now that we have a clear definition of murder, it is equally important to
define the term abortion. Once again, confusion arises because there are
various acceptable definitions. A simple dictionary definition (Mirriam-
Webster) would be “a medical procedure used to end the pregnancy and cause the
death of the fetus.” However, other nuances of the term would include both
induced and spontaneous expulsion (miscarriage) of the fetus. However, it is
very obvious that a miscarriage and an abortion are two very separate and
opposite terms. Though in both cases, a fetus dies, one is voluntary and the
other is not. This makes all the difference in the world. If a woman has a
miscarriage, neither she, nor anyone else has done anything intentionally to
end the life of her child. On the other hand, the medical procedure of
abortion to end the life of a child is deliberate (on purpose).

**  
**

Is the fetus a human being? This is also an important part of the discussion,
since the fetus would have to be human if killing it were to be considered
murder. Biologically, it is clear that it is. If the unborn is growing, it
must be alive. From conception, when sperm and egg unite, the embryo grows
through cellular reproduction. If the unborn has human parents, it must be
human. Human beings reproduce after their own kind. The fetus is not part of a
human, but is, in fact, a complete human organism, different than the mother
and father. In addition, God has clearly called the unborn human beings, and
has stated that life begins at conception. Psalm 139:13-16 states that the
unborn are created by Him in the womb and Psalm 51:5 describes the unborn
having a sin nature, and being alive at the moment of conception.

**  
**

So, is abortion murder? The answer is certainly yes. Abortion is the willful
and unjustified killing of an unborn child. Regardless if abortion is legal by
human government, it is a violation of the universal moral law of God, which
supersedes man’s law. It should go without saying, in any regard, abortion is
morally wrong, and a sin according to Almighty God.

**

**

RECOMMENDED RESOURCES

**  
**

--- ONLINE RESOURCES ---

Southern Baptist Seminary Blog – The Witness of Scripture: Abortion is Murder.
(http://www.sbts.edu/blogs/2016/01/22/the-witness-of-scripture-abortion-is-
murder/)

Got Questions – Is Abortion Murder? (http://www.gotquestions.org/is-abortion-
murder.html)

CARM – Is Abortion Wrong? (https://carm.org/abortion-wrong)

**  
**

--- PRINT RESOURCES ---

Francis Beckwith – Defending Life (http://amzn.com/0521691354)

J. Budziszewski – Written On the Heart (http://amzn.com/B002R0JXJU)

Scott Klusendorf – The Case For Life (http://amzn.com/B00294YEJI)

### Related content

        
                  * ![Is Abortion a Good Option?](https://s3.amazonaws.com/truelife1/icons/4/answerthumbnails/full.jpg?1466429653)
        

Is Abortion a Good Option?

        
                  * ![When does human life begin?](https://s3.amazonaws.com/truelife1/icons/119/answerthumbnails/full.jpg?1549301326)
        

When does human life begin?

#### Still have questions?

If you don’t see your question listed, feel free to submit it to our experts
or live chat with a real person.

![Submit

Question](/assets/question_icon-3fd995c8a1dc730f57f6e2fbd3cf6cff0fed52ed0e6442123649feeb0b6fa40e.png)

#### Submit a question

If you don’t see your question listed, let usknow and we may answer it on our
site.

![Live chat](/assets/chat-

icon-b145d64b496dc5d94669ae6c1c874140f9e2e65f4f23d7f8c4beb9947cb5f9f1.png)

#### Live chat with us

Questions about life and God click here, Pastors & Customer Support here.

#### Churches Near

Each church on our system has partnered with TrueLife.org and are ready to be
a part of your life.

![Church Map](/assets/footer-

map-83845d3992ba3fd4f0b2bcb8e8790bf480b73cabcf30c785b23fb110eafa8b30.png)

Enter your zip code

VIEW MORE

#### Resources for Pastors

Our proven strategy sees 80% of church members invite after one Sunday. You
have to see it to believe it! Click any of the links below.

        
                  * 70% invite after one Sunday
          * Study Guides and Leader Guides
          * TrueLife.org Church Invitation Cards
          * Video player for your website
          * Custom Church Profile
        

VIEW ALL RESOURCES

#### About TrueLife

TrueLife.org has filmed and compiled content that delivers thorough answers
from a biblically conservative Christian point of view. We have partnered with
nearly 2,000 churches to share Christ’s deep and unfailing love with our
veiwers.

learn More

(C) 2006-2019 True Life Inc. All rights reserved. | Terms & Conditions |
Privacy Policy | Login | Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

