

Menu

![Yes, I Am Cheap](https://yesiamcheap.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/2015/12/YIAC.png)

    
        * About Me
    * Blog
    * Free eBook
    * Classes
    * Subscribe
    * Press and Media
      * Ads
    * Contact
    

# Cost of Living in the 1950’s as Compared to Today in 2013

Posted on August 25, 2011March 19, 2016 by Sandy Smith

This post may contain affiliate links which may compensate us based on your
interaction. Please read the disclosures for more information.

The 1950s were a time of great prosperity and economic growth in the United
States. Today, looking at the decade objectively, we realize it wasn’t quite
the post-war utopia portrayed in the media of the day or the nostalgic
recreations since. Nonetheless, many look back fondly on what they view as a
simpler time. One thing a lot of folks envy from that time is the cost of
living. Everything in 2011 seems so much more expensive. Of course, no one in
today's world expects to pay 18 cents for a gallon of gas, $25 for a man’s
suit, or $1,500 for a brand new car[1]. Still, paychecks just don’t seem to go
as far now as they did then. Or do they?

### **Many Factors to Consider**

When you compare the cost of living in the 1950s with today's cost of living,
you have to consider a variety of factors. For example, some things are
actually cheaper to produce now than they were in the 1950s. Of course, most
of today's goods and services come with higher price tag, but people also get
paid proportionately more.

### **Household Income Then and Now**

In 1955, the median household income in the U.S. was around $5,000[2]. That
means half of all households earned more than $5,000, while half brought in
less. Adjusted for inflation, that translates to around $25,000 today.
However, today's median household income is just over $40,000. We’re not
really making that much more money though. That $15,000 difference can be
attributed, in large part, to the increase in the number of two-income
households since the middle of the twentieth century [3]. The big difference
between expenses then and now is the amount of stuff we buy. We also tend to
live in much bigger houses.

### **Average Home Size 1950 vs. Today**

The average size of a new house in 1950 was 983 square feet. In 2004 it stood
at 2,349 square feet [4]. At the same time, family size went from about 3.5
persons per household, to around 2.5 today [5]. A bigger house incurs more
costs, even with fewer people living there.

### **Consumerism**

We also buy more things to put into our homes today. Comedian George Carlin
once described houses as “a place to keep your stuff while you go out and get
more stuff.” TVs, computers, mobile devices, game systems, microwave ovens,
and gadgets of all sorts fill a typical 21st century dwelling. In the 1950s, a
family had a television, a few radios perhaps, and the most basic of household
appliances and furniture. Today, many houses-certainly most new ones- have
central air conditioning. This was unheard of in the 1950s, even in warmer
climates.

There were fewer cars as well. By the end of the 1950s, less than 3% of
households owned three or more vehicles. In 2009, it was almost 20% [6]. More
cars mean more car-related expenditures-from routine maintenance and fuel to
major repairs and insurance premiums.

### **A Dollar Then, a Dollar Now**

So, we’re buying a lot more stuff with roughly the same amount of money,
meaning consumption is taking up a bigger portion of household budgets. But do
the items we purchase cost more today? The Bureau of Labor Statistics website
has a fun little online gadget that allows you to convert dollar amounts from
one year into those of another. For example, a loaf of bread in 1955 cost
around 18 cents, which converts to about $1.50 today. Depending on the brand
of bread you buy, that sounds about right. A new car in 1955 was about $1,500.
Today, that same car will cost you $12,000. That may get you a pretty basic
car, but remember that the 2011 model is much safer, gets better mileage, and
has a lot more features.

### **TV Time**

Of course, some items have come down in price; televisions for instance. In
1955, a new TV would set you back $250.00. That’s $2,100 now. For that kind of
money, you could now buy a top-of-the-line TV. Even with $250 in today’s
money, you could purchase a far nicer set than the one your grandparents used
to watch _I Love Lucy_ and Milton Berle. Then again, we’re buying a lot more
of them. In fact, while the average household is 2.5 persons, it has 2.86
televisions [7]. Also, in the 1950s, programming was free. Today, most people
have cable, or satellite, a monthly expenditure that easily runs over $50 a
month. Add that to household expenses that people in mid-century America never
dealt with, like Internet and mobile phone service.

### **Living Large**

If you were to live like someone in the 1950s, you could live fairly
comfortably. Indeed, by mid-twentieth century standards you'd be well-off,
even with a modest income. However, living in a small house with one
television, no cable or satellite service, one car, no air conditioning, and
so on is seen as a low standard of living in 2011. You could certainly cut
back some. Do you really need three high-definition TVs or a 3,000-square-foot
house? You likely need computer and DSL internet services, because that’s
simply the way the world is now. Mobile phones are more of a necessity now as
well. Have you looked for a pay phone lately?

Perhaps we need to assess what we really want from our standard of living, and
adjust our expenditures accordingly. On average we are living better now than
at any point in history, but the key to happiness may be in finding ways to
make it more affordable.

[1] “Cost of living 1950,” ThePeoplesHitstory.com. Web. 07 July 2011
http://www.thepeoplehistory.com/1950.html#cost_of_living

[2] Median Household Income, Stanford University, 23 October 2002. Web. 30
July 2011  
http://www.stanford.edu/class/polisci120a/immigration/Median%20Household%20Income.pdf

[3] Aldrich, Howard E., Cliff, Jennifer E., “The pervasive effects of family
on entrepreneurship:  
toward a family embeddedness perspective.” Journal of Business Venturing 18.
Web. 30 July 2011  
http://faculty.utep.edu/Portals/167/01%20The%20Pervasive%20effects%20of%20family%20on%20entre%20toward%20a%20family%20embeddedness%20perspective.pdf

[4] Adler, Margot. “Behind the Ever-Expanding American Dream House.” National
Public Radio, NPR.org, 4 July 2006. Web. 29 July 2011
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5525283

[5] El Nasser, Haya, “Increase in household size could slow economic
recovery.” USA Today. 7 May 2010. Web. 30 July 2011
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2010-05-06-household_N.htm

[6] Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Center for Transportation Analysis.
Transportation Energy Book 30. Web. 30 July 2011
http://cta.ornl.gov/data/tedb30/Edition30_Chapter08.pdf

[7] More than Half the Homes in U.S. Have Three or More TVs, Nielsen Wire, 20
July 2009. Web. 30 July 2011  
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/media_entertainment/more-than-half-the-
homes-in-us-have-three-or-more-tvs/

About The Author

Check N Go is the fourth largest consumer financial service institution
offering installment loans and online payday loans in the United States. As a
founding member of the Consumer Financial Services Association (CFSA), Check N
Go has always been committed to responsible lending and works with legislators
to improve the credibility of the cash advance industry. Check N Go has check
cashing and payday loan locations in 28 states, with online locations in an
additional 3.

### Join the newsletter

Subscribe to get our latest content by email.

Success! Now check your email to confirm your subscription.

There was an error submitting your subscription. Please try again.

Email Address

Subscribe We won't send you spam. Unsubscribe at any time. Powered by
ConvertKit

![Related Posts Plugin for WordPress,

Blogger...](http://www.linkwithin.com/pixel.png)![Related Posts Plugin for

WordPress, Blogger...](http://www.linkwithin.com/pixel.png)

### _Related_

This entry was posted in Learn Something. Bookmark the permalink.

# Post navigation

<- Video: How Not to Blow Your Budget And Still Be Stylish

I Make Money Online: Virtual Assistant ->

## 46 thoughts on "Cost of Living in the 1950’s as Compared to Today in 2013"

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/180493b94bcc8af7d8efbc0762d07e98?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/180493b94bcc8af7d8efbc0762d07e98?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **harry** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 9:53 am

I guest people in the 1950s had lower taxes

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 8:57 pm

The marginal tax rate in say 1952 was 24.6% for those making the average $5K
annual salary. At 25% it's comparable to those making the $45K average salary
today. I'm getting this information from the historical tax data
http://www.taxfoundation.org/publications/show/151.html

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e9f2b83dd5eeb2088e05974a19e2d7dc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e9f2b83dd5eeb2088e05974a19e2d7dc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Tristan** says:
    

September 28, 2016 at 9:49 am

Actually the opposite, the 1950's had one of the highest tax rates in our
history, especially among the top earners, with rates as high as 91%
(http://federal-tax-rates.insidegov.com/l/40/1955).

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff4ce3558376316572e90c70064e0201?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff4ce3558376316572e90c70064e0201?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Money Beagle** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 10:32 am

You'd have to look at other factors like what the tax rates were back then.
Also, I doubt that anybody was paying health care premiums or co-pays or
anything like that, and look what the cost of that stuff is today. Also, most
households probably had one person that was working and had a pension to look
forward to in retirement, so 401(k) savings and such were not anything anybody
was worried about. Those three things alone probably made it a completely
different financial world than you have today.

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6b9ef673a6c507b65747d81eb03c176e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6b9ef673a6c507b65747d81eb03c176e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Laurence** says:
    

November 27, 2012 at 9:50 pm

Live was indeed much different in the 1950 for most of us. Nearly everyone who
had a car only had one. Indoor plumbing was common in the cities and towns but
not so much 20 or 30 miles out of town. Food was much cheaper but most canned
thier food too so not everyone bought everything from the grocer. Speaking of
grocers,in small towns there was no large chain stores like we see today.

Home were much smaller than we see today, even by "middle class" standards.
One would rarely see anything much larger than around 1,000 sq ft and many
were smaller. We had one telephone, one television, - it was black and white
in those days and there were only three channels. Most of us dried our cloths
on a "cloths line'.  
We rarely ever ate out and vacations were at a relatives house, but only for
the day.

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73970b125d28153935c283c8b15d5058?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73970b125d28153935c283c8b15d5058?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Shoehorn Bob** says:
    

December 2, 2013 at 12:44 am

The healthcare costs may have been lower, but if you hurt you knee, you didn't
get an MRI. If you got cancer, your treatment options were limited. With many
ailments, you simply suffered and or died -- no hip replacements, no
artificial hearts, etc.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e5b6a38aab8f126cd5154a7608eb6b53?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e5b6a38aab8f126cd5154a7608eb6b53?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **ShoeGal** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 11:33 am

This is a great article to put things in perspective. I have heard people
complain that life was easier back then and I happen to agree. I think at that
time being frugal was more of a social norm than it is now.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fdfc1869c9b55af2cfb56b1eda9884fd?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fdfc1869c9b55af2cfb56b1eda9884fd?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Darla** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 12:09 pm

I think the term I’ve heard most about life back then is that it was simpler.
Not easy, not cheap…just much simpler. I believe some of the hardships we
suffer today are self-created. The insatiable appetites for ‘stuff’. The
constant desire to replace something we didn’t have as a child – which, by the
way, has become an old, used up cliché. You didn’t have it – nothing you buy
now will change that, so enjoy what you have and move on.

But as ShoeGal says, what a great way to get things in perspective. Good
article!

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 25, 2011 at 8:58 pm

The need to have more "things" is what drives us into debt. For people going
back to what they are calling "micro" homes and frugality, it's really just a
return to the way that our parents and grandparents lived.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cba60d02d5b004595be203ea4590590f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cba60d02d5b004595be203ea4590590f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Hunter @ Financially Consumed** says:
    

August 26, 2011 at 6:55 am

Fascinating perspective. It's interesting comparing the cost of goods over
time. In many categories it is clear that producers have done an amazing job
at keeping their costs well below inflation through more efficient uses of
technology. Bicycles are an example of this. Although, there is a greater
range of choice today, and if you want the very best, you will certanly pay
for it.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73db907890f4da01b38b9149fbee1a41?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73db907890f4da01b38b9149fbee1a41?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Harri @ TotallyMoney** says:
    

August 26, 2011 at 11:02 am

Very interesting article. Since the 50s we've grown rather accustomed to
relative prosperity. As such the market for 'stuff' has grown and grown. I'd
add that as consumers we have more choice now than people in the 50s could
have possibly envisaged (in large part thanks to the internet), which is both
a blessing in so much as we can make price conscious decisions and a nightmare
in so much as we're more exposed to products that we feel we need to
incorporate into our loves.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ceb9ed7889cfe2cfafab8a8708574658?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ceb9ed7889cfe2cfafab8a8708574658?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Jenna, Adaptu Community Manager** says:
    

August 26, 2011 at 1:47 pm

I can't believe how big houses have gotten over the years even as family sizes
has getting smaller. I've been looking at some nice 1920's houses to buy and
they've got a ton more storage compared to the newer homes.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/50f55c00ebde4ed39bfae7fb6e581047?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/50f55c00ebde4ed39bfae7fb6e581047?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Ginger** says:
    

August 26, 2011 at 2:58 pm

I own a house build in 1950 and it is very different compared to current day
houses. It has more kitchen storage yet smaller closets. I think cost of
living has not gone up much past inflation, we just expect more. We have
internet, tv, and multiple cars when we do not really need them.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b3f4e3957c68d94a9914e64037efeb57?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b3f4e3957c68d94a9914e64037efeb57?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Scott Ed** says:
    

August 27, 2011 at 10:30 am

Simply inflating dollars does not tell the whole story. Several years ago, the
Wall Street Journal did a comparison similar to the one in this article.
However, it used a more apples-to-apples comparison technique. It calculated
the amount of time it took at the median income to earn the median price of
certain items. The upshot was that over time and at the median income of the
year under study, the amount of time it takes to earn the amount equal to the
median prices of various products has increased, in most cases considerably.
Big ticket items (houses, cars) had increased more in terms of time than lower
price items.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fc6fe730a2f21d3a8008bdac584fd3e7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fc6fe730a2f21d3a8008bdac584fd3e7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Emily** says:
    

August 27, 2011 at 2:13 pm

Those are great insights that we often (probably usually) overlook when
thinking back to the "good ol' days." 'Course, I was born in 1970, so the 50's
are out of my world, but the same analysis mostly holds true.

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 27, 2011 at 4:25 pm

I always use bread and milk as my benchmarks. How much was a loaf of bread say
10 years ago versus now? Or even just a candy bar?!

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2a3440f243a7d74cc27daa2cf341fce5?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2a3440f243a7d74cc27daa2cf341fce5?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Barb Friedberg** says:
    

August 27, 2011 at 9:21 pm

I am fascinated by articles which compare historical costs with today.
Inflation is usually a factor, and taken into consideration, some items are
actually cheaper today.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c7aa22e7ceb32d1305021bfc8b6eb019?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c7aa22e7ceb32d1305021bfc8b6eb019?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **First Gen American** says:
    

August 28, 2011 at 3:35 pm

In addition to the smaller homes, etc, I think people generally paid less in
interest for their purchases. I think credit was much harder to get back then
and most people paid cash for their items. If you think about paying 20%
interest on your credit card purchases, that's a whole lot more cash the
average consumer is dishing out.

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 28, 2011 at 6:31 pm

Never thought about that. People actually spend MORE for things now if you
factor in how much we are spending on credit with the interest tacked on.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 28, 2011 at 6:31 pm

Never thought about that. People actually spend MORE for things now if you
factor in how much we are spending on credit with the interest tacked on.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fbdab0f9609aa1f5982cc85b83e41aea?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fbdab0f9609aa1f5982cc85b83e41aea?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Invest It Wisely** says:
    

August 28, 2011 at 7:36 pm

Interesting post, Sandy. I wonder how the effects of inflation would be
different if, well, we had not inflated the currency to the same degree. That
means a lot of wealth would not have been siphoned off to various
misadventures where the wealth was destroyed.

Also good point on how living standards still improved in spite of that. I
remember even as a poor student I was able to live pretty decently on just
part-time work!

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fbdab0f9609aa1f5982cc85b83e41aea?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fbdab0f9609aa1f5982cc85b83e41aea?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Invest It Wisely** says:
    

August 28, 2011 at 7:36 pm

Interesting post, Sandy. I wonder how the effects of inflation would be
different if, well, we had not inflated the currency to the same degree. That
means a lot of wealth would not have been siphoned off to various
misadventures where the wealth was destroyed.

Also good point on how living standards still improved in spite of that. I
remember even as a poor student I was able to live pretty decently on just
part-time work!

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6e9a2a6778b9ecf21650730b87f3c79f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6e9a2a6778b9ecf21650730b87f3c79f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **earth costs** says:
    

August 31, 2011 at 2:08 pm

The cost of living comparatively is so hard to tell, there are so many factors
that add up within an individuals life that cost of living becomes more of an
idea than a tangible number to work with. There is one value I can say has
raised the cost of living for an individual in the present times as opposed to
the 1950's. Medicare and medication. What were the cost of medication in the
50's and how many pills did the average citizen take. I know a few friends
that spend the majority of their money on prescription drugs, sometimes buying
10 different medications at a time… These are middle aged people, what about
the elderly?

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 31, 2011 at 10:33 pm

The thing is that we are living longer than the life expectancy in the 1950's.
Some of it is probably due to all of those medications. I'm not surprised that
people are paying more both because of price increases and because people are
just simply taking more health maintenance prescriptions.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6e9a2a6778b9ecf21650730b87f3c79f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6e9a2a6778b9ecf21650730b87f3c79f?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **earth costs** says:
    

August 31, 2011 at 2:08 pm

The cost of living comparatively is so hard to tell, there are so many factors
that add up within an individuals life that cost of living becomes more of an
idea than a tangible number to work with. There is one value I can say has
raised the cost of living for an individual in the present times as opposed to
the 1950's. Medicare and medication. What were the cost of medication in the
50's and how many pills did the average citizen take. I know a few friends
that spend the majority of their money on prescription drugs, sometimes buying
10 different medications at a time… These are middle aged people, what about
the elderly?

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy** says:
    

August 31, 2011 at 10:33 pm

The thing is that we are living longer than the life expectancy in the 1950's.
Some of it is probably due to all of those medications. I'm not surprised that
people are paying more both because of price increases and because people are
just simply taking more health maintenance prescriptions.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a2e21f4e777b3494e8a912afc48b9bc7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a2e21f4e777b3494e8a912afc48b9bc7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **sophie** says:
    

September 2, 2011 at 7:19 pm

Very interesting comparison between now and what my grandparents had.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a2e21f4e777b3494e8a912afc48b9bc7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a2e21f4e777b3494e8a912afc48b9bc7?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **sophie** says:
    

September 2, 2011 at 7:19 pm

Very interesting comparison between now and what my grandparents had.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ae5f67fb5c25d4304df3cd95500dfcfc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ae5f67fb5c25d4304df3cd95500dfcfc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Applewine** says:
    

October 28, 2011 at 11:55 am

    1. Only one parent worked back then. So comparing "family income" then and now you would have to divide todays inflation corrected income in half to account for only one adult working. That makes a huge difference. Also, if you don't have a mother to take care of the kids you risk lowering their future earning potential as well. A dedicated parent to raising kids can provide great support in academic education and psychological and philosophical preperation for life.

    2. You can't just look at the tax rate. You have to look at what dollar amount they actually paid. I've watched a video on this that showed a top earner paying an effective 10% tax. There were also many deductions at different times which make the percentage alone misleading. You have to look at what they actually paid.

    3. You have to take into account inflation as a tax going forward as well. The inflation seems to be accelerating. Inflation is the amount of government currency creation which is tied to government spending. This is drastically larger today than in the 1950's. So, what you save you in your bank account today won't be worth much in 20 years.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ae5f67fb5c25d4304df3cd95500dfcfc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ae5f67fb5c25d4304df3cd95500dfcfc?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Applewine** says:
    

October 28, 2011 at 11:55 am

    1. Only one parent worked back then. So comparing "family income" then and now you would have to divide todays inflation corrected income in half to account for only one adult working. That makes a huge difference. Also, if you don't have a mother to take care of the kids you risk lowering their future earning potential as well. A dedicated parent to raising kids can provide great support in academic education and psychological and philosophical preperation for life.

    2. You can't just look at the tax rate. You have to look at what dollar amount they actually paid. I've watched a video on this that showed a top earner paying an effective 10% tax. There were also many deductions at different times which make the percentage alone misleading. You have to look at what they actually paid.

    3. You have to take into account inflation as a tax going forward as well. The inflation seems to be accelerating. Inflation is the amount of government currency creation which is tied to government spending. This is drastically larger today than in the 1950's. So, what you save you in your bank account today won't be worth much in 20 years.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6997d831541c2ae313ed129b8b9bca6d?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6997d831541c2ae313ed129b8b9bca6d?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **50sFreak** says:
    

November 27, 2011 at 6:15 pm

You also have to consider womens lib, when women wanted to have a career,
demanding equal status in the workplace. Back in the 1950's, women were
expected to get married, and raise a family, basically running the household.
I also believe this equal status was a factor in causing, the inflation of
prices! Plainly said, if their are two incomes per household, then society has
more money to spend, allowing busineses to expand, and pay this demand for the
other salary. In turn, this would inflate services, manufactuers, foods,
clothing, and goods that these businesses offer to our society.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6997d831541c2ae313ed129b8b9bca6d?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6997d831541c2ae313ed129b8b9bca6d?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **50sFreak** says:
    

November 27, 2011 at 6:15 pm

You also have to consider womens lib, when women wanted to have a career,
demanding equal status in the workplace. Back in the 1950's, women were
expected to get married, and raise a family, basically running the household.
I also believe this equal status was a factor in causing, the inflation of
prices! Plainly said, if their are two incomes per household, then society has
more money to spend, allowing busineses to expand, and pay this demand for the
other salary. In turn, this would inflate services, manufactuers, foods,
clothing, and goods that these businesses offer to our society.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f745d6e173ac7ccfc51b839ed5a8de88?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f745d6e173ac7ccfc51b839ed5a8de88?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **ozarkmama** says:
    

June 16, 2012 at 11:00 am

I agree with 50sfreak. Moving women out of the home and into the work place
doubled the income. A woman working 40 hours a week does not have as much time
for cooking from scratch, bargin hunting, sewing homemade clothes, and
gardening and everything else that women did to save money. A woman who has to
spend time away from kids may feel a sense of guilt so she often buys her kids
more toys, clothes, movies and so forth. I know many women who wish they could
stay home and raise thier children themselves but not many can afford to and I
know of husbands who say "Why should I be the only one making money around
here??"

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f745d6e173ac7ccfc51b839ed5a8de88?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f745d6e173ac7ccfc51b839ed5a8de88?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **ozarkmama** says:
    

June 16, 2012 at 11:00 am

I agree with 50sfreak. Moving women out of the home and into the work place
doubled the income. A woman working 40 hours a week does not have as much time
for cooking from scratch, bargin hunting, sewing homemade clothes, and
gardening and everything else that women did to save money. A woman who has to
spend time away from kids may feel a sense of guilt so she often buys her kids
more toys, clothes, movies and so forth. I know many women who wish they could
stay home and raise thier children themselves but not many can afford to and I
know of husbands who say "Why should I be the only one making money around
here??"

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659e7dcb81423204cbc6f088e98d1967?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659e7dcb81423204cbc6f088e98d1967?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Texan** says:
    

July 30, 2012 at 1:50 pm

You also have to take into account that we live in a disposable time. When my
folks bought household items and tools, they were built to last and they still
have many of those items today, 50 years later. Most of what we buy is made
cheaply and therefore needs to be replaced every few years.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659e7dcb81423204cbc6f088e98d1967?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659e7dcb81423204cbc6f088e98d1967?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Texan** says:
    

July 30, 2012 at 1:50 pm

You also have to take into account that we live in a disposable time. When my
folks bought household items and tools, they were built to last and they still
have many of those items today, 50 years later. Most of what we buy is made
cheaply and therefore needs to be replaced every few years.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/317ce8e0241b660e30310122406e5072?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/317ce8e0241b660e30310122406e5072?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **jesse wayne Money** says:
    

September 3, 2014 at 3:40 pm

Don't know where you gathered your information or what planet you came from
but a loaf of bread cost 2.54 the average price ofa car is 25,000.,even a good
usedcar is about 14,000.Milk ,gallon almost
5.00!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy Smith** says:
    

September 3, 2014 at 9:54 pm

That's gotta be organic milk. 😉

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fc7e4e84196b539f50a70c3d6e015a2a?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fc7e4e84196b539f50a70c3d6e015a2a?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Jamie** says:
    

January 4, 2017 at 11:44 am

Right, but the stuff we buy today is disposable? Nothing can be really
"repaired" anymore. Once it breaks, throw it away. It's just not worth it to
repair anything now. Back then, things lasted. So that $2,500 TV in today's
money was around for many years. People buy new TV's today like they change
socks. Same with cell phones. A lot of people go out and buy the latest model
while the previous one works fine, computers too.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6ff62015b9d02a2a62b8a3757f15b792?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6ff62015b9d02a2a62b8a3757f15b792?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Ann Hunt** says:
    

September 27, 2017 at 6:42 pm

Who do I contact to ask permission to include some information from this site?
I'm an author and am writing a book about the 1950's in America. Thank you.

Reply

    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ed134b0583878008b4a7f05cced7fb?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Sandy Smith** says:
    

September 28, 2017 at 2:20 pm

Hi Ann. My assistant will reach out to you.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7fe0c91960348df3a8b4b9135451a48e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7fe0c91960348df3a8b4b9135451a48e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Jim mcg** says:
    

November 21, 2017 at 5:03 pm

Let’s talk housing !  
1st home 8k sold 16k  
2nd 28k sold 53k  
3rd 114k sold 189 k  
Current home 189k worth 675k

That’s inflation !

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f4f1e7a51b1d50ec215487e9d5fcd1f8?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f4f1e7a51b1d50ec215487e9d5fcd1f8?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **walter Mattson** says:
    

November 23, 2017 at 5:09 pm

Attempting to compare the 1950 with today is difficult and in many cases a
waste of time. I was born in 1939 and in my childhood days I recall going to
the local dentist for tooth repair etc. We didn't have insurance back then. We
paid my dentists bill by giving the dentist eggs from our chickens. I am only
presenting this to put life and times in perspective. Dental quality was
terrible but the costs were affordable. The same was true for medical and
medicine costs and quality. Cars were simpler and readily repaired at home.
Now they are so complex and have so many features that the costs for a spark
plug replacement is definitely more time consuming and relatively more costly.
What all the previous verbiage means to all citizens is to buy within your
means to pay. It also means that if we as citizens want to improve all lives
meaning the poor and wealthy, then we need to reduce the cost of exorbitant
rules and regulations by government and private institutions and individuals
for the purpose of improving our total lively hood costs. For example,
environmental regulations that have not been proven to be significantly
harmful need to be pared down. The exorbitant cost of lawsuits on a doctor's
practice needs to be contained to a reasonable value. The insurance cost for a
surgeon can be over $250,000 per year. Who pays for that? All citizens who
need surgery. We need to call for on control of frivolous lawsuits. There are
too many lawsuits that are made where the defendant simply pays because the
cost of litigation is too high. The federal government needs to get out of the
business of picking winners and losers. The Food and Drug Administration needs
to be abolished and turned over to competitive private companies to eliminate
federal pay to play etc.. It is my understanding that the cost to get approval
from the federal government can be billions of dollars. That explains why the
initial costs of drugs are so high. Drugs in the US can not be classed as
drugs if they are basic natural products. Yet, Europe readily does class them
as drugs if found effective. There are too many other examples that affect our
costs of living. Think about it. We can do better.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6cc18aca5078c63efa9761f3206c785e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6cc18aca5078c63efa9761f3206c785e?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Happier Days** says:
    

June 15, 2018 at 3:52 pm

In 1955 the avg income was about $5k, min wage was $.75 ($1 by 1956), a car
cost $1.7-2k, and a house cost $10-12k. Online research indicates the $1 min
wage equals approx. $8 adjusted to 2013 value. The $5k income equals about
$25k in 2013 value. I'm baffled by these numbers because if $1 equals $8, why
is the $5k only worth $25k today? If you multiply the $5k by 8 you get $40k
which is close to the avg yearly wage. In reality I think you need to multiply
by about 15 to get a real number. Today you need to earn about $75k to have
the buying power of $5k from 1955. The numbers are more realistic with that
formula. Min. wage should be $15, annual avg $75k, car $25-30k, house
$150-180k. I realize you can get a car for less but you also can pay a lot
more for the avg house especially in larger cities. Consider how expensive it
is to operate a vehicle with high labor costs on maintenance and repairs, high
insurance costs, higher registration costs, and gas which has at times
exceeded normal inflation rates. Another formula to keep in mind is the avg
annual income ratio to the cost of a house. $5k income times 2.5 you get
$12.5k. You could buy a house for $12.5k in the 50s. Today if you make the avg
$40k that will only get you a $100k house. In smaller town mid America yes
maybe you can buy houses for that price range but what about most other
places? In big cities you probably would need to earn as much as $200k to make
the ratio work in today's dollars.

Reply

    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2c9609768feac09a382f8d6072939567?s=32&d=mm&r=pg)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2c9609768feac09a382f8d6072939567?s=32&d=mm&r=pg) **Truth** says:
    

August 21, 2018 at 4:30 pm

So much cheaper back then, and you did get a lot for just a dollar as well.

Reply

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

you MUST enable javascript to be able to comment

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is
processed.

Search for:

# Categories

Categories Select Category About Me Auto Credit Credit Cards Finance 101 Get
Out of Debt Course Investing Learn Something Make Money News Off The
Reservation Partner Posts Rants Reader Advice Recipes Reduce Debt Rental
Property Save Money Scams Special Offers Spend Money Sponsored Posts Video
Pick Weekly Roundup Work

![Sandy](https://yesiamcheap.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/2016/06/sidebar.jpg)

# Contact Info

E-mail: pr@yesiamcheap.com

# Yes, I Am Cheap Sponsors

![](https://yesiamcheap.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/30-for-30-White.jpg)

# Disclaimer

The information contained in YesIAmCheap.com is for general information or
entertainment purposes only and does not constitute professional financial
advice. Please contact an independent financial professional for advice
regarding your specific situation.

Please read our disclosures and privacy policy.

# Media Mentions

![Some media mentions](https://yesiamcheap.com/images/media-mentions.png)

![](https://yesiamcheap.com/wordpress/wp-content/themes/zerif-

pro/images/envelope4-green.png)

pr@yesiamcheap.com

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

2009-2019 SAY YES SERVICES LLC

![facebook_pixel](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1022628167897243&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![facebook_pixel](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1022628167897243&ev=GeneralEvent&noscript=1&cd\[post_type\]=post&cd\[post_id\]=2772&cd\[content_name\]=Cost+of+Living+in+the+1950%E2%80%99s+as+Compared+to+Today+in+2013&cd\[categories\]=Learn+Something&cd\[tags\])

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

