

Homepage

Homepage

Sign inGet started

![Tincture](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/letterbox/78/72/50/50/1*EoRzOUoKmwdVaDSDiGvh1A.png?source=logoAvatar-

lo_m0Qn9pBChkPu---8f91081810f4)

    
        * Empathy & Equity
    * Practice of Medicine
    * Innovation & Progress
    * Insights & Leaders
    * About
    

* * *

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2400/1*fIxYRzAfkPCmiNHRkoc0Cg.jpeg)

# Methods For Marketing Drugs Are Changing. Here’s What That Means For The

Pharma Industry

![Go to the profile of Praveen Tipirneni](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/100/100/1*k8jSD5Z4dpYuPzrfHv5lSg.jpeg)

Praveen TipirneniBlockedUnblockFollowFollowing

Oct 16, 2018

* * *

Just a few decades ago, the consumer’s voice didn’t matter much in the pharma
industry. Patients had little influence — a doctor was the sole arbiter of
what drug was prescribed for an illness.

And when that drug was chosen, it didn’t matter how much it actually cost
because insurance would pay for it.

> Now, patient involvement is changing. **** People are spending more than
ever on copays, and naturally, they’re becoming more aware of the process.

The other day, I watched in CVS as I was getting some antibiotics for my kid.
In the line in front of me, there was only one person whose purchases cost
less than the copay for the drug he was getting.

That is a marked change from a few years ago.

This shift in consumer recognition demands a change in the way the drug
industry markets and interacts with consumers. It’s no longer a one-way
relationship — patients are making decisions about medications that they
didn’t have to in the past.

This will fundamentally change drug marketing over the next decade:

### **As the price of pharmaceuticals increases, so does people’s involvement

in the industry.**

One sure-fire way to get people to pay attention to something is by having
them spend a lot of money on it.

The higher the number on the cash register, the more likely you are to
investigate whether you’re getting your money’s worth. That’s exactly what’s
happening in pharma right now. Drugs that used to be covered entirely by
insurance now require a $30 copay.

> _When people see the cost of a medication competing with groceries in their
monthly budget, they begin to take stock. They start weighing the pros and
cons of the drug, and whether they can live without it._

Consciously or not, consumers are making choices about their medications in a
way they weren’t in the past. You can hear the dialogue increase substantially
in everyday chatter.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*Y2bwGHPixm_dDmAnRZd56w.jpeg)

Credit: iStock

### **Drug companies have to recognize their flaws and work to better

understand consumers.**

Right now, drug companies don’t operate the same way that consumer companies
do.

Think of business such as Google or Proctor & Gamble — they deploy certain
advertising that aims to educate and draw in consumers.

Some of this lack of marketing is due to regulation, and some of it is due to
societal distaste for the idea of pushing drugs on the public. As a result,
there isn’t a lot of compelling information in a consumer-friendly manner
about drug companies and their products.

Nobody has the jingle of a medication ad on their mind.

Instead, people see the bad apples. They see Martin Shkreli jacking up the
price of a decades-old anti-infection drug. They see Heather Bresch raising
the price of EpiPens to five times the traditional price, then applauding a
lower-priced version that only tripled the cost.

> Drug companies are going to have to start showing consumers the value of the
products they’re using.

So when a drug is initially priced very high, they have to be able to
communicate that the cost is going towards recouping R&D investments, and that
when the patent runs out, the price will be significantly less. Keep in mind
that though the drug may have a high cost now, it will be practically free for
your kids.

Companies have to communicate these benefits and present the long-term
advantage.

That’s not something the pharma industry has done before. But ten years from
now, biotech and pharma are going to look much more like a consumer business
than they currently do.

### **Marketing must evolve to educate customers and help explain the

benefits of the drugs.**

We already have plenty of drug advertising. Watch any TV show aimed at an
older demographic, and you’ll notice that practically every other commercial
is promoting a medication.

The problem with this approach is that there are limits on what can be shown
in these commercials. The information on these drugs is out there, but most
people won’t — or can’t — look through an FDA label carefully to determine
whether a drug is right for them.

And many doctors feel the average person is easily influenced when they don’t
have the right information.

> Marketing to the consumer is going to increase substantially because drug
companies will have to explain the pros and cons of a drug better than an FDA
label can.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*7rYEAuSKGDikjCW_8RgWww.png)

Doctors may not like it, but the consumer is now being forced to become a part
of this decision. And consumers need the proper information and tools to make
a choice.

Soon enough, the industry will have to strike a balance between giving people
the right amount of information and presenting it in a way that will help them
pay attention long enough to absorb what they need to know to stay healthy.

    
        * Healthcare
    * Pharmaceutical
    * Patient Engagement
    * Empathy
    * Prescription Drugs
    

2 claps

1

    * BlockedUnblockFollowFollowing

![Go to the profile of Praveen Tipirneni](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/120/120/1*k8jSD5Z4dpYuPzrfHv5lSg.jpeg)

### Praveen Tipirneni

Medium member since Jun 2018

CEO at Morphic Therapeutic | Battle of the Bugs at Cubist Pharmaceuticals |
Climb, Run, Bike, Swim | www.morphictx.com

    * Follow

![Tincture](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/120/120/1*EoRzOUoKmwdVaDSDiGvh1A.png)

### Tincture

Translating 'fortress medicine' into plain english. A digital town square for
ideas & new perspectives. Open-source Thoughtware. Accessible. Important.
Exciting. Trying hard to remember the future.

Tincture

Translating 'fortress medicine' into plain english. A digital town square for
ideas & new…

Follow

    
        * 2
    
    *     *     * ![Tincture](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/fit/c/80/80/1*EoRzOUoKmwdVaDSDiGvh1A.png)
    

Never miss a story from **Tincture** , when you sign up for Medium. Learn more

Get updatesGet updates

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

