

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods Blog About Follow DONATE

Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About

Follow

My Account __

Log in View Account Log out

Donate

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-standard.svg)

__

__

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-white-alt.svg)

__

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods

    
        * Publications
    * Topics
    * Datasets
    * Interactives
    * Fact Tank
    * Experts
    

__

    * Main

More __

FactTank-logos

### NEWS IN THE NUMBERS

November 28, 2018

__

* * *

# 5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

By Jens Manuel Krogstad, Jeffrey S. Passel and D’Vera Cohn

The number of unauthorized immigrants living in the United States was lower in
2016 than at any time since 2004. This decline is due mainly to a large drop
in the number of new unauthorized immigrants, especially Mexicans, coming into
the country. The origin countries of unauthorized immigrants also shifted
during that time, with the number from Mexico declining and the number rising
from only one other region, Central America, according to the latest Pew
Research Center estimates.

Here are five facts about the unauthorized immigrant population in the U.S.

![U.S. unauthorized immigrant total rises, then

falls](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/FT_18.11.28_FactsIllegalImmigration_USunauthorizedimmigranttotal_new.png)1
**There were 10.7 million unauthorized immigrants in the U.S. in 2016** ,
representing 3.3% of the total U.S. population that year. The 2016
unauthorized immigrant total is a 13% decline from the peak of 12.2 million in
2007, when this group was 4% of the U.S. population.

2 **The number of Mexican unauthorized immigrants declined since 2007, but the
total from other nations changed little.** Mexicans made up half of all
unauthorized immigrants in 2016, according to the Center’s estimate, compared
with 57% in 2007. Their numbers (and share of the total) have been declining
in recent years: There were 5.4 million Mexican unauthorized immigrants living
in the U.S. in 2016, down from 6.9 million in 2007.

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/GMD_immigrationCourse_260x173.png)

#### Try our email course on U.S. immigration

Learn about U.S. immigration through five short lessons delivered to your
inbox every other day.  
Sign up now!

Meanwhile, the total from other nations, 5.2 million in 2016, remained about
the same as in 2007, when it was 5.3 million. The number of unauthorized
immigrants has grown since 2007 only from one birth region: Central America,
from 1.5 million that year to nearly 1.9 million in 2016. This growth was
fueled mainly by immigrants from the Northern Triangle nations of El Salvador,
Guatemala and Honduras.

The totals also went down over the 2007-2016 period from South America and the
combined region of Europe plus Canada. The remaining regions (the Caribbean,
Asia, Middle East-North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the world)
did not change significantly in that time.

![](https://www.pewhispanic.org/wp-

content/uploads/sites/5/2018/11/PH_2018.11.27_Unauthorized-Immigration-

Estimate_0-06.png)3 **The U.S. civilian workforce includes 7.8 million
unauthorized immigrants, representing a decline since 2007.** Between 2007 and
2016, the number of unauthorized immigrant workers fell, as did their share of
the total U.S. workforce over the same period. This group accounted for 4.8%
of those in the U.S. who were working or were unemployed and looking for work.
The number of unauthorized immigrant men in the prime working ages of 18 to 44
also declined, but not women.

Compared with their 4.8% share of the civilian workforce overall in 2016,
unauthorized immigrants are overrepresented as a share of the workforce in
farming occupations (24%) and construction occupations (15%). In all
industries and occupations, though, they are outnumbered by U.S.-born workers.

4 **Six states account for58% of unauthorized immigrants: California, Texas,
Florida, New York, New Jersey and Illinois.** But individual states have
experienced different trends. From 2007 to 2016, the unauthorized immigrant
population decreased in a dozen states: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas,
California, Florida, Illinois, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New
York and Oregon. In three states, the unauthorized immigrant population rose
over the same period: Louisiana, Maryland and Massachusetts.

![](https://www.pewhispanic.org/wp-

content/uploads/sites/5/2018/11/PH_2018.11.27_Unauthorized-Immigration-

Estimate_0-07.png)

![](https://www.pewhispanic.org/wp-

content/uploads/sites/5/2018/11/PH_2018.11.27_Unauthorized-Immigration-

Estimate_2-01.png) 5 **A rising share of unauthorized immigrants have lived in
the U.S. for more than a decade.** About two-thirds (66%) of unauthorized
immigrant adults in 2016 had been in the U.S. more than 10 years, compared
with 41% in 2007. A declining share of unauthorized immigrants have lived in
the U.S. for less than five years – 18% of adults in 2016, compared with 30%
in 2007. In 2016, unauthorized immigrant adults had lived in the U.S. for a
median of 14.8 years, meaning that half had been in the country at least that
long.

_To learn more: Exploreunauthorized immigrant population trends for states,
birth countries and regions_.

_Note: This post was originally published on Nov. 18, 2014, and has been
updated._

Topics:

Unauthorized ImmigrationImmigration TrendsGlobal Migration and
DemographyMigrationImmigration

Share this link:

__

* * *

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/03/Krogstad_JensManuel.jpg?w=200)

Jens Manuel Krogstad _is a a senior writer/editor focusing on Hispanics,
immigration and demographics at Pew Research Center._

POSTS BIO TWITTER EMAIL

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Passel2.jpg?w=160)

Jeffrey S. Passel _is a a senior demographer at Pew Research Center._

POSTS BIO EMAIL

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/01/Cohn_DVera1.jpg?w=200)

D’Vera Cohn _is a a senior writer/editor focusing on immigration and
demographics at Pew Research Center._

POSTS BIO TWITTER EMAIL

donate-icon

### MAKE A FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO SUPPORT OUR WORK

DONATE

##### Related

HispanicDecember 3, 2018

What we know about illegal immigration from Mexico

HispanicApril 25, 2017

As Mexican share declined, U.S. unauthorized immigrant population fell in 2015
below recession level

Pew Research CenterMay 23, 2019

U.S. unauthorized immigrants are more proficient in English, more educated
than a decade ago

HispanicMarch 11, 2019

20 metro areas are home to six-in-ten unauthorized immigrants in U.S.

HispanicJune 3, 2019

Key findings about U.S. immigrants

##### Popular on Fact Tank

Fact TankJanuary 17, 2019

Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact TankSeptember 6, 2018

Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact TankNovember 28, 2018

5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Fact TankNovember 30, 2018

Key findings about U.S. immigrants

Fact TankApril 5, 2017

Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in
Europe

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-alt.svg)  
1615 L St. NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20036  
USA  
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main  
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax  
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries

##### Research Areas

U.S. Politics & Policy Journalism & Media Internet & Technology Science &
Society Religion & Public Life Hispanic Trends Global Attitudes & Trends
Social & Demographic Trends Methods

##### Follow Us

__Email Newsletters __Facebook __Twitter __Tumblr __YouTube __RSS

**About Pew Research Center** Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank
that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the
world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content
analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does
not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy
Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers

We need to confirm your email address

To complete the subscription process, please click the link in the email we
just sent you.

Cancel

OK

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

