

Open main menu

![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Search

# Socialism

system of government where the means of production are socially owned

    
        * Read in another language 
    * Watch this page 
    * Edit
    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/New_Harmony%2C_Indiana%2C_por_F._Bates.jpg/220px-

New_Harmony%2C_Indiana%2C_por_F._Bates.jpg)

New Harmony, a model community presented by Robert Owen, 1838

**Socialism** is an economic and political system where the ways of making a
living (factories, offices, etc.) are owned by the workers who run them and
the people who depend on them, meaning the value made belongs to the people
who make it, instead of a group of private owners. People who agree with this
type of system are called socialists.[1] There are two ways socialists think
of the way society can own the means of making wealth: either the state
(government of the country) is used or worker-owned cooperatives are used.
Another important belief is that management and sharing are supposed to be
based on public interests. Socialists believe that everything in society is
made by the cooperative efforts of the people/citizens.

There are many kinds of socialism, so not one definition can apply to all of
them; however, in all types, the workers own the means of production.[2] The
major differences between the different varieties are the role of the free
market or planning, how the means of production are controlled, the role of
management of workers and the government's role in the economy.

In some major societies whose governments have called themselves socialist,
corruption and lack of incentive for workers to produce have reduced
production and the average standard of living. Similar kinds of corruption
have had other negative effects on societies considered Capitalist. However,
in many of the societies of Western Europe which have adopted progress toward
democratic socialism, productivity, standards of living, incentives, and
markers of personal happiness and security are very high.

Some socialists believe that socialism will evolve into what they see as a
more advanced system, with no state, money, or social classes.

## Contents

##

OverviewEdit

Socialism is an economic theory of social organization that believes that the
means of making, moving, and trading wealth should be owned or controlled by
the community as a whole. In Marxist theory, it is a transitional (temporary,
in between) social state between capitalism and communism, although some
socialist nations now exist that have no intention of transitioning to
communism.

Social democracy is a kind of socialism that tries to mix parts of socialism
with capitalism. In this system, the government takes wealth (money) from the
rich and gives it to the poor like in a Communist state, but despite there
being more government control and less chance to make a very large amount of
money, people can still run their own businesses and own private property.
Unlike communism, where all private property is taken to be owned publicly,
people and businesses pay taxes on their property, and this money is spent on
public services (see below), after taking out the costs of running the
government and collecting the taxes. The main method of democratic socialism
is changing society through slow reform rather than a quick revolution.

In many countries that use social democracy, some services and industries are
subsidized (given money to help them run) and/or partly controlled by the
government. For example, education, health care, housing, utility companies
and public transportation are some industries that might be owned/supported by
the government in a socialist system. For the most part, people working in
these industries are paid by the government, with money paid by the people as
taxes. Welfare is also likely offered under socialism.

Another kind of socialism is "Collectivization." In this system, money and
goods are shared more equally among the people, with the government in
control. In theory, this system results in the gap between classes getting
smaller, with the state helping the nation's poorest people, while the richest
agree to higher taxes and economic controls/restrictions. Of course, socialism
as it is commonly used is different in many ways from communism (See "The
History of Socialism and Communism", later in the article.)

Today, many democratic socialists, especially in Western Europe, Australia,
and New Zealand want industries to be guided jointly (together) by
representatives of shareholders (people who own part of the business) as well
as the workers working together in what is known as an industrial democracy
because both groups want the business to do well. This would be a more direct
democratic way of organizing, rather than control by central government. Trade
unions and/or workers councils would represent the interests of the employees.

Many countries see socialism differently. Socialist International is an
organization dedicated to the cause of promoting socialist ideals, and has
ties with many socialist parties, especially Social Democratic parties.

Most non-communist people say "communism" when they mean the Marxist and
Leninist ideas of Russia's Bolshevik party. Marx believed that capitalism
followed the economic and political system of feudalism. He also believed that
capitalism would oppress (treat unfairly) many people and that those people
would eventually revolt and change to socialism. Then he thought that
socialism can be another bridge, but to communism. However, many people
incorrectly use the term "Communist" to refer to a socialist state. Others
call this 'State Socialism,' to distinguish it from the communist goal that
does not need a state or any form of government. To non-communists, the word
'socialism' is now used mostly for attempts to come close to this goal in a
democratic state.

##

HistoryEdit

A Welshman, Robert Owen, was the first socialist. His followers began calling
themselves socialists in 1841.[3] He is still regarded as a pioneer of the Co-
operative Movement in Britain. He said that workers should own the companies
they worked for. The workers would then share the profits among themselves. He
set up a new model factory in New Lanark, Scotland.[4]

Karl Marx is the most well-known creator of the theory of socialism, and of
communism. He wrote a book about capitalism, socialism, and communism, called
"The Communist Manifesto". Friedrich Engels co-wrote the book, and paid for
much of Marx's work and research.

Many socialist political parties were formed during the 19th century and early
part of the 20th century. Left-wing political parties are mostly newer than
right-wing ones.[ _source?_ ]

##

Socialism with Chinese CharacteristicsEdit

Socialism[5] with Chinese characteristics combines the basic principles of
scientific socialism with the facts of building socialistic China. Socialism
is the common rule and essential feature of the practice, and Chinese
characteristics are what the basic principles of socialism really represent in
China. And the scientific socialism theory is raised by Deng Xiaoping, the
chief designer of opening up and economic reform in China.

    1. For the economic aspect, China insists on the economy with different types of ownership basic system of market economy with the public ownership in the leading role. 

    2. For its political aspect, China sticks to a system of the People's Congress, a system of multiparty cooperation and political consultation, and a system of regional ethnic autonomy. 

    3. For its cultural aspect, China keeps its socialist value system at the core of social trends, while respecting differences and expanding common grounds.[ _source?_ ]

##

Related pagesEdit

    
        * Capitalism
    * Communism
    

##

ReferencesEdit

    
        1. ↑ Durlauf, Steven N.; E. Blume, Lawrence. "socialism". _DICTIONARY OF ECONOMICS_. Palgrave Macmillan 2013.
    2. ↑ Peter Lamb, J. C. Docherty. _Historical dictionary of socialism_. Lanham, Maryland, UK; Oxford, England, UK: Scarecrow Press, Inc, 2006. p. 1.
    3. ↑ Gale (2001). "Socialism" . World of Sociology. Retrieved 15 June 2011.
    4. ↑ "Socialism". _Encyclopedia of World Trade From Ancient Times to the Present_. 2005. Retrieved  15 June 2011.
    5. ↑ Chi, Liu. "socialism with Chinese Characteristics". _CRIENGLISH_. CRENGLISH.com.
    

![](//simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

Retrieved from
"https://simple.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialism&oldid=6568864"

Last edited on 7 June 2019, at 15:06

## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

    
        * Privacy
    * Desktop
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

