

The Balance

How Much Did Obamacare Cost?

Menu Search

Go

Go

    
        * Investing
      * Basics 
      * Stocks 
      * Real Estate 
      * Value Investing 
      * View All 
    * Credit & Debt
      * Building Credit 
      * Credit Card Basics 
      * Reducing Debt 
      * Reports & Scores 
      * View All 
    * Retirement Planning
      * Basics 
      * 401(k) Plans 
      * IRAs 
      * Social Security 
      * View All 
    * Banking & Loans
      * Basics 
      * Best Savings Account Rates 
      * Getting a Loan 
      * Online Banking 
      * View All
    

visit our other sites

Hot Topics

    
        * Obamacare
    * Financial Crisis
    * Subprime Crisis
    

Hot Topics Obamacare

# How Much Did Obamacare Cost?

## Learn Why the Affordable Care Act Doesn't Add to the Debt

    
        * Share 
    * Pin 
    * Email
    

![Obamacare

costs](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/c0rqDaGAFjvHh-O1JI7qoE_1VYw=/300x200/filters:saturation\(0.2\):brightness\(10\):contrast\(5\):no_upscale\(\)/GettyImages-56371818-586d50d83df78c17b6c140aa.jpg)

••• Illustration: Medioimages/Photodisc/Getty Images

By Kimberly Amadeo

Updated June 03, 2019

Does Obamacare add to the U.S. debt or reduce it? The answers can be very
confusing. Estimates ranged from saving $143 billion its first decade to
adding $1.76 trillion to it. And then there's President Barack Obama's initial
claim that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act would add increase
the debt by $940 billion in its first 10 years. Who's right? They all are.
Here's how.

### How Obamacare Reduces the Debt by $143 Billion

The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office said that the ACA would reduce
the debt by $143 billion. It added up the costs of both of the laws that
implemented Obamacare. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public
Law 111-148) detailed the plan. The Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act (Public Law 111-152) passed new Obamacare taxes and budget reductions in
other areas, which offset the cost of the plan.

The following five new ACA taxes would bring in an additional $567 billion in
revenue:

    
        1. Hospital insurance tax - $212 billion.
    2. Non-compliance tax - $64 billion.
    3. Cadillac health insurance tax - $32 billion.
    4. Medical device and insurers tax - $107 billion.
    5. Raising medical deduction limit to 10 percent - $104 billion.
    

Also, there were five areas where the ACA imposed a total of $477 billion in
cost savings:

    
        1. Reduce drug subsidies to the wealthy - $87 billion.
    2. Reduce hospital DSH payments - $37 billion.
    3. Reduce Medicare payments - $197 billion.
    4. Reduce Medicare Advantage payments - $135 billion.
    5. Service education loans directly. That eliminated the cost of the private loan servicer, Sallie Mae - $20 billion.
    

When the costs of $940 billion were deducted, the deficit would have been
reduced by $104 billion. This would have been added back to the deficit if
Trump had repealed and replaced Obamacare.

Where did the CBO get the other $40 billion in savings? From a plan for the
federal government to offer long-term care insurance. The CBO thought would
lower Medicaid costs by $40 billion. Unfortunately, it soon became apparent
that long-term care was much more expensive. This program was scrapped.
(Source: "March 20, 2010, Report," CBO.)

### Obama Said It Cost $940 Billion

When President Obama signed the ACA on March 23, 2010, he said it would cost
$940 billion over its first 10 years (FY 2010 - FY 2019). The CBO made that
estimate in its analysis completed March 18, 2010. A few days later the CBO
lowered its cost projection to $938 billion based on a more detailed analysis.
The estimate came from five cost areas that were not directly offset by
revenues:

    
        1. Expanding Medicaid and CHIP - $434 billion.
    2. Tax credits to small businesses who provide insurance - $40 billion.
    3. Setting up the health insurance exchanges - $358 billion.
    4. Tax credits for those who can't afford insurance - $106 billion.
    

To find out more about these programs, see Obamacare Bill. (Sources: "March
18, 2010, Report," "March 20, 2010, Report," CBO.)

### The CBO Said It Cost $1.76 Trillion

In March 2012, the CBO updated its Obamacare cost estimate to $1.76 trillion.
The Senate Budget Committee Minority Office reported that this was two times
more than the CBO's original estimate of $940 billion. Did the cost of
Obamacare spiral out of control? Did Obamacare proponents deliberately mislead
us? No and no.

First, the original CBO estimate was for FY 2010 - FY 2019, a 10-year span.
The updated CBO estimate was a for an 11-year span starting two years later,
FY 2012 - FY 2023. The most expensive provisions of Obamacare didn't take
effect until 2014. That's when mandatory health insurance coverage took
effect. The biggest cost was expanding Medicaid and CHIP to include more low-
income people. Here's the breakout:

    
        1. Expanding Medicaid and CHIP - $931 billion.
    2. Small business tax credits - $23 billion.
    3. Setting up exchanges and providing tax credits for those who can't afford insurance (combined) - $808 billion.
    

(Source: "March 13, 2012, Report," CBO. "Analysis of Obama's Health Law,"
Senate Budget Committee, June 28, 2012. "No, Obamacare Costs Didn't Double,"
National Review, March 20, 2012.)

**In Depth:** How the ACA Works | The Truth About Obamacare | How Much Will It
Cost Me? | Why Reform Healthcare, Anyway?

_Note: The author 's book, "The Ultimate Obamacare Handbook," offers more in-
depth information._

Continue Reading

+

    
        * ![hospital administrators ehlp pay for obamacare](//:0)
    

#### Who Really Pays for Obamacare?

    
        * ![Baby getting temperature taken under armpit](//:0)
    

#### How the Affordable Health Care Act Affects You

    
        * ![U.S. Capitol Building](//:0)
    

#### How the CBO Affects You

    
        * #### 10 Pros and Cons of Obamacare
    
    * ![obamacare helps newborn baby](//:0)
    

#### 10 Surprising Changes in the Affordable Care Act Itself

    
        * ![family-with-wheelchair](//:0)
    

#### What You Will and Won't Lose If Obamacare Is Replaced

    
        * ![Obama Healthcare Reform](//:0)
    

#### How Insurance Companies Changed Obama's Healthcare Reform Plan

    
        * ![Doctor standing in front of a healthcare Clock](//:0)
    

#### A Timeline of How Obamacare Has Impacted Americans

    
        * ![Trump and Obama](//:0)
    

#### Is Trump or Obama Best for the Economy?

    
        * ![Doctor explaining something](//:0)
    

#### What a Congressional Plan to Repeal Obamacare Would Look Like

    
        * ![obama and biden](//:0)
    

#### If the FY 2013 Budget Didn't Pass, What Was Spent?

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### Why the Government Shut Down and What Happens Next

    
        * ![Whats wrong with obamacare](//:0)
    

#### 11 Challenges Presented by Obamacare

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### What Has Obama Done? 14 Significant Accomplishments

    
        * ![Obama-FY 2014 budget.jpg](//:0)
    

#### Why the Deficit Was Less Than Expected in 2014

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### How Trump's Health Care Policies Will Raise Premium Prices for You

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

    
        * Investing
    * Credit & Debt
    * Retirement Planning
    * Banking & Loans
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Careers
    * Contact
    * Editorial Guidelines
    

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * Lifewire
    * ThoughtCo
    * TripSavvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

