

BREAKING NEWS

Tap here to turn on desktop notifications to get the news sent straight to
you.

Open Search

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPostHero-d783f680fb974e80346bdfa145131d058e596e1d32f791981875aa481702c770.svg)

Log In Join HuffPost Plus

![headshot](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/5759d67f1500002c001b8a28.jpg?ops=100_100)

Darryl S. Weiman, M.D., J.D., Contributor

Professor of Surgery, University of Tennessee Health Science Center

# The Affordable Care Act and Medical Malpractice Reform

06/04/2016 07:43 am ET **Updated** Jun 05, 2017

![Stethoscope and $100 dollar bills symbolizing healthcare spending and the

affordable care

act](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/5bb813562000000702019090.jpeg?ops=scalefit_720_noupscale)

Stethoscope and $100 dollar bills symbolizing healthcare spending and the
affordable care act

    
        *     *     *     *     * The goals of health care reform are to ensure that everyone has access to high quality care and the care is affordable. Most providers believe that significant cost savings would be realized if there was meaningful tort reform. In fact, when the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was being crafted, there were numerous discussions relating to the limitation of future damages for patients injured by medical negligence, modification of the collateral source rule, and funding to the states for experimentation on litigation alternatives or substitutes.
    

Unfortunately, the only part of the ACA relating to malpractice reform to be
passed was section 10607 of the Act which, "authorize[s] the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to award demonstration grants to states for the
development, implementation, and evaluation of alternatives to current tort
litigation." This section does not eliminate malpractice litigation; it will
only look at alternative ways of resolving the cases. The risk to providers
remains. Malpractice coverage will still be required to practice and losses
can be catastrophic. Even if a verdict is within the limits of the coverage,
the provider who is found liable will be reported to the National Practitioner
Data Bank which could have significant detrimental consequences if he wants to
move to a new practice or when his privileges are up for renewal at his
current location.

With mandatory health insurance or Medicare and Medicaid, it was hoped that
the 30 million uninsured in the country would be covered. With a ban on
lifetime payout limits and a prohibition on insurers from excluding patients
with pre-existing conditions, the duration of coverage was also significantly
increased. With more patients covered and covered for a longer time, it is
foreseeable that more malpractice claims will result.

Despite the passage of the ACA, physicians and other health care providers
continue to practice "defensive medicine" in hopes of better defending or even
preventing future malpractice claims. By ordering more tests and doing more
procedures in hopes of covering all the bases and not missing any significant
diagnoses, the goal is to avoid any future litigation; the extra procedures
and tests may not be in the patient's best interests and some may even be
harmful, but it was thought they would allow for an easier defense if faced
with a claim.

There are several mandates under Obamacare which require significant
expenditures on the part of health care providers. These expenditures have led
to increased overhead costs which many, if not most, private practitioners are
not able to meet. As a result, many providers are joining health care groups
or hospitals whereby they become employees. The groups take care of the
overhead costs and the providers are paid a salary.

One of the results of this practice model is that outpatient care and
inpatient care is being divided. Patients are no longer the responsibility of
a single practitioner. They may see a family practitioner in the office
setting, but in-patient care will be provided by a hospitalist who has not yet
had the opportunity to form a physician-patient relationship. The lack of this
attachment is more likely to result in some animosity, especially if the
hospital course does not go well. It cannot be good if the patient is viewed
as a customer of the hospital as opposed to a person which the physician has
gotten to know well.

When a physician becomes an employee, they are expected to follow guidelines
and protocols many of which were approved by Medicare. If the physician is
able to meet certain benchmarks outlined in Medicare, they will be rewarded
with a share of the savings. Failure to follow these guidelines can lead to
economic penalties; the provider is faced with a dilemma--do what he feels is
best for the patient or face decreases in pay and, perhaps, even the loss of
his job.

If the patient suffers harm, a medical malpractice suit is likely to follow.
Then there is the issue of malpractice premiums. If the employer is paying the
premiums, will the lawyer hired to defend the case be answerable to the
employer or the physician? If this is not spelled out in the employment
contract, the physician may need to hire his own attorney to be sure his
interests are protected in the suit. This can be a significant expense.

The physician is caught in the middle. Too bad! The jury will not be
sympathetic to the economic chains attached to the practice. The jury expects
the physician to use his best medical/surgical judgment at all times. The
standard of care is unchanged under the ACA; the physician will be expected to
do what a reasonable physician would do if faced with the same or similar
circumstances. I do not believe that economic considerations will be
entertained in this analysis.

It looks like the ACA has created a health care environment where it is more
likely for the provider to be the target of a malpractice suit. Although
alternative forms of resolution will be investigated, the target will remain
the same. Tort reform will likely be a slow process handled by the states.
Physicians will vote with their feet. They will not stay where their financial
well-being is at increased risk.

Dr. Weiman's website is _www.medicalmalpracticeandthelaw.com_

Download

REAL LIFE. REAL NEWS. REAL VOICES.

Help us tell more of the stories that matter from voices that too often remain
unheard.

Join HuffPost Plus

_Do you have information you want to share with HuffPost?Here’s how._

#### MORE:

Politics News Affordable Care Act

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/H-icon-72fd5782b36a1a42ab82a4af65cbc6dd6ddc4d4a71190a91c5cfaab7c66fd836.svg)

The Affordable Care Act and Medical Malpractice Reform

    
        *     *     *     * Real Life. Real News. Real Voices.
    

Help us tell more of the stories that matter from voices that too often remain
unheard.

Join HuffPost Plus

Let us know what you'd like to see as a HuffPost Member.

Take the survey

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPostHero-d783f680fb974e80346bdfa145131d058e596e1d32f791981875aa481702c770.svg)

    
        * About Us
    * Advertise
    * About Our Ads
    * Contact Us
    * RSS
    * FAQ
    * Careers
    * Archive
    * User Agreement
    * Privacy Policy
    * Comment Policy
    * HuffPost Press Room
    * Coupons
    

Part of HuffPost News. ©2019 Verizon Media. All rights reserved.

U.S. Canada U.K. Australia Brazil España France Ελλάδα (Greece) India Italia
日本 (Japan) 한국 (Korea) Maghreb Quebec

All Editions

News

US News

World News

Business

Environment

Health

Social Justice

Politics

Congress

Donald Trump

2020 Election

Extremism

Entertainment

Culture & Arts

Media

Celebrity

TV & Film

Coupons

Communities

Queer Voices

Women

Black Voices

Latino Voices

Asian Voices

HuffPost Personal

Video

Horoscopes

Style & Beauty

Food & Drink

Parenting

Travel

Finds

Wellness

Relationships

Money

Home & Living

Work/Life

Special Projects

Pride 2019

Impact: Project Zero

Impact: This New World

Highline

Listen to America

Podcasts

From Our Partners

What's Working: Purpose + Profit

Newsletters

Follow us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6723616&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621685564716533&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=10153394098876130&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

