

Toggle navigation ![Health Capital

Topics](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/hcc-logo.png)

    
        * Home
    * Firm Profile 
      * Background
      * Affiliations
      * Mission
      * Project Process
      * Healthcare Foucus
      * Underlying Principles
    * Services 
      * Valuation Consulting
      * Commercial Reasonableness Opinions
      * Fairness Opinions
      * Commercial Payor Reimbursement Benchmarking
      * Litigation Support & Expert Witness
      * Financial Feasibility Analysis & Modeling
      * Intermediary Services
      * Certificate of Need
      * ACO Value Metrics & Capital Formation
      * Strategic Consulting
      * Industry Research Services
    * HCC Leadership 
      * Todd A. Zigrang
    

President

    
          * John R. Chwarzinski
    

Senior Vice President

    
          * Jessica L. Bailey-Wheaton
    

Vice President & General Counsel

    
          * Daniel J. Chen
    

Senior Financial Analyst

    
        * Clients & Projects 
      * Recent HCC Projects
      * Law Firm
      * Healthcare Providers
    * News 
      * News Archives
      * Upcoming Events
      * Featured Topics
      * Media Interviews
    * Resources 
      * HC Topics
      * Published Articles
      * Lectures & Presentations
      * Professional Courses
      * Legislative Testimony
      * Online Sources
      * Glossary
      * Healthcare Taxonomies
    * Careers
    * Contact
    

![PDF Icon](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/pdf-

icon.png)View PDF

![HC Topics Banner

Image](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/banner_imgs/10/4.jpg)

#### Tort Reform: The Impact of the ACA on Medical Malpractice

The impact of the _Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act_ (ACA) on the
U.S. medical malpractice system is relatively unknown, due to: (1) the lack of
direct impacts; (2) the ACA’s insurance provisions not becoming effective
until 2014; and, (3) medical malpractice insurance being based on a historical
_“tail”_ method, i.e., the allowance of claims to be reported to an insurer of
an expired policy. This uncertainty continues to reflect the concerns of
medical liability insurers, in part, because there have been few, if any,
answers to alleviate their uncertainty and measure the ACA’s impact on the
incidence and cost of medical malpractice. This is the third _Health Capital
Topics_ article in a three-part series on tort reform, and will summarize the
impact of the ACA on the medical malpractice environment.

Only two sections of the ACA directly address the medical malpractice system.
Section 6801 of the ACA simply provides a policy statement regarding the
importance of medical malpractice reform and encourages Congress to develop
program alternatives to the current civil litigation system for medical
malpractice. 1 Additionally, Section 10607 of the ACA authorizes the
_Department of Health and Human Services_ (HHS) to award grants to states “
_for the development, implementation, and evaluation of alternatives to
current tort litigation_ ” for medical malpractice claims.2 This section
allows HHS to make available $50 million in grants for these demonstration
projects, subject to congressional approval.3 Congress planned demonstration
projects to give states improved statistical evidence on certain types of
malpractice reform, such as impacts due to apology programs, where physicians
apologize for faults in care, or early disclosure, where physicians
immediately disclose faults in care to patient representatives.4 Evidence
resulting from these projects could consequently be used to develop state or
federal malpractice reform laws. As of May 2016, HHS awarded seven
demonstration grants totaling $19.7 million.5 The projects conducted by the
grantees included: (1) studies of communication methods, such as when and how
physicians talk to families about instances of malpractice, including
apologies;6 (2) improving medical procedures in risk-prone specialties, and
then measuring for decreases in malpractice rates;7 and, (3) examining the
efficacy of alternative claim settlements involving health courts, medical
malpractice deferments, or judge-led negotiations.8 For example, a
demonstration grant in New York’s funded an alternative malpractice-specific
dispute system, which was found to be quicker and more financially efficient
than traditional litigation, and popular with both plaintiffs and defendants.9
After the demonstration period, New York self-funded the project to expand it
beyond Manhattan.10 However, as of April 2017, HHS has not utilized the full
$50 million in grants, and many of the grant programs failed to show a
decrease in malpractice rates, greatly lessening the direct effects of the ACA
on current malpractice rates.11

Even without these potential direct impacts, the medical malpractice system
may still face changes as a result of the ACA. The _Medical Liability
Monitor’s_ 2016 _Annual Rate Survey Issue_ found that the ACA did not
_directly_ impact malpractice risk, but _indirectly_ impacted it through
incentivizing provider consolidation and self-insurance within the industry.
12 As providers consolidate with larger health systems, insurers fear that the
medical liability insurance market “ _will shrink as their former customers
become their competitors._ ”13 From 2011 to 2016, medical liability insurers
consistently noted to the _Medical Liability Monitor_ that hospital or
_accountable care organization_ (ACO) acquisitions of physician practices
serve as “ _the biggest threat to their market share_ ” because of the larger
entity’s ability to better absorb the risk related to malpractice liability.14
In theory, this ability to absorb this risk will allow for higher rates of
self-insurance, which can negatively affect the rates of straight indemnity
insurers.

Upon the 2010 passage of the ACA, the number of malpractice claims was
expected to increase as more individuals gained health insurance coverage.
Building on the premise that insured people receive more care than the
uninsured,15 a RAND report on the ACA and liability insurance relationships
estimated that with the expected influx of newly-insured individuals,
particularly in states expanding Medicaid, more physician-patient encounters
would increase the volume of overall medical errors, leading to an increase in
medical malpractice lawsuits.16 Consequently, the RAND report estimated that
the number of liability payments in medical malpractice actions would increase
by 3.4 percent.17 However, according to the __ 2016 _Annual Rate Survey Issue_
, claim frequency levels are at “ _historic lows [with] little-to-no evidence
of a significant upward trend in the near future_.” 18 It also remains unclear
whether this depressed claim frequency actually reflects decreased numbers of
medical malpractice lawsuits, although it may be attributable to the efforts
by states over the past 40 years to limit noneconomic damages for this type of
litigation, which may, in part, disincentive plaintiff attorneys, who work on
a _contingency fee basis_ , from assuming the risk of representing a client in
a case that will only result in a certain (i.e., capped) amount of damages.19

One direct effect of the ACA is the remedy it has provided for a for medical
malpractice cases. Due to the ACA’s requirement that most individuals have
health insurance (i.e., the _Individual Mandate_ ),20 as well as the statutory
out-of-pocket spending limits placed on insurers,21 both defense attorneys and
scholars have asserted that medical malpractice future damages should be
limited to the total sum of insurance premiums and out-of-pocket expenditures
of plaintiffs (in contrast to the _retail rate_ of each future medical
service). 22 Prior to ACA implementation, future medical costs comprised the
bulk of damages in malpractice cases, due in part to the inability of
plaintiffs to find insurance as their resulting disability qualified as a
_preexisting condition_ , barring them from obtaining insurance coverage and
significantly increasing their out-of-pocket expenses.23 If courts allow this
proposed remedy, damages would ostensibly be limited to an individual’s annual
insurance premiums and ACA out-of-pocket cap of $7,150, a total damages amount
that would be significantly less than all future healthcare costs for an
uninsured individual.24 Due in part to this significant difference in
potential damage awards, some courts are hearing defense arguments to limit
damages to this future insurance limit, or are allowing defendants to pay only
the future _insurance out-of-pocket amounts_ for a harmed plaintiff rather
than the _future health costs_. 25 Other states, including Minnesota,
Illinois, Alabama, Michigan, New York, and Washington, have expressly
disallowed this new remedy based on the _collateral source rule,_ which allows
plaintiffs to recover damages regardless of insurance recovery.26 California,
a state without the _collateral source rule,_ did not allow this remedy in a
case, but the defendant only argued the full ACA-based remedy on appeal,
leaving a window for future litigators to try again.27 This remedy can greatly
decrease the financial burden of malpractice cases on defendants, and could
lower malpractice insurance premium costs, however it is unclear if courts
will allow its use.

Because the ACA’s insurance provisions did not take effect until 2014, there
is little data to quantify the effect (if any) of the law on the amount and
frequency of medical malpractice claims.28 This uncertainty is also due to the
structure of medical malpractice insurance. Most malpractice insurance
operates on a “ _tail coverage”_ basis, which covers any lawsuits that may
arise within a contractually-specified extended time period after an initial
policy coverage period ends.29 Analyzing _tail coverage_ schemes requires
years, and even decades, worth of datasets, which are not yet available for
ACA-related claims.

Although the (direct and indirect) impacts of the ACA on medical malpractice
are still unknown, the larger debate concerning the ultimate path of tort
reform will continue as Congress focuses on healthcare reform. With the
approval by the House Judiciary Committee of the “ _Protecting Access to Care
Act of 2017_ ,”30 which seeks to implement a non-economic damages cap of
$250,000 for medical malpractice actions, the Republican-controlled Congress
has signaled an intent to push for tort reform on the federal level.31
Healthcare and legal professionals may find it prudent to closely monitor
federal tort reform bills in addition to state-level proposals, and explore
the potential impact, if any, of such bills on issues affecting medical
malpractice, including risk levels and the cost of professional liability
insurance.

* * *

1

“Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” Pub. L. No. 111-148, § 124,
Stat. 804 (March 23, 2010).

2

_Ibid._ Stat. 1009

3

_Ibid._ Stat. 1014

4

“Medical Liability Demonstration Projects: A Small but Important Step Towards
Malpractice Reform and Cutting the Costs of Health Care” By Megan Donohue,
Annals of Health Law Advanced Directive, Vol. 20, (Fall 2010), pp. 39-48.

5

“Longitudinal Evaluation of the Patient Safety and Medical Liability Reform
Demonstration Program” By Michelle Pillen et al., Report For Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality, May 2016,
https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/professionals/quality-
patient-safety/patient-safety-resources/resources/candor/psml-demo-grants-
final-report.pdf (Accessed 4/13/2017) p. 1.

6

_Ibid._ p. 12.

7

_Ibid._ p. 22.

8

_Ibid._ p. 30.

9

_Ibid._ p. 44.

10

_Ibid._

11

_Ibid._ p. 39.

12

“Do Still Waters Still Run Deep? Medical Professional Liability in 2016” By
Paul Greve, JD, RPLU and Alison Milford, ACAS, MAAA, Medical Liability
Monitor, Vol. 41, No. 10 (October 2016) p. 6.

13

“From Crunchy Candy to Simmering Frogs: Waiting and Hoping for a Hardening
Market as the Market Trends Slowly, Steadily Softer” By Chad C. Karls, FCAS,
MAAA, Medical Liability Monitor, Vol. 36, No. 10 (October 2011), p. 5.

14

“The Slinky Effect: With Medical Professional Liability Insurance Rates
Continuing to – Slowly and Steadily – Decline During the Most Recent Soft
Market, It Appears It will Take Several More Years Before the Market Hardens
and Rates Accelerate Upward” By Chad C. Karls, FCAS, MAAA, Medical Liability
Monitor, Vol. 39, No. 10 (October 2014), p. 6; “Casualty Actuarial Society
Session Debates Potential Medical Professional Liability Implications of
PPACA” Medical Liability Monitor, Vol. 39, No. 7 (July 2014), p. 4; “Do Still
Waters Still Run Deep? Medical Professional Liability in 2016” By Paul Greve,
JD, RPLU and Alison Milford, ACAS, MAAA, Medical Liability Monitor, Vol. 41,
No. 10 (October 2016) p. 2.

15

“Insurance Coverage, Medical Care Use, and Short-Term Health Changes Following
an Unintentional Injury or the Onset of a Chronic Condition” By Jack Hadley,
Ph.D., Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 297, No. 10 (March
14, 2007), p. 1080.

16

“How Will the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Affect Liability
Insurance Costs?” By David I. Auerbach et al., RAND Corporation, 2014, p. 30.

17

_Ibid_. p. 31.

18

Paul Greve, JD, RPLU and Alison Milford, ACAS, MAAA, October 2016, p. 1.

19

“Rates and Characteristics of Paid Malpractice Claims Among US Physicians by
Specialty, 1992-2014” By Adam C. Schaffer, M.D., et al., JAMA Internal
Medicine, (March 27, 2017),
http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-abstract/2612118
(Accessed 4/12/17) p. E6.

20

“Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” Pub. L. No. 111-148, § 124,
Stat. 1501 (March 23, 2010).

21

“Out-of-pocket maximum / limit” Healthcare.gov, 2017,
https://www.healthcare.gov/glossary/out-of-pocket-maximum-limit/ (Accessed
4/20/2017).

22

“Compensating Persons Injured by Medical Malpractice and Other Tortious
Behavior for Future Medical Expenses Under the Affordable Care Act” By Maxwell
Mehlman, et al., Annals of Health Law, Vol. 25, No. 35 (2016), p. 35.

23

_Ibid._ p. 43.

24

“Out-of-pocket maximum / limit” Healthcare.gov, 2017,
https://www.healthcare.gov/glossary/out-of-pocket-maximum-limit/ (Accessed
4/20/2017).

25

“The Affordable Care Act is Not Tort Reform” By Andrew F. Popper, Catholic
University Law Review, Vol. 65, No. 1 (2015), p. 3-4; “Thwart the Assault on
Future Medical Expenses” By Seth Cardeli, TRIAL Magazine, (May 2014),
http://myadvocates.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/Thwart-the-Assault-on-
Medical-Expenses_SethCardeli.pdf (Accessed 4/20/2014).

26

"Halsne v. Avera Health" Case No. 12-cv-409 (March 21, 2014), Memorandum
Opinion And Order; “Thwart the Assault on Future Medical Expenses” By Seth
Cardeli, TRIAL Magazine, (May 2014), http://myadvocates.wpengine.com/wp-
content/uploads/Thwart-the-Assault-on-Medical-Expenses_SethCardeli.pdf
(Accessed 4/20/2014).

27

“Leung v. Verdugo Hills Hosp., B204908, 2013 WL 221654, at *10 (Cal. Ct. App.
Jan. 22, 2013).

28

“Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” Pub. L. No. 111-148, § 124,
Stat. 1255 (March 23, 2010); “2014 in 214 words” Healthcare.gov, August 7,
2013, https://www.healthcare.gov/blog/2014-in-214-words/ (Accessed 4/14/2017).

29

“The Medical Malpractice Crisis: Bandaging Oregon’s Wounded System and
Protecting Physicians” By Valerie B. Hedrick, Willamette Law Review, Vol. 43,
No. 3 (May 8, 2007), p. 375-376.

30

“Protecting Access to Care Act” H.R. 1215, 115th Cong. § 4(b) (Feb. 21, 2017).

31

“The Medical Professional Liability Tort Reform Blitz of 2017” Medical
Liability Monitor, Vol. 42, No. 4 (April 2017) p. 1.

**

(C) Health Capital Consultants

**

![HCC Logo](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/hcc-

logo.png)

(800)FYI - VALU

Providing Solutions  
in the Era of  
Healthcare Reform

Founded in 1993, HCC is a nationally recognized healthcare economic fincancial
consulting firm

    
        * **HCC Home**
    * **Firm Profile**
    * **HCC Services**
    * **HCC Experts**
    * **Clients & Projects**
    * **HCC News**
    * **Upcoming Events**
    * **Contact Us**
    * **Email Us**
    

### HCC Services

    
        * **Valuation Consulting**
    * **Commercial Reasonableness Opinions**
    * **Commercial Payor Reimbursement Benchmarking**
    * **Litigation Support & Expert Witness**
    * **Financial Feasibility Analysis & Modeling**
    * **Intermediary Services**
    * **Certificate of Need**
    * **ACO Value Metrics & Capital Formation**
    * **Strategic Consulting**
    * **Industry Research Services**
    

![Todd A. Zigrang](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-

imgs/tzigrang.jpg)

**Todd A. Zigrang** , MBA, MHA, CVA, ASA, FACHE, is the President of Health
Capital Consultants (HCC), where he focuses on the areas of valuation and
financial analysis for hospitals, physician practices, and other healthcare
enterprises. Mr. Zigrang has over 20 years of experience providing valuation,
financial, transaction and strategic advisory services nationwide in over
1,000 transactions and joint ventures. Mr. Zigrang is also considered an
expert in the field of healthcare compensation for physicians, executives and
other professionals.

Mr. Zigrang is the co-author of " _The Adviser’s Guide to Healthcare – 2nd
Edition_ " [2015 – AICPA], numerous chapters in legal treatises and
anthologies, and peer-reviewed and industry articles such as: The Accountant’s
Business Manual (AICPA); Valuing Professional Practices and Licenses (Aspen
Publishers); Valuation Strategies; Business Appraisal Practice; and, NACVA
QuickRead. In addition to his contributions as an author, Mr. Zigrang has
served as faculty before professional and trade associations such as the
American Society of Appraisers (ASA); the National Association of Certified
Valuators and Analysts (NACVA); Physician Hospitals of America (PHA); the
Institute of Business Appraisers (IBA); the Healthcare Financial Management
Association (HFMA); and, the CPA Leadership Institute.

Mr. Zigrang holds a Master of Science in Health Administration (MHA) and a
Master of Business Administration (MBA) from the University of Missouri at
Columbia. He is a Fellow of the American College of Healthcare Executives
(FACHE) and holds the Accredited Senior Appraiser (ASA) designation from the
American Society of Appraisers, where he has served as President of the St.
Louis Chapter, and is current Chair of the ASA Healthcare Special Interest
Group (HSIG).

![John R. Chwarzinski](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-

imgs/jchwarzinski.jpg)

**John R. Chwarzinski** , MSF, MAE, is Senior Vice President of Health Capital
Consultants (HCC). Mr. Chwarzinski’s areas of expertise include advanced
statistical analysis, econometric modeling, as well as, economic and financial
analysis. Mr. Chwarzinski is the co-author of peerreviewed and industry
articles published in Business Valuation Review and NACVA QuickRead, and he
has spoken before the Virginia Medical Group Management Association (VMGMA)
and the Midwest Accountable Care Organization Expo.

Mr. Chwarzinski holds a Master’s Degree in Economics from the University of
Missouri – St. Louis, as well as, a Master’s Degree in Finance from the John
M. Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis. He is a
member of the St. Louis Chapter of the American Society of Appraisers, as well
as a candidate for the Accredited Senior Appraiser designation from the
American Society of Appraisers.

![Jessica L. Bailey-

Wheaton](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/jbailey.jpg)

**Jessica L. Bailey-Wheaton** , Esq., is Vice President and General Counsel of
Health Capital Consultants (HCC), where she conducts project management and
consulting services related to the impact of both federal and state
regulations on healthcare exempt organization transactions and provides
research services necessary to support certified opinions of value related to
the Fair Market Value and Commercial Reasonableness of transactions related to
healthcare enterprises, assets, and services. Ms. Bailey is a member of the MO
and IL Bars and holds a J.D., with a concentration in Health Law, from Saint
Louis University School of Law, where she served as Fall Managing Editor for
the Journal of Health Law & Policy.

![Daniel J. Chen](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-

imgs/dchen.jpg)

**Daniel J. Chen** , MSF, CVA, is a Senior Financial Analyst at Health Capital
Consultants (HCC), where he develops fair market value and commercial
reasonableness opinions related to healthcare enterprises, assets, and
services. In addition he prepares, reviews and analyzes forecasted and pro
forma financial statements to determine the most probable future net economic
benefit related to healthcare enterprises, assets, and services and applies
utilization demand and reimbursement trends to project professional medical
revenue streams and ancillary services and technical component(ASTC) revenue
streams. Mr. Chen has a M.S. in Finance from Washington University St. Louis.

(C) Health Capital Consultants

![Healthcare Valuation

Banner](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/hc-valuation-

banner.jpg) ![Advisor's Guide to Healthcare

Banner](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/advisors-guide-

banner.jpg) ![Accountable Care Organizations

Banner](https://www.healthcapital.com/hcc/newsletter/html-imgs/ACOs-

banner.jpg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

