

Skip to main content

![The Fiscal

Times](https://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/zq35QoVVKqo3NfRnE4uUdutXzVY6DVGqc75M8rJtrLE/mtime:1559773171/sites/all/themes/tft-

new/logo.png)

Another Big Flaw in Obamacare—Tort Reform

__

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=401214826749108&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?ev=6031119860094&cd\[value\]=0.00&cd\[currency\]=USD&noscript=1)

![The Fiscal

Times](https://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/zq35QoVVKqo3NfRnE4uUdutXzVY6DVGqc75M8rJtrLE/mtime:1559773171/sites/all/themes/tft-

new/logo.png)

## Search form

Search

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    
    * Free Newsletter
    * Budget
    * Taxes
    * Health Care
    * Social Security
    * The Debt
    * Search
    

# Another Big Flaw in Obamacare—Tort Reform

    
        * View published (active tab)
    
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

By Liz Peek

Follow

December 23, 2013

![Printer-friendly

version](https://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/YC165Z93uAoHqb9Ga_vfFUMg5d_xYn6xmj5E8HN2me0/mtime:1559773171/sites/all/modules/contrib/print/icons/print_icon.gif)

a a

Type Size: Small

What’s left of Obamacare? With all the delays and “fixes,” the misnamed
Affordable Care Act looks like downtown Aleppo – a mere shell of its former
self.

There are now 14 changes that President Obama has made to his grotesque
healthcare bill. These are not “tweaks” but, rather, wholesale changes to the
way the law is meant to play out. Many (like the deadline extension for 2015
enrollment) are meant to postpone the pain until after the 2014 elections.
Others are in response to the fury felt by millions who believed the president
when he assured them they would keep their insurance. Added together, the
delay of the states’ Basic Health Program, the small business postponement,
the putting-off of the employer mandate and the most recent decision to let
individuals off the hook – you have to say, there’s not much meat left on
these bones.

Should we be relieved? No. The country continues to stagger under the
uncertainty of this grandiose reordering of our healthcare industries, and
2014 will be no different. Next year, as insurers come to grip with the
disappointing enrollment results – too many old and sick, not nearly enough
young and healthy – they will begin to propose premium hikes for 2015 that
will appall the nation. The White House, in response, will try to jawbone the
insurers into airbrushing their plans; insurers, faced with losses, will stand
firm. What then? President Obama and his team will make the insurers whole by
funneling subsidies to that industry; the Affordable Care Act protects
insurance companies from losses. Taxpayers will foot the bill, and they will
not be happy.

The president and his anxious supporters hope the problems will go away. They
will not. The law demands that money be taken from the vast majority of
Americans and given to a smaller pool of formerly uninsured. It was not sold
this way. It was presented as a way to rein in spiraling healthcare costs.
President Obama would have the country believe that the healthcare law is
already having this impact. Yes, the frightening inflation of healthcare costs
of several years ago has subsided, but it is not because of Obamacare. It is
because of the recession, and several fortuitous events, such as a number of
major drugs, like Lipitor, going generic. (Prescription drugs account for
about 14 percent of private medical outlays and have been one of the faster-
rising cost ingredients in our healthcare soup.)

If cost control were really the ambition, some ideas favored by Republicans,
such as limiting the awards available to patients who sue their doctors –
i.e., tort reform – would have been adopted. The Obama White House stood in
the way of limiting excessive payments to plaintiffs. Why, after all, would
they bite the hand of the tort bar that so generously feeds them? (Lawyers and
law firms gave $28 million to Obama’s reelection effort, compared to $14
million to GOP candidate Romney. From 1990 to date, the American Association
for Justice, previously called the Association of Trial Lawyers of America,
doled out 95 percent of its $25 million in contributions to Democrats.)

The American Association for Justice cites on its website a 2004 CBO study
concluding that malpractice costs only amount to 2 percent of healthcare
expenditures. That figure, however, only includes actual settlements made by
insurers and doctors. It does not reflect the widespread over-diagnosis of
tests and treatments that serve to protect doctors from lawsuits in case
anything should go wrong.

It also doesn’t ring true. When general surgeons in Miami pay $190,000 per
year for malpractice insurance and internists in Detroit are charged roughly
$35,000 per year, my guess is that doctors work to minimize their exposure.
Other studies back this up.

For example, a 2008 study by PricewaterhouseCoopers' Health Research Institute
estimated the cost of defensive medicine at $210 billion per year, or 10
percent of all healthcare spending. Bolstering that position was a wide-
ranging survey of practitioners in 2010 that found some 91 percent of doctors
practicing “defensive medicine”, attempting to avoid lawsuits. Harder data
emerges from a 2008 survey that was conducted by the Massachusetts Medical
Society; they found that 83 percent of their members spend $1.4 billion or
more a year trying to protect themselves against lawsuits.

_More than 20 percent of procedures like x-rays, magnetic resonance images,
and ultrasounds were performed for this reason; some 28 percent of the
specialty referrals and 13 percent of the hospital admissions ordered by
doctors were for defensive purposes_ – shocking (and probably honest)
statistics.

Another study, by the Rand Corporation, estimates that an average of 10
percent of a physician’s career (or 4 years over a 40-year span) may be spent
fighting malpractice claims. That figure rises for some specialties; for
neurosurgeons the average is 27 percent of their career. With a doctor
shortage looming, this seems a huge expenditure of our nation’s medical
capability.

Doctors and hospitals must be held accountable, but to allow out-of-control
malpractice settlements to inflate our already-high medical costs seems
absurd. As with most aspects of Obamacare, there must surely be a better way.

![](https://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/CkMa1WkJOF3ZE5VTt-

wDR97m6_rdB09Ozx5WOW73rz0/mtime:1441894990/sites/default/files/styles/author_bio/public/Liz_Peek_large.jpg?itok=VONmL9Qk)

Liz Peek

Follow on Twitter See Facebook Page

After more than two decades on Wall Street as a top-ranked research analyst,
Liz Peek became a columnist and political analyst. Aside from The Fiscal
Times, she writes for FoxNews.com, The New York Sun and Women on the Web.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=14117530&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c4gb0ythXExpc.gif)

    
        * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    

Follow Your Money

(C) 2009-2019 The Fiscal Times. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

