

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png) Find your
Lawyer Explore Resources For...

Learn About the Law

        
                  * Accidents and Injuries
          * Arbitration and Mediation
          * Bankruptcy
          * Car Accidents
          * Civil Rights
          * Consumer Protection
          * Criminal Law
          * DUI Law
          * Education Law
          * Elder Law
          * Employment Law
          * Estate Planning
          * Family Law
          * Health Care Law
          * Immigration Law
          * Litigation and Appeals
          * Military Law
          * Product Liability
          * Real Estate Law
          * Small Business Law
          * Social Security and Retirement Planning
          * State Laws
          * Tax Law
          * Traffic Laws
        

FindLaw Answers

Legal Forms

Blogs

Are you a Legal Professional?

__

Visit Legal Professionals Site

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png)

        
                  *       * Find a Lawyer
          * Learn About the Law
          * FindLaw Answers
          * Legal Forms
          * Blogs
          * For Legal Professionals
        

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

##### More Options

        
                  * Legal Issues
          * Name Search
          * Browse Lawyers
          * Browse Law Firms
          * Browse Types of Cases
          * Help
        

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

Cancel

##### More Options

        
                  * Legal Issues
          * Name Search
          * Browse Lawyers
          * Browse Law Firms
          * Browse Types of Cases
          * Help
        
          * FindLaw
          * Learn About The Law
          * Family Law
          * Reproductive Rights
          * Abortion Laws
        

# Abortion Laws

![Subscribe to FindLaw Newsletters](https://www.findlawimages.com/newsletters-

component/nlmodulefinal.jpg)

__

By submitting this form, you agree to Findlaw.com's terms. We respect your
privacy.

Top Headlines U.S. Supreme Court Modern Practice Is It Legal? Weirdly Legal
Everyday Legal California Lawyers Federal Practice What the L? Law & Tech

**Thank you for subscribing!**

#

Created by FindLaw's team of attorney writers and editors.

The Supreme Court's decision in the 1972 case of _Roe v. Wade_ was -- and is
still -- the most important decision affecting abortion in the United States.
Roe made it possible for women to terminate their pregnancies for virtually
any reason within certain gestational time limits.

Since Roe, abortion has come under scrutiny by lawmakers and abortion
opponents who have pushed for stricter abortion laws over the past several
decades. For instance, the 1992 case of _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ upheld a
woman's right to legal abortion, but allowed for states to impose certain
restrictions on abortion, such as 24-hour waiting periods, informed consent
requirements, parental consent provisions, and record keeping mandates.

Although legal abortion is still the law of the land, the future of abortion
leans toward stricter limitations that seem to chip away at the essential
holding of Roe.

Below is a summary of abortion laws that arguably limit a woman's right to
have an abortion. For state-specific information, check your state's abortion
laws.

**Counseling**

Most states require women to receive counseling before an abortion procedure.
The type of counseling varies among the states, but may include:

        
                  1. Information about a potential link between breast cancer and abortions;
          2. The fetus' ability to feel pain;
          3. Mental health consequences; and
          4. Availability of ultrasounds.
        

**Waiting Periods**

More than half of the states require a woman to wait 24 hours (or longer)
before receiving an abortion. A handful of states also require a woman to
visit a clinic more than once between the initial consultation and the actual
abortion procedure.

**Doctor and Hospital Requirements**

In the majority of states, abortions must be performed by a licensed
physician. Several other states require abortions to be performed in a
hospital (depending on the trimester), and other states require a second
physician to be present in abortions after a certain limit.

The majority of states allow medical institutions to refuse abortions and a
handful of these states only allow refusal by private or religious
institutions.

**Gestational Limits**

Most states ban abortions after a certain gestational time period - such as
after "fetal viability" or when a fetus might potentially survive outside the
womb. The time period of fetal viability varies among the states. The most
stringent gestational limit is 20-weeks (Nebraska and North Carolina). Other
states limit abortions to under 24-weeks (Florida, Nevada, and New York).

**Parental Involvement**

Parental consent and notification laws generally relate to women under the age
of 18. Most states require at least one parent's involvement in a minor's
decision to have an abortion. Other states require both parents to consent to
an abortion procedure, while a dozen states require only one or both parents
be notified. Finally, a small number of states require both parental consent
and notification.

**" Partial-Birth" Abortions**

"Partial-birth" abortions refer to a controversial procedure that ends a
pregnancy through a method which partially delivers an intact fetus before
aborting it. The federal government has banned the use of this method in most
cases (according to _Gonzales v. Carhart_ (2007)). More than a dozen states
have also banned partial-birth abortions, with a few of these states banning
this procedure only after viability.

**Public Funding**

Most states prohibit the use of state funds to pay for abortions, except in a
few circumstances - such as when federal funds are available, where the
mother's life is in danger, or where rape or incest was involved. Other states
allow abortions to be paid through state funds. One state (South Dakota)
limits funding for abortion except when a mother's life is in danger.

**Private Insurance Coverage**

A handful of states cover abortions under private insurance plans, but only
when a women's life is endangered if she carries the pregnancy to term. Other
states allow individual health care providers to refuse abortions.

**Ultrasounds**

Under new laws, a growing number of states require women to view or hear the
fetus through an ultrasound before undergoing an abortion.

**Confused About Your State's Abortion Laws? Consider Speaking with an
Attorney  
**

Although abortion remains technically legal under federal and state law,
states have been placing restrictions on access to the procedure. And since
state abortion laws change rather frequently, sometimes professional legal
advice is needed. Consider getting the help of a family law attorney for some
clarity on an abortion-related legal matter today.

### Next Steps

Contact a qualified family law attorney to make sure your rights are
protected.

### Help Me Find a Do-It-Yourself Solution

        
                  * Premarital Forms
          * Name Change Forms
          * Paternity Forms
        

## Popular Directory Searches

        
                  * Divorce Lawyers
          * Child Custody Attorneys
          * Child Support Attorneys
          * Adoption Lawyers
        

## Reproductive Rights

        
                  * Abortion
          * Birth Control
          * Reproductive Rights Overview
        

Back to Top

Learn More About

        
                Legal Topics
        State Laws
        Blogs
        FindLaw RSS Feeds
        Abogado
        LawInfo
        Super Lawyers
        

Find a Lawyer

        
                Browse by Location
        Browse by Legal Issue
        Browse by Law Firm & Lawyer Profile
        

Get Legal Forms

        
                Visit our Legal Forms site
        

Find Answers

        
                FindLaw Answers
        Community Guidelines
        

For Lawyers

        
                Visit our professional site
        Edit your legal profile
        Website development
        Advertise on our site
        

About Us

        
                Company History
        Media
        About FindLaw.com
        Contact Us
        Privacy
        Cookies
        Terms
        Disclaimer
        Advertising
        Jobs
        

Social

        
                ![Facebook icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Facebook
        ![Youtube icon](data:image/png;base64,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) YouTube
        ![Twitter icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Twitter
        ![Pinterest icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Pinterest
        

Law Firm Marketing

        
                Attorney Websites
        Online Advertising
        Buy a Directory Profile
        

Marketing Resources

        
                On-Demand Webcasts
        White Papers
        

* * *

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png)

![Thomson Reuters Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/tr-logo.png)

Copyright (C) 2019, Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

