

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

    * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

뉴스

도서

동영상

더보기

지도쇼핑금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 368,000,000개 (0.33초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 번역 결과

영어

한국어

    
            expenses
    

expenses

    
            경비
    
        gyeongbi
    

번역 복사됨

    
            번역(여성형)
    
        (여성형)
    

번역 복사됨

    
            번역(남성형)
    
        (남성형)
    

번역 복사됨

* * *

'expenses'의 번역

명사

* * *

경비

expenses, budget, defense, outgoings, outgo, outgoing

* * *

지출

expenditure, expenses, outlay, outgoings, carrying out, supply

* * *

소요 경비

expenses, expense

* * *

용

dragon, pocket money, antler, expenses

Google 번역에서 열기|

사용자 의견

---|--- 

## 웹 검색결과

### EXPENSE | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

_expense_ 의미, 정의, _expense_ 의 정의: 1. the use of money, time, or effort: 2.
something that makes you spend money: 3. money that you spend when you are ...

### Expense Definition - Investopedia

https://www.investopedia.com › Business › Business Essentials

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

    1.       1.         1.           * Common _expenses_ include payments to suppliers, employee wages, factory leases, and equipment depreciation. Businesses are allowed to ...

### What is an expense? definition and meaning - BusinessDictionary.com

www.businessdictionary.com/definition/expense.html

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    2. 유사한 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition of _expense_ : Money spent or cost incurred in an organization's
efforts to generate revenue, representing the cost of doing business.
_Expenses_ may be ...

### Expense - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    2. 유사한 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

Expenditure is an outflow of money to another person or group to pay for an
item or service, or for a category of costs. For a tenant, rent is an
_expense_.

‎Bookkeeping for expenses · ‎Cash flow · ‎Deduction of business ... · ‎Expense
report

### Expenses - Definition, Types, and Practical Examples

https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com › ... › Accounting

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

An _expense_ is a type of expenditure that flows through the income statement
and is deducted from revenue to arrive at net income. _Expenses_ are
considered.

### Expense definition — AccountingTools

https://www.accountingtools.com/articles/2017/5/6/expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

    1.       1.         1.           * An _expense_ is the reduction in value of an asset as it is used to generate revenue. If the underlying asset is to be used over a long period of ...

### What is an expense? | AccountingCoach

https://www.accountingcoach.com/blog/what-is-an-expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    2. 유사한 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition of _Expense_ Under the accrual method of accounting, an _expense_
is a cost that is reported on the income statement for the period in which:
The cost ...

### What are Expenses? - Definition | Meaning | Example

https://www.myaccountingcourse.com/accounting.../expenses

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition: An _expense_ is the cost of an asset used by a company in its
operations to produce revenues. In other words, an _expense_ is the use of
assets to create ...

### Expense definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary

https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    2. 유사한 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

_Expense_ definition: _Expense_ is the money that something costs you or that
you need to spend in order to do... | Meaning, pronunciation, translations and
...

### Expense - What is an expense? | Debitoor invoicing software

https://debitoor.com/dictionary/expense

    
        1. 저장된 페이지
    2. 유사한 페이지
    

이 페이지 번역하기

Stay on top of your _expenses_ by registering them quickly and easily from
anywhere with Debitoor accounting software. Try it free for 7 days. An
_expense_ is the ...

### 관련 검색: expenses

expenses 뜻

expense 미드

expenditure

expense report

revenue

expense cost 차이

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

    *       *         * 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

    
        * Google 계정
    * 검색
    * 지도
    * YouTube
    * Play
    * 뉴스
    * Gmail
    * 주소록
    * 드라이브
    * 캘린더
    * 번역
    * 사진
    * 쇼핑
    

더보기

    
        * 문서
    * 도서
    * Blogger
    * Duo
    * 행아웃
    * Keep
    * Jamboard
    * 컬렉션
    

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

