

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

__

__

    
        * Research
    * Events
    * Publications
    * Commentary
    * Store
    * Support
    
    * About Cato
    * Blog
    * Our Experts
    * Our Centers
    * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    

## Search form

Search this site

![](/sites/all/themes/cato/styles/images/blog_rev4.png)

# Cato At Liberty

    
        * __RSS
    * Customize
    

May 3, 2018 12:21PM

# Average Tax Rates by Income Group

By Chris Edwards

Share

    
        *  __Tweet
    * __Like
    * __Submit
    * __Share
    

For months, news articles and commentaries have decried the supposedly huge
tax cuts for the rich passed by Republicans in December. In a classic
rhetorical formulation, a _New York Times_ editorial in February said,
“Republicans designed the law to principally benefit wealthy families while
offering crumbs to low-income and middle class families.”

Actually, the largest relative tax cuts went to the middle class, as I discuss
here. But perhaps some people have fixed views on the tax cut, and can’t
imagine the Republicans doing anything other than favors for plutocrats.

So let’s try a different angle and look at overall burdens under the GOP tax
law, which went into effect January 1. The official tax scorekeeper, the Joint
Committee on Taxation, recently published estimates of average income tax
rates by income group for 2018, which are presented in the table below. The
tax rates are income taxes paid divided by total income within each group.

Tax rates rise rapidly as income rises above $50,000 a year. The $1 million
and over group pays a 10 times higher share (26.3 percent) of their income to
taxes than does the middle $50,000 to $75,000 group (2.4 percent).

In aggregate, households with incomes of less than $50,000 do not pay any
federal income taxes. Instead, they receive large subsidies from the U.S.
Treasury in the form of refundable tax credits. Those subsidies to low earners
are expected to jump from $83 billion a year before the tax law to $99 billion
after the tax law (page 48).

That is more than crumbs.

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/wp-

content/uploads/average_tax_rates.png)

Data from Table A-6.

Topics:

Tax and Budget Policy

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

### Topics

    
        * Cato Publications
    * Constitution, the Law, and the Courts
    * Criminal Law and Civil Liberties
    * Education and Child Policy
    * Energy and Environment
    * Finance, Banking & Monetary Policy
    * Foreign Policy and National Security
    * General
    * Government and Politics
    * Health Care
    * International Economics, Development & Immigration
    * Political Philosophy
    * Poverty & Social Welfare
    * Regulatory Studies
    * Social Security
    * Tax and Budget Policy
    * Telecom, Internet & Information Policy
    * Trade Policy
    

### Archives

    
        * June 2019
    * May 2019
    * April 2019
    * March 2019
    * February 2019
    * January 2019
    * December 2018
    * November 2018
    * October 2018
    * September 2018
    * August 2018
    * July 2018
    * June 2018
    * May 2018
    * April 2018
    * March 2018
    * February 2018
    * January 2018
    * December 2017
    * November 2017
    * October 2017
    * September 2017
    * August 2017
    * July 2017
    * June 2017
    * May 2017
    * April 2017
    * March 2017
    * February 2017
    * January 2017
    * December 2016
    * November 2016
    * October 2016
    * September 2016
    * August 2016
    * July 2016
    * June 2016
    * May 2016
    * April 2016
    * March 2016
    * February 2016
    * January 2016
    * December 2015
    * November 2015
    * October 2015
    * September 2015
    * August 2015
    * July 2015
    * June 2015
    * May 2015
    * April 2015
    * March 2015
    * February 2015
    * January 2015
    * December 2014
    * November 2014
    * October 2014
    * September 2014
    * August 2014
    * July 2014
    * June 2014
    * May 2014
    * April 2014
    * March 2014
    * February 2014
    * January 2014
    * December 2013
    * November 2013
    * October 2013
    * September 2013
    * August 2013
    * July 2013
    * June 2013
    * May 2013
    * April 2013
    * March 2013
    * February 2013
    * January 2013
    * December 2012
    * November 2012
    * October 2012
    * September 2012
    * August 2012
    * July 2012
    * June 2012
    * May 2012
    * April 2012
    * March 2012
    * February 2012
    * January 2012
    * December 2011
    * November 2011
    * October 2011
    * September 2011
    * August 2011
    * July 2011
    * June 2011
    * May 2011
    * April 2011
    * March 2011
    * February 2011
    * January 2011
    * December 2010
    * November 2010
    * October 2010
    * September 2010
    * August 2010
    * July 2010
    * June 2010
    * May 2010
    * April 2010
    * March 2010
    * February 2010
    * January 2010
    * December 2009
    * November 2009
    * October 2009
    * September 2009
    * August 2009
    * July 2009
    * June 2009
    * May 2009
    * April 2009
    * March 2009
    * February 2009
    * January 2009
    * December 2008
    * November 2008
    * October 2008
    * September 2008
    * August 2008
    * July 2008
    * June 2008
    * May 2008
    * April 2008
    * March 2008
    * February 2008
    * January 2008
    * December 2007
    * November 2007
    * October 2007
    * September 2007
    * August 2007
    * July 2007
    * June 2007
    * May 2007
    * April 2007
    * March 2007
    * February 2007
    * January 2007
    * December 2006
    * November 2006
    * October 2006
    * September 2006
    * August 2006
    * July 2006
    * June 2006
    * May 2006
    * April 2006
    * Show More
    

### Email Alerts

Sign up to have Cato At Liberty posts delivered straight to your inbox!

Read Cato At Liberty right on your Kindle. Sign up today!

Subscribe

### Cato Today Newsletter

_Daily dose of liberty delivered straight to your inbox._

View full list of newsletters

### Also from Cato

    
        * Internships and Student Programs
    * DownsizingGovernment.org
    * Libertarianism.org
    * HumanProgress.org
    * Cato Unbound
    * Unlawful Shield
    * Freedom in the 50 States
    * Overlawyered
    * ElCato.org
    * Alt-M
    

### Social Media

    
        * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    * __YouTube
    * __LinkedIn
    * __Instagram
    * __Tumblr
    * __RSS
    

![](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

Cato Institute  
1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW  
Washington, DC 20001-5403

    
        * Phone (202) 842 0200
    

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Media Contact

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id= 454916984694808&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

