

![](https://logs1242.xiti.com/hit.xiti?s=510544&s2=2&p=TOP+STORIES::Germany::German+Doctors+Protest+Against+Pay+Conditions&di=&an=&ac=&x1=1&x2=2&x3=1860368&x4=1432&x5=German+Doctors+Protest+Against+Pay+Conditions&x6=&x7=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dw.com%2Fen%2Fgerman-

doctors-protest-against-pay-

conditions%2Fa-1860368&x8=&x9=20060118&x10=TOP+STORIES::Germany&x13=1&x14=&x15=null&x16=null&x17=&x18=)

We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information
in our data protection declaration.

More info OK

    
        1. Inhalt
    2. Navigation
    3. Weitere Inhalte
    4. Metanavigation
    5. Suche
    6. Choose from 30 Languages
    
    * Albanian Shqip
    * Amharic አማርኛ
    * Arabic العربية
    * Bengali বাংলা
    * Bosnian B/H/S
    * Bulgarian Български
    * Chinese (Simplified) 简
    * Chinese (Traditional) 繁
    * Croatian Hrvatski
    * Dari دری 
    * English English
    * French Français
    * German Deutsch
    * Greek Ελληνικά
    * Hausa Hausa
    * Hindi हिन्दी
    * Indonesian Indonesia
    * Kiswahili Kiswahili
    * Macedonian Македонски
    * Pashto پښتو
    * Persian فارسی
    * Polish Polski
    * Portuguese Português para África
    * Portuguese Português do Brasil
    * Romanian Română
    * Russian Русский
    * Serbian Српски/Srpski
    * Spanish Español
    * Turkish Türkçe
    * Ukrainian Українська
    * Urdu اردو
    

Wrong language? Change it here DW.COM has chosen English as your language
setting.

DW.COM in 30 languages

DW AKADEMIE

ABOUT DW

DW.COM

Deutsche Welle

![Deutsche Welle](/cssi/dwlogo-print.gif)

    
        * TOP STORIES
    
      * Germany
      * Brexit
      * World
        * Europe
          * Germany and Turkey - A difficult relationship
        * Africa
          * The 77 Percent
          * Crime Fighters
          * Africa on the Move
        * Asia
        * Americas
        * Middle East
      * Business
        * Founders Valley
        * Wo+men
        * My 2030
      * Science
      * Environment
        * Global Ideas
          * In focus
          * DoingYourBit
        * Eco Africa
        * Living Planet
      * Culture
        * Film
        * Books
        * Music
        * Arts
        * Digital Culture
        * Lifestyle
        * Travel
        * BTHVN2020
      * Sports
        * More sports
    

#### SPECIAL

    
          * 100 Must-Reads
      * 50 kitchens, one city
      * Baking Bread
      * DW Freedom
      * Expedition Humboldt
      * Gutenberg in the Cyberstorm
      * Planet Berlin
      * The Migration Dilemma
      * World War I
    
    * Media Center
    
      * Live TV
      * All media content
      * Latest Programs
      * Podcasts
    
    * TV
    
      * Schedule and Reception
      * TV Programs
    

#### TV programs

    
          * Arts.21
      * Arts and Culture
      * Business
      * Check-in
      * Close up
      * Conflict Zone
      * DocFilm
      * Drive it!
      * DW News
      * Eco Africa
      * Eco India
      * Euromaxx
      * Faith Matters
      * Focus on Europe
      * Global 3000
      * In Good Shape
      * Kick off!
      * Made in Germany
      * Quadriga
      * Reporter
      * Shift
      * The Bundesliga
      * The Day
      * The 77 Percent
      * Tomorrow Today
      * World Stories
    
    * RADIO
    * LEARN GERMAN
    

#### German Courses

    
          * German Courses
      * Quick start
      * Harry
      * Deutsch Interaktiv
      * Radio D
      * Mission Europe
      * Deutsch - warum nicht?
      * Audiotrainer
      * Deutschtrainer
      * Die Bienenretter
    

#### German XXL

    
          * German XXL
      * Deutsch Aktuell
      * Deutsch im Fokus
      * Telenovela
      * Bandtagebuch
      * Landeskunde
    

#### Community D

    
          * Community D
      * Das Porträt
      * Podcasts & Newsletter
      * Service
    

#### Teaching German

    
          * Teaching German
      * DW im Unterricht
      * Unterrichtsreihen
      * Deutschlehrer-Info
    
    * Germany
    * Brexit
    * World
    * Business
    * Science
    * Environment
    * Culture
    * Sports
    

TOP STORIES / Germany

Advertisement

#### Germany

# German Doctors Protest Against Pay Conditions

Over 20,000 doctors from hospitals and private practices all over Germany took
to the streets Wednesday to protest against poor salaries and bureaucracy in
the statutory health system.

![The system is sick claims this and many more German

doctors](/image/1860169_4.jpg)

"The system is sick" claims this and many more German doctors

Most German doctors are no longer willing to accept what they refer to as the
adverse funding conditions in the statutory health system. Many of them voiced
their anger and frustration on the streets of Berlin, while smaller protest
actions took place in other big cities across the country. Tens of thousands
of practices were shut nationwide.

Andreas Schulz, a general practitioner in Lower Saxony and one of the
protesters in Berlin, hoped that Wednesday's protest would have an impact on
Germany's politicians.

"We definitely think that with our action today and following action we are
able to change the existing conditions. The leading politicians, including our
new Chancellor Merkel, will have to listen to the doctors, because otherwise
the patient care will go down in Germany."

The restricted funding policy pursued by statutory health funds and endorsed
by the government does not only mean less money for the treatment of patients
but also less money in doctors' pockets at the end of the day. Doctors are
forced to observe ceilings on what they spend on their patients or face
financial penalties themselves.

"The amount of money the health insurance funds give to the doctors is very
strictly budgeted," explained Hans-Jörg Freese, a spokesman for the German
Medical Association.

**Health insurance funds decide fees**

**

![Ärzte Protestwoche in Deutschland](/image/1858860_404.jpg)

Doctors say they have been inadequately paid for a decade

**

**"We have a different system when you compare it with other countries like
Britain, where you have a state financed system. In Germany we have health
insurance funds, and they have to decide and negotiate with the doctors the
amount of money they give for the healthcare system. And we have had low wages
over the last 10 years in Germany."**

**Health Minister Ulla Schmidt has shown little sympathy for the doctors. She
has said that doctors have less to complain about than they would have us
believe. She doesn't subscribe to the view that doctors are paid too little,
insisting that their incomes are above the average earnings of German
academics.  
**

**_*Politicians have no grip on realistic figures, say doctors_** *

* * *

![Ärzte Protestwoche in Deutschland](/image/1860244_404.jpg)

Doctors and nurses are blowing the whistle on their pay conditions

* * *

**_*But Andreas Schulz said the minister didn't know what she was talking
about. "The politicians do not understand hospital funding, and they
definitely don't understand funding of the practices outside the hospital,"
the doctor said. "They mention numbers that are valid about the turnover of
funding inside and outside the hospitals, but the important thing is what is
left for the individual doctor, for the individual practice, after everything
has been paid."_** *

**_*The protesters are warning that more and more German doctors will leave
the country, if conditions in the health system remain unchanged. They point
out that a third of all doctor's practices are currently facing bankruptcy and
that the number is even higher in rural areas. In many cases, nurses can no
longer be employed full-time and the purchase of essential new equipment is
postponed to avoid financial disaster._** *

* * *

#### DW recommends

## Berlin Doctors Demand Better Wages

Medical workers at Europe's largest university hospital started a week-long
strike in Berlin on Monday, with more strikes being planned for December all
over Germany. (Nov. 28, 2005)

## German Health Service Sick, Doctors Say

German doctors have voiced concern about the health of their own profession
during a four-day national congress in Berlin, responding to widespread
protests over low pay and untenable working conditions. (May 4, 2005)

## Doctors Defect to Blissful Britain

Germany's health system is a troubled soul. The winces of pain elicited by the
financial incision of reform may be beginning to fade, but the laments of
young doctors are growing louder and many are leaving for Britain. (May 10,
2005)

    
        * **Date** 18.01.2006 
    * **Author** Hardy Graupner (nda) 
    * **Related Subjects** Germany, Berlin, Health
    * **Keywords** germany, german, doctors, protest, pay, wages, health, hospitals, nurses, ulla schmidt, berlin, Some 5, 000 doctors from all over Germany protested Wednesday against poor salaries and conditions.
    * **Print** Print this page
    * **Permalink** https://p.dw.com/p/7nxw
    

#### Related content

![In-vitro-Fertilisation \(IVF\)](/image/39097353_301.jpg)

## German doctors want human egg donations to be legalized 04.06.2019

A group of doctors in Germany is calling for new reproductive health laws.
They say the current legislation is outdated, as the science has moved on.
They want human egg donations to be legalized and to make IVF safer.

![Bremen: Warnstreik im öffentlichen Dienst](/image/47755135_301.jpg)

## Germany: 1 million teachers, nurses and other state employees secure key

pay raise 03.03.2019

From police officers to teachers to castle administrators — state employees
across Germany are due to get a pay raise. With extra money for health care
workers, the deal could help alleviate Germany's care worker crisis.

![Hannover Zahnarzt](/image/37915941_301.jpg)

## Holidays with the doctor: Medical tourism in Hungary 15.10.2018

Health is wealth, they say. But sometimes health pursuits benefit both the
patient's and the doctor's fortunes. Once such case is Hungary's burgeoning
wellness industry and a small-but-growing niche for foreign patients.

    
        * **Date** 18.01.2006 
    * **Author** Hardy Graupner (nda) 
    * **Related Subjects** Germany, Berlin, Health
    * **Keywords** germany, german, doctors, protest, pay, wages, health, hospitals, nurses, ulla schmidt, berlin, Some 5, 000 doctors from all over Germany protested Wednesday against poor salaries and conditions.
    * **Print** Print this page
    * **Permalink** https://p.dw.com/p/7nxw
    

Advertisement

#### News bulletin

![](https://tvdownloaddw-a.akamaihd.net/stills/images/kune/kune20190612_kuna02c_image_1024x576_3.jpg)

## Top stories in 90 seconds

DW News presents the most important news — in brief, quickly and up-to-date.

#### Germany

## Germany's 'gay' Paragraph 175 abolished 25 years ago

## Germany: Gay conversion 'therapy' ban presented

## Gay Nazi victim Wolfgang Lauinger dies without state compensation

## Germany's new refugee labor laws slammed as lacking common sense

![Facebook Offizielles Logo](/image/41525323_302.jpg)

## DW News on Facebook 11.07.2017

![Twitter Offizielles Logo](/image/41525319_302.jpg)

## Follow @dwnews on Twitter 11.07.2017

    
        * TOP STORIES
    * Germany
    * Brexit
    * World
    * Business
    * Science
    * Environment
    * Culture
    * Sports
    *  
    * A - Z Index
    * MEDIA CENTER
    * Live TV
    * All media content
    * Latest Programs
    * Podcasts
    * TV
    * Schedule and Reception
    * TV Programs
    *  
    * RADIO
    * LEARN GERMAN
    * German Courses
    * German XXL
    * Community D
    * Teaching German
    * ABOUT DW
    * Who we are
    * Press
    * GMF
    * Business & Sales
    * Advertising
    * Travel
    * SERVICE
    * Reception
    * Mobile
    * Smart TV
    * Newsletters & Co.
    * FAQ
    * Contact
    *  
    * DW AKADEMIE
    * About us
    * Media Development
    * Master's Degree
    * Traineeship
    * Training
    

© 2019 Deutsche Welle | Privacy Policy | Legal notice | Contact | Mobile
version

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

