

# Abortion in the United States by state

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1c/Abortion_limits_in_the_United_States.svg/400px-

Abortion_limits_in_the_United_States.svg.png)

Latest point in pregnancy a woman can get an abortion by state and territory
(without special exceptions, including risk of death to the mother or fetus)

Start of third trimester (25 weeks)

Viability (24-28 weeks)

24 weeks

18–20 weeks

13 weeks

Abortion outlawed

No limit

_Indicates a limit at 6–8 weeks is expected to come into effect  
_ Indicates a ban on abortion is expected to come into effect

Abortion in the United States is legal via the landmark 1973 case of _Roe v.
Wade_. Specifically, abortion is legal in all U.S. states, and every state has
at least one abortion clinic.[1][2] However, individual states can
regulate/limit the use of abortion or create "trigger laws", which would make
abortion illegal within the first and second trimesters if _Roe_ were
overturned by the Supreme Court of the United States[3][4][5] Also, nine
states—Alabama, Arizona, Michigan, New Mexico, Oklahoma, West Virginia, and
Wisconsin as well as the already mentioned Arkansas and Mississippi, still
have their unenforced pre- _Roe_ abortion bans on the lawbooks, which could
start being enforced if _Roe_ were overturned.[4] In accordance with the US
Supreme Court case of _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992), states cannot
place legal restrictions posing an undue burden for "the purpose or effect of
placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion of a
nonviable fetus."[6]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Current legal status nationwide
          * 2 State regulatory initiatives regarding abortion
            * 2.1 Alabama
            * 2.2 Alaska
            * 2.3 Arizona
            * 2.4 Arkansas
            * 2.5 California
            * 2.6 Colorado
            * 2.7 Connecticut
            * 2.8 Delaware
            * 2.9 District of Columbia
            * 2.10 Florida
            * 2.11 Georgia
            * 2.12 Hawaii
            * 2.13 Idaho
            * 2.14 Illinois
            * 2.15 Indiana
            * 2.16 Iowa
            * 2.17 Kansas
            * 2.18 Kentucky
            * 2.19 Louisiana
            * 2.20 Maine
            * 2.21 Maryland
            * 2.22 Massachusetts
            * 2.23 Michigan
            * 2.24 Minnesota
            * 2.25 Mississippi
            * 2.26 Missouri
            * 2.27 Montana
            * 2.28 Nebraska
            * 2.29 Nevada
            * 2.30 New Hampshire
            * 2.31 New Jersey
            * 2.32 New Mexico
            * 2.33 North Carolina
            * 2.34 North Dakota
            * 2.35 Ohio
            * 2.36 Oklahoma
            * 2.37 Oregon
            * 2.38 Pennsylvania
            * 2.39 Rhode Island
            * 2.40 South Carolina
            * 2.41 South Dakota
            * 2.42 Tennessee
            * 2.43 Texas
            * 2.44 Utah
            * 2.45 Vermont
            * 2.46 Virginia
            * 2.47 Washington
            * 2.48 West Virginia
            * 2.49 Wisconsin
            * 2.50 Wyoming
          * 3 State table
            * 3.1 Bans of abortion
            * 3.2 Limits on abortion
            * 3.3 Protections of abortion
          * 4 See also
          * 5 References
          * 6 External links
        

## Current legal status nationwide[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Map_of_US_abortion_laws_pre-1973.svg/350px-

Map_of_US_abortion_laws_pre-1973.svg.png)

Abortion laws in the US prior to _Roe._

Illegal

Legal in case of rape

Legal in case of danger to woman’s health

Legal in case of danger to woman's health, rape or incest, or likely damaged
fetus

Legal on request

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/Map_of_US_minor_abortion_laws.svg/350px-

Map_of_US_minor_abortion_laws.svg.png)

Parental notification and consent laws in the US

Parental notification or consent not required

One parent must be informed beforehand

Both parents must be informed beforehand

One parent must consent beforehand

Both parents must consent beforehand

One parent must consent and be informed beforehand

Parental notification law currently enjoined

Parental consent law currently enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a6/Map_of_US_mandatory_waiting_period_laws.svg/350px-

Map_of_US_mandatory_waiting_period_laws.svg.png)

Mandatory waiting period laws in the US

No mandatory waiting period

Waiting period of less than 24 hours

Waiting period of 24 hours or more

Waiting period law currently enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Map_of_US%2C_pre-

abortion_counselling_law.svg/350px-Map_of_US%2C_pre-

abortion_counselling_law.svg.png)

Abortion counseling laws in the US

No mandatory counseling

Counseling in person, by phone, mail, and/or other

Counseling in person only

Counseling law enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Map_of_US_mandatory_ultrasound_laws.svg/350px-

Map_of_US_mandatory_ultrasound_laws.svg.png)

Mandatory ultrasound laws in the US

Mandatory. Must display image.

Mandatory. Must offer to display image.

Mandatory. Law unenforceable.

Not mandatory. If ultrasound is performed, must offer to display image.

Not mandatory. Must offer ultrasound.

Not mandatory.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/75/Map_of_US%2C_feticide_laws.svg/350px-

Map_of_US%2C_feticide_laws.svg.png)

Fetal homicide laws in the fifty states

Homicide or murder.

Other crime against fetus.

Depends on age of fetus.

Assaulting mother.

No law on feticide.

The current judicial interpretation of the US Constitution regarding abortion
in the United States, following the Supreme Court of the United States 1973
landmark decision in _Roe v. Wade_ , and subsequent companion decisions, is
that abortion is legal but may be restricted by the states to varying degrees.
States have passed laws to restrict late term abortions, require parental
notification for minors, and mandate the disclosure of abortion risk
information to patients prior to the procedure.[7]

The key, deliberated article of the US Constitution is the Fourteenth
Amendment, which states that:

> All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the
jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State
wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor
shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws.[8]

The official report of the US Senate Judiciary Committee, issued in 1983 after
extensive hearings on the Human Life Amendment (proposed by Senators Orrin
Hatch and Thomas Eagleton), stated:

> Thus, the [Judiciary] Committee observes that no significant legal barriers
of any kind whatsoever exist today in the United States for a woman to obtain
an abortion for any reason during any stage of her pregnancy.[9]

One aspect of the legal abortion regime now in place has been determining when
the fetus is "viable" outside the womb as a measure of when the "life" of the
fetus is its own (and therefore subject to being protected by the state). In
the majority opinion delivered by the court in _Roe v. Wade_ , viability was
defined as "potentially able to live outside the woman's womb, albeit with
artificial aid. Viability is usually placed at about seven months (28 weeks,
approx. 196 days) but may occur earlier, even at 24 weeks." When the court
ruled in 1973, the then-current medical technology suggested that viability
could occur as early as 24 weeks. Advances over the past three decades have
allowed fetuses that are a few weeks less than 24 weeks old to survive outside
the woman's womb. These scientific achievements, while life-saving for
premature babies, have made the determination of being "viable" somewhat more
complicated. The youngest child thought to have survived a premature birth in
the United States was Amillia Taylor (born on 24 October 2006 in Miami,
Florida, at 21 weeks and 6 days gestational age, approx. 153 days vs. possibly
expected gestational period of 40 weeks, approx. 280 days).[10]

In comparison to other developed countries, the procedure is more available in
the United States in terms of how late the abortion can legally be performed.
However, in terms of other aspects such as government funding, privacy for
non-adults, or geographical access, some US states are far more restrictive.
In most European countries abortion on-demand is allowed only during the first
trimester, with abortions during later stages of pregnancy being allowed only
for specific reasons (e.g. physical or mental health reasons, risk of birth
defects, if the woman was raped etc.). The reasons that can be invoked by a
woman seeking an abortion after the first trimester vary by country, for
instance, some countries, such as Denmark, provide a wide range of reasons,
including social and economic ones.[11]

There are no laws or restrictions regulating abortion in Canada, while the law
on abortion in Australia varies by state/territory. In many countries the
right to abortion has been legalized by respective parliaments, while in the
US the right to abortion has been deemed a part of a constitutional right to
privacy by the Supreme Court.

Because of the split between federal and state law, legal access to abortion
continues to vary somewhat by state. Geographic availability, however, varies
dramatically, with 87 percent of US counties having no abortion provider.[12]
Moreover, due to the Hyde Amendment, many state health programs which poor
women rely on for their health care do not cover abortions; currently only 17
states (including California, Illinois and New York) offer or require such
coverage.[13]

The 1992 case of _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ overturned _Roe's_ strict
trimester formula, but reemphasized the right to abortion as grounded in the
general sense of liberty and privacy protected under the Due Process Clause of
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution: "If the right of
privacy means anything, it is the right of the individual, married or single,
to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so
fundamentally affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or beget a
child." Advancements in medical technology meant that a fetus might be
considered viable, and thus have some basis of a right to life, at 22 or 23
weeks rather than at the 28 that was more common at the time Roe was decided.
For this reason, the old trimester formula was ruled obsolete, with a new
focus on viability of the fetus.

Since 1995, led by Congressional Republicans, the US House of Representatives
and US Senate have moved several times to pass measures banning the procedure
of intact dilation and extraction, also commonly known as partial birth
abortion. After several long and emotional debates on the issue, such measures
passed twice by wide margins, but President Bill Clinton vetoed those bills in
April 1996 and October 1997 on the grounds that they did not include health
exceptions. Congressional supporters of the bill argue that a health exception
would render the bill unenforceable, since the _Doe v. Bolton_ decision
defined "health" in vague terms, justifying any motive for obtaining an
abortion. Subsequent Congressional attempts at overriding the veto were
unsuccessful.

On October 2, 2003, with a vote of 281–142, the House again approved a measure
banning the procedure, called the _Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act_. Through
this legislation, a doctor could face up to two years in prison and face civil
lawsuits for performing such an abortion. A woman who undergoes the procedure
cannot be prosecuted under the measure. The measure contains an exemption to
allow the procedure if the woman's life is threatened.

On October 21, 2003, the United States Senate passed the same bill by a vote
of 64–34, with a number of Democrats joining in support. The bill was signed
by President George W. Bush on November 5, 2003, but a federal judge blocked
its enforcement in several states just a few hours after it became public law.
The Supreme Court upheld the nationwide ban on the procedure in the case
_Gonzales v. Carhart_ on April 18, 2007. The 5-4 ruling said the _Partial-
Birth Abortion Ban Act_ does not conflict with previous Court decisions
regarding abortion.

The decision marked the first time the court allowed a ban on any type of
abortion since 1973. The swing vote, which came from moderate justice Anthony
Kennedy, was joined by Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, and the two
recent appointees, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts.

## State regulatory initiatives regarding abortion[edit]

The following states have or had initiatives regarding abortion. The fetal
heartbeat bill legislative approach has picked up momentum in 2018 and 2019.

### Alabama[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This section **has an unclear citation style**. The references used may be
made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting.
_( May 2019)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

Main article: Abortion in Alabama

House Bill 490 prohibiting abortions once a heartbeat is detected passed the
Lower House (73-29) on March 4, 2014. Alabama was the first state to pass such
a bill.[6] The bill later died in committee.[7]

On April 2, 2019, House Bill 314, also known as the Human Life Protection Act,
which bans abortions at every stage of pregnancy and criminalizes the
procedure for doctors (except in the case of medical emergency), was
introduced into the Lower House. The bill passed the Lower House on April 30
(74-3),[8] the Senate on May 14,[9] and was signed into law by Governor Kay
Ivey on May 16.[10]

### Alaska[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Alaska

### Arizona[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Arizona

### Arkansas[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Arkansas

### California[edit]

Main article: Abortion in California

### Colorado[edit]

Main article: Colorado Amendment 48 (2008)

and

Main article: Abortion in Colorado

The initiative was proposed jointly by Kristine Burton and Michael Burton[14]
of Colorado for Equal Rights.[15] **Colorado Amendment 48** was a proposed
initiative to amend the definition of a person to "any human being from the
moment of fertilization." On November 4, 2008, the initiative was turned down
by 73.2 percent of the voters.[16]

### Connecticut[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Connecticut

### Delaware[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Delaware

### District of Columbia[edit]

### Florida[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Florida

### Georgia[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Georgia (U.S. state)

Georgia has a six-week abortion ban slated to go into effect, which will make
it illegal to obtain an abortion in the state once the fetus's heartbeat can
be detected. The law makes no exception for cases of rape or incest and
mandates a penalty in prison for doctors who perform the procedure, noted
specifically that this is NOT referring to the women who get this procedure
done. [17]

### Hawaii[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Hawaii

### Idaho[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Idaho

### Illinois[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Illinois

### Indiana[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Indiana

### Iowa[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Iowa

### Kansas[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Kansas

Kansas lawmakers approved sweeping anti-abortion legislation (HB 2253) on
April 6, 2013 that says life begins at fertilization, forbids abortion based
on gender and bans Planned Parenthood from providing sex education in
schools.[18]

In 2015 Kansas became the first state to ban the dilation and evacuation
procedure, a common second-trimester abortion procedure.[19] But the new law
was later struck down by the Kansas Court of Appeals in January 2016 without
ever having gone into effect.[20] In April 2019, the Kansas Supreme Court
affirmed the lower court's decision, and ruled that the right to abortion is
inherent within the state's constitution and bill of rights, such that even if
_Roe v. Wade_ is overturned and the federal protection of abortion rights is
withdrawn, the right would still be allowed within Kansas, barring a change in
the state constitution.[21]

### Kentucky[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Kentucky

### Louisiana[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Louisiana

On June 19, 2006, Governor Kathleen Blanco signed into law a trigger ban on
most forms of abortion (unless the life of the mother was in danger or her
health would be permanently damaged) once it passed the state legislature.
Although she felt exclusions for rape or incest would have "been reasonable,"
she felt she should not veto based on those reasons. The trigger law would
only go into effect if the United States Supreme Court reversed _Roe v. Wade_.
Louisiana's measure would allow the prosecution of any person who performed or
aided in an abortion. The penalties include up to 10 years in prison and a
maximum fine of $100,000.[22]

A second law, Act 620, passed in 2014, modeled after one passed earlier in
Texas, required that any doctor performing abortions also have admittance
privileges at a authorized hospital within a 30 mile radius of the abortion
clinic, among other new requirements. At the time the law was passed, only one
doctor had this privileges, effectively leaving only one legal abortion clinic
in the state.[23] Ultimately, the model Texas law was declared
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_
in 2016, as the additional admitting privileges required by Texas law
interfered with a woman's right to an abortion per _Roe v. Wade_.[24] While
the Texas law was being challenged, the Louisiana law was challenged by
abortion clinics and doctors in the state in _June Medical Services, LLC v.
Gee_ ; while the District Court ordered an injunction on the law, the Fifth
Circuit Appeals Court reversed this decision, allowing the law to come in
effect later in 2014. The plaintiffs petitioned the Supreme Court, who granted
an emergency stay of the Fifth Circuit's order, pending the result of the
pending Texas litigation in _Whole Woman's Health_. _June Medical Services_
was remanded back to District Court, which found the law unconstitutional
under _Whole Woman's Health_. The Fifth Circuit reversed the District's
finding and prepared to allow the law to come back into effect by February 4,
2019, differentiating the case from the Texas one as they found the physician
had not taken any steps to try to qualify for this allowance. The plaintiffs
again petitioned the Supreme Court for an emergency stay of the Fifth
Circuit's decision.[25] Justice Samuel Alito granted the stay of the law until
February 7, 2019, stating that the Court needed more time to evaluate the
request and had made no merits on the ruling of the case.[26] Subsequently, on
February 7, 2019, the Supreme Court ruled 5–4, with Justice John Roberts
joining the liberal Justices, in reversing the Firth Circuit's order,
effectively preventing the law from going into effect.[27]

### Maine[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Maine

### Maryland[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Maryland

### Massachusetts[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Massachusetts

### Michigan[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Michigan

### Minnesota[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Minnesota

### Mississippi[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Mississippi

On February 27, 2006, Mississippi's House Public Health Committee voted to
approve a ban on abortion, but that bill died after the House and Senate
failed to agree on compromise legislation.[28]

On November 8, 2011, the Personhood amendment, to define personhood as
beginning "at the moment of fertilization, cloning, or the functional
equivalent thereof," was rejected by 55 percent of voters.[29]

On March 20, 2018, a federal district court in Mississippi enacted a
temporary, 10-day ban of the enforcement of a new state law that prohibits the
performance of an abortion once the gestational age of the fetus is greater
than 15 weeks.[30][31][17]

### Missouri[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Missouri

### Montana[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Montana

### Nebraska[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Nebraska

### Nevada[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Nevada

### New Hampshire[edit]

Main article: Abortion in New Hampshire

### New Jersey[edit]

Main article: Abortion in New Jersey

### New Mexico[edit]

### North Carolina[edit]

### North Dakota[edit]

Main article: North Dakota HB 1572

**North Dakota's HB 1572** , otherwise known as the **Personhood of Children
Act** , was a bill in the North Dakota Legislature which aims to "provide
equality and rights to all human beings at every stage of biological
development". This step could eventually eliminate all types of abortion for
nearly any reason in the state of North Dakota.[32] It would allocate rights
of "the pre-born, partially born." If it had passed, it would have likely been
used to challenge _Roe v. Wade_.[33]

This legislation, sponsored by State Representative Dan Ruby, passed the North
Dakota House of Representatives on February 17, 2009 by a vote of 51–41. On
April 3, 2009 the North Dakota Senate rejected HB 1572 in a 29 to 16 vote.

### Ohio[edit]

An Ohio state law passed in April 2019 will make abortion illegal after the
fetus's heartbeat can be detected, usually between five or six weeks into the
pregnancy. No exceptions for cases of rape or incest are made in the law,
which is slated to go into effect in July.[17]

### Oklahoma[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Oklahoma

In 2016, Oklahoma state legislators passed a bill to criminalize abortion for
providers, potentially charging them with up to three years in prison.[34] On
May 20, 2016, Governor Mary Fallin vetoed the bill before it could become law,
citing its wording as too vague to withstand a legal challenge.[35]

### Oregon[edit]

### Pennsylvania[edit]

### Rhode Island[edit]

### South Carolina[edit]

### South Dakota[edit]

Main article: Women's Health and Human Life Protection Act

In 2004, a bill outlawing abortion passed both houses of the legislature, but
was vetoed by the Governor due to a technicality. The state's legislature
subsequently passed five laws curtailing the legality of abortion in 2005.[36]
The majority of a legislative "task force"[37] then issued a report
recommending that the Legislature illegalize all abortions, which would lead
to a challenge of the constitutionality of _Roe v. Wade_ in the United States
Supreme Court. A separate minority report criticizing the process and reaching
different conclusions was also released.[38]

In February 2006, the Legislature passed the _Women's Health and Human Life
Protection Act_ , which was signed into law by Governor Mike Rounds on March
6, 2006. This law would have forbidden abortion under virtually every
circumstance, including in cases of rape and incest. The law allowed "a
medical procedure designed or intended to prevent the death of a pregnant
mother." Physicians performing such procedures would have been required to
"...make reasonable medical efforts under the circumstances to preserve both
the life of the mother and the life of her unborn child."

The act had specifically defined pregnancy as beginning at the point of
conception rather than at implantation into the uterine wall (see beginning of
pregnancy controversy), which might have meant that WHHLPA applied to
emergency contraception and possibly all forms of hormonal contraception.

Several members of the South Dakota legislative majority, as well as Governor
Rounds, acknowledged that the overt goal of WHHLPA was to get the Supreme
Court to overturn _Roe_ [39] per the recommendation of the task force (the
Supreme Court at that time was shifting in a conservative direction, one that
might have been more amenable to overturning _Roe_ ).

A referendum to repeal the Women's Health and Human Life Protection Act was
placed on ballot for the November 2006 statewide election due to a successful
petition drive by the organization South Dakota Healthy Families. On May 30,
over 38,000 petition signatures were filed, more than twice the 17,000
required to place a measure on the ballot. On November 7, WHHLPA was repealed
by the South Dakota electorate; the vote was 56%-44% favoring repeal.[40]

### Tennessee[edit]

### Texas[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9c/Abortion_Access_in_Texas_Verifying_Current_State_Lic_Facilities_and_Female_Pop_Proximity.png/350px-

Abortion_Access_in_Texas_Verifying_Current_State_Lic_Facilities_and_Female_Pop_Proximity.png)

Abortion access in Texas.

The _Roe v. Wade_ case, tried in Texas, stands at the center of years of
national debate about the issue of abortion.[41] Henry Wade was serving as
District Attorney of Dallas County at the time.

On August 29, 2014 US District Judge Lee Yeakel struck down as
unconstitutional two provisions of Texas' omnibus anti-abortion bill, House
Bill 2 that was to come into effect on September 1. The regulation would have
closed about a dozen abortion clinics, leaving only eight places in Texas to
get a legal abortion, all located in major cities. Judge Lee Yeakel ruled that
the state's regulation was unconstitutional and would have placed an undue
burden on women, particularly on poor and rural women living in west Texas and
the Rio Grande Valley.[42] The legal challenge to the law eventually reached
the Supreme Court in _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ (2016) which ruled
that the law was unconstitutional, its burden of requiring abortion doctors to
have admission privileges at a local hospital within 30 miles of the center to
interfere with a woman's right to an abortion from _Roe v. Wade_.

### Utah[edit]

### Vermont[edit]

### Virginia[edit]

### Washington[edit]

### West Virginia[edit]

### Wisconsin[edit]

### Wyoming[edit]

## State table[edit]

### Bans of abortion[edit]

State | Status before "Roe" | Current status  
---|---|---  
Completely illegal | Illegal with limits | Trigger law on any abortion |
Trigger law on late term abortion  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Flag_of_Alabama.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Alabama.svg.png) Alabama | Yes | Yes _| No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Flag_of_Alaska.svg/21px-

Flag_of_Alaska.svg.png) Alaska | No | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arizona.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arizona.svg.png) Arizona | Yes | Yes_ | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arkansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arkansas.svg.png) Arkansas | Yes | Yes _| No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_California.svg/23px-

Flag_of_California.svg.png) California | No | Yes_ | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/46/Flag_of_Colorado.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Colorado.svg.png) Colorado | No | Yes _| Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/96/Flag_of_Connecticut.svg/20px-

Flag_of_Connecticut.svg.png) Connecticut | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c6/Flag_of_Delaware.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Delaware.svg.png) Delaware | No | Yes | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Florida.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Florida.svg.png) Florida | No | Yes_ | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg.png) Georgia | No | Yes _| No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ef/Flag_of_Hawaii.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Hawaii.svg.png) Hawaii | No | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_Idaho.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Idaho.svg.png) Idaho | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_Illinois.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Illinois.svg.png) Illinois | Yes | No | No[43] | No[43]  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/Flag_of_Indiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Indiana.svg.png) Indiana | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Flag_of_Iowa.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Iowa.svg.png) Iowa | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Flag_of_Kansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kansas.svg.png) Kansas | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/Flag_of_Kentucky.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kentucky.svg.png) Kentucky | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Flag_of_Louisiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Louisiana.svg.png) Louisiana | Yes | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/Flag_of_Maine.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Maine.svg.png) Maine | No | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Flag_of_Maryland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Maryland.svg.png) Maryland | No | Yes_ | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg.png) Massachusetts | No | Yes _| No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/Flag_of_Michigan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Michigan.svg.png) Michigan | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Minnesota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Minnesota.svg.png) Minnesota | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/42/Flag_of_Mississippi.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mississippi.svg.png) Mississippi | No | Yes_ | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Flag_of_Missouri.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Missouri.svg.png) Missouri | Yes | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cb/Flag_of_Montana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Montana.svg.png) Montana | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Flag_of_Nebraska.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nebraska.svg.png) Nebraska | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f1/Flag_of_Nevada.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nevada.svg.png) Nevada | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg.png) New Hampshire | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg.png) New Jersey | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg.png) New Mexico | No | Yes _| No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_New_York.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_York.svg.png) New York | No | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg.png) North Carolina | No | Yes_ | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg/21px-

Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg.png) North Dakota | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Ohio.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ohio.svg.png) Ohio | Yes | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg.png) Oklahoma | Yes | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Oregon.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oregon.svg.png) Oregon | No | Yes _| No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg.png) Pennsylvania | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg.png) Rhode Island | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg.png) South Carolina | No | Yes_ | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg.png) South Dakota | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Tennessee.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Tennessee.svg.png) Tennessee | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Texas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Texas.svg.png) Texas | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Flag_of_Utah.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Utah.svg.png) Utah | Yes | No | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Flag_of_Vermont.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Vermont.svg.png) Vermont | Yes | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Flag_of_Virginia.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Virginia.svg.png) Virginia | No | Yes* | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Washington.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Washington.svg.png) Washington | No | No | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg.png) West Virginia | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg.png) Wisconsin | Yes | No | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Flag_of_Wyoming.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Wyoming.svg.png) Wyoming | Yes | No | No | No

### Limits on abortion[edit]

State | Time limit without exceptions[44] | Waiting period | Mandatory
ultrasound[45] | Counseling | % of counties without provider | Parental
Notification for Minors | Parental Consent for Minors[46]  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Flag_of_Alabama.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Alabama.svg.png) Alabama^ | Conception (effective 2020) | Yes | Yes |
Yes | 59%[47] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Flag_of_Alaska.svg/21px-

Flag_of_Alaska.svg.png) Alaska | None | None | No | Yes | 37%[48] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arizona.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arizona.svg.png) Arizona^ | Viability | Yes | 24 hours | Yes | 19%[49]
| No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arkansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arkansas.svg.png) Arkansas^ | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes | 77%[50] | No
| One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_California.svg/23px-

Flag_of_California.svg.png) California^ | Viability | None | No | None |
5%[51] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/46/Flag_of_Colorado.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Colorado.svg.png) Colorado^ | None | None | No | None | 27%[52] |
Yes[53] | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/96/Flag_of_Connecticut.svg/20px-

Flag_of_Connecticut.svg.png) Connecticut | Viability | None | No | None |
5%[54] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c6/Flag_of_Delaware.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Delaware.svg.png) Delaware | Viability | None | No | Yes | 18%[55] |
Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Florida.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Florida.svg.png) Florida^ | 24 weeks | None | Yes | None | 20%[56] |
Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg.png) Georgia^ | 6 weeks (effective 2020)
| Yes | No | Yes | 58%[57] | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ef/Flag_of_Hawaii.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Hawaii.svg.png) Hawaii | Viability | None | No | None | 5%[58] | No |
No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_Idaho.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Idaho.svg.png) Idaho | Viability | Yes | No | Yes | 68%[59] | No |
One[60][59]  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_Illinois.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Illinois.svg.png) Illinois | Viability | None | No | None | 40%[61] |
Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/Flag_of_Indiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Indiana.svg.png) Indiana | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes | 66%[62] | No |
One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Flag_of_Iowa.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Iowa.svg.png) Iowa | 20 weeks | None | No | None | 42%[63] | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Flag_of_Kansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kansas.svg.png) Kansas | 20 weeks | Yes | Yes | Yes | 56%[64] | No |
One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/Flag_of_Kentucky.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kentucky.svg.png) Kentucky | 6 weeks (effective 2020) | Yes | Yes |
Yes | 74%[65] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Flag_of_Louisiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Louisiana.svg.png) Louisiana | 20 weeks | Yes | 24 hours[66] | Yes |
63%[67] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/Flag_of_Maine.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Maine.svg.png) Maine | Viability | None | No | None | 55%[68] | No |
No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Flag_of_Maryland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Maryland.svg.png) Maryland^ | Viability | None | No | None | 24%[69] |
Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg.png) Massachusetts^ | 24 weeks | None | No | Yes |
14%[70] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/Flag_of_Michigan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Michigan.svg.png) Michigan | Viability | Yes | No | Yes | 40%[71] | No
| One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Minnesota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Minnesota.svg.png) Minnesota | Viability | Yes | No | Yes | 59%[72] |
Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/42/Flag_of_Mississippi.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mississippi.svg.png) Mississippi^ | 6 weeks (effective 2020) | Yes |
Yes | Yes | 91%[73] | No | Both  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Flag_of_Missouri.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Missouri.svg.png) Missouri | 8 weeks (effective Aug. 28, 2019) | Yes |
No | Yes | 94%[74] | No | Both  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cb/Flag_of_Montana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Montana.svg.png) Montana | Viability | None | No | None | 55%[75] | No
| No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Flag_of_Nebraska.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nebraska.svg.png) Nebraska | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes | 41%[76] | No
| One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f1/Flag_of_Nevada.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nevada.svg.png) Nevada | 24 weeks | None | No | None | 9%[77] | No |
No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg.png) New Hampshire | None | None | No | None |
30%[78] | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg.png) New Jersey | None | None | No | None | 23%[79] |
No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg.png) New Mexico^ | None | None | No | None | 48%[80] |
No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_New_York.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_York.svg.png) New York | Viability or 24 weeks[81] | None | No |
None | 10%[82] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg.png) North Carolina^ | 20 weeks | None | No | None
| 53%[83] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg/21px-

Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg.png) North Dakota | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes |
73%[84] | Yes | Both  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Ohio.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ohio.svg.png) Ohio | 6 weeks (effective 2020) | Yes | No | Yes |
56%[85] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg.png) Oklahoma | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes | 54%[86] | Yes
| One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Oregon.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oregon.svg.png) Oregon^ | None | None | No | None | 30%[87] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg.png) Pennsylvania | 24 weeks | Yes | No | Yes |
48%[88] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg.png) Rhode Island | 24 weeks | None | No | Yes |
36%[89] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg.png) South Carolina^ | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes |
71%[90] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg.png) South Dakota | 20 weeks | None | No | None |
77%[91] | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Tennessee.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Tennessee.svg.png) Tennessee | Viability | None | No | None | 63%[92]
| No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Texas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Texas.svg.png) Texas | 20 weeks | Yes | 24 hours | Yes | 43%[93] | Yes
| One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Flag_of_Utah.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Utah.svg.png) Utah | Viability | Yes | No | Yes | 62%[94] | Yes | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Flag_of_Vermont.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Vermont.svg.png) Vermont | None | None | No | None | 38%[95] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Flag_of_Virginia.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Virginia.svg.png) Virginia^ | 25 weeks | Yes | 24 hours | Yes |
78%[96] | Yes | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Washington.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Washington.svg.png) Washington | Viability | None | No | None |
15%[97] | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg.png) West Virginia | 20 weeks | Yes | No | Yes |
90%[98] | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg.png) Wisconsin | 20 weeks | Yes | 24 hours[99] | Yes |
67%[100] | No | One  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Flag_of_Wyoming.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Wyoming.svg.png) Wyoming | Viability | None | No | None | 96%[101] |
Yes | One

### Protections of abortion[edit]

State | Freedom Act[102] | State constitutional protection[103]  
---|---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Flag_of_Alabama.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Alabama.svg.png) Alabama | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Flag_of_Alaska.svg/21px-

Flag_of_Alaska.svg.png) Alaska | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arizona.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arizona.svg.png) Arizona | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Flag_of_Arkansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Arkansas.svg.png) Arkansas | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_California.svg/23px-

Flag_of_California.svg.png) California | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/46/Flag_of_Colorado.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Colorado.svg.png) Colorado | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/96/Flag_of_Connecticut.svg/20px-

Flag_of_Connecticut.svg.png) Connecticut | Yes | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c6/Flag_of_Delaware.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Delaware.svg.png) Delaware | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Florida.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Florida.svg.png) Florida | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Georgia_%28U.S._state%29.svg.png) Georgia | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ef/Flag_of_Hawaii.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Hawaii.svg.png) Hawaii | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_Idaho.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Idaho.svg.png) Idaho | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/01/Flag_of_Illinois.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Illinois.svg.png) Illinois | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/Flag_of_Indiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Indiana.svg.png) Indiana | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Flag_of_Iowa.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Iowa.svg.png) Iowa | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Flag_of_Kansas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kansas.svg.png) Kansas | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/Flag_of_Kentucky.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kentucky.svg.png) Kentucky | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Flag_of_Louisiana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Louisiana.svg.png) Louisiana | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/Flag_of_Maine.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Maine.svg.png) Maine | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Flag_of_Maryland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Maryland.svg.png) Maryland | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Massachusetts.svg.png) Massachusetts | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/Flag_of_Michigan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Michigan.svg.png) Michigan | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Minnesota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Minnesota.svg.png) Minnesota | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/42/Flag_of_Mississippi.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mississippi.svg.png) Mississippi | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Flag_of_Missouri.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Missouri.svg.png) Missouri | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cb/Flag_of_Montana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Montana.svg.png) Montana | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Flag_of_Nebraska.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nebraska.svg.png) Nebraska | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f1/Flag_of_Nevada.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nevada.svg.png) Nevada | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Hampshire.svg.png) New Hampshire | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Jersey.svg.png) New Jersey | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_Mexico.svg.png) New Mexico | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_New_York.svg/23px-

Flag_of_New_York.svg.png) New York | Yes[104][105] | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_North_Carolina.svg.png) North Carolina | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg/21px-

Flag_of_North_Dakota.svg.png) North Dakota | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Ohio.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ohio.svg.png) Ohio | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oklahoma.svg.png) Oklahoma | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Flag_of_Oregon.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Oregon.svg.png) Oregon | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Pennsylvania.svg.png) Pennsylvania | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg/19px-

Flag_of_Rhode_Island.svg.png) Rhode Island | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Carolina.svg.png) South Carolina | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Dakota.svg.png) South Dakota | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Tennessee.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Tennessee.svg.png) Tennessee | No | No[106]  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f7/Flag_of_Texas.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Texas.svg.png) Texas | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Flag_of_Utah.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Utah.svg.png) Utah | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Flag_of_Vermont.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Vermont.svg.png) Vermont | No | Yes  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Flag_of_Virginia.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Virginia.svg.png) Virginia | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Flag_of_Washington.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Washington.svg.png) Washington | Yes | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_West_Virginia.svg.png) West Virginia | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Wisconsin.svg.png) Wisconsin | No | No  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Flag_of_Wyoming.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Wyoming.svg.png) Wyoming | No | No

## See also[edit]

        
                  * Abortion statistics in the United States
          * Abortion by country
          * Abortion and religion
          * Abortion debate
          * Heartbeat bill
          * Types of abortion restrictions in the United States
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** "Using Abortion Pills for Safe Abortion in the USA. Abortion is illegal in Alabama and Georgia. Self-Managed Abortion; Safe and Supported (SASS). — Women Help Women Consultation". Consult.womenhelp.org. 2017-01-12. Retrieved  2017-07-21.
          2. **^** Politics (2017-02-10). "Here's how many abortion clinics are in each state". Business Insider. Retrieved 2017-07-21.
          3. **^** What if Roe Fell?, Center for Reproductive Rights (February 21, 2019).
          4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Abortion Policy in the Absence of Roe, Guttmacher Institute (May 1, 2019).
          5. **^** Abortion would automatically be illegal in these states if Roe v. Wade is overturned, CBS News (April 22, 2018).
          6. **^** Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992) at 877.
          7. **^** Interactive maps comparing US abortion restrictions by state, LawServer
          8. **^** "The Constitution of the United States of America: As Amended" (PDF). 2007-07-25. Retrieved 2009-02-17.
          9. **^** Report, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, on Senate Joint Resolution 3, 98th Congress", 98–149, June 7, 1983, p. 6.
          10. **^** "Most-premature baby allowed home". BBC News. 2007-02-21. Retrieved  2007-05-05.
          11. **^** Denmark
          12. **^** "Access to Abortion" (PDF). National Abortion Federation. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-17.
          13. **^** "Public Funding for Abortion" (map)
          14. **^** Statement of Sufficiency (pdf). _Secretary of State_. State of Colorado. May 29, 2008.
          15. **^** Personhood Initiative '08. _Colorado for Equal Rights_.
          16. **^** Election result 2008
          17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Smith, Kate (May 13, 2019). "A pregnant 11-year-old rape victim in Ohio would no longer be allowed to have an abortion under new state law". _CBS News_. Retrieved  May 14, 2019.
          18. **^** http://usnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/04/06/17623840-kansas-lawmakers-pass-sweeping-anti-abortion-legislation?lite
          19. **^** Kansas governor signs nation's 1st ban on abortion procedure - Yahoo News. News.yahoo.com (2015-04-07). Retrieved on 2015-04-12.
          20. **^** Alter, Charlotte. "Kansas Court Strikes Down Second-Trimester Abortion Ban". _TIME.com_. Retrieved  2016-10-20.
          21. **^** Margolies, Dan; Llopis-Jepsen, Celia (April 26, 2019). "Kansas Supreme Court Rules State Constitution Protects Right To Abortion". _NPR_. Retrieved  April 26, 2019.
          22. **^** Alford, Jeremy (June 7, 2006). "Louisiana Governor Plans to Sign Anti-Abortion Law". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  April 23, 2010.
          23. **^** [1]
          24. **^** [2]
          25. **^** [3]
          26. **^** de Vogue, Ariana (February 1, 2019). "Supreme Court blocks Louisiana abortion law from taking effect Monday". _CNN_. Retrieved  February 1, 2019.
          27. **^** de Vogue, Ariana (February 7, 2019). "Supreme Court blocks Louisiana abortion law from taking effect". _CNN_. Retrieved  February 7, 2019.
          28. **^** MacIntyre, Krystal. "Mississippi abortion ban bill fails as legislators miss deadline for compromise", _Jurist News Archive_ (2006-03-28). Retrieved 2007-01-23.
          29. **^** Curry, Tom. MSNBC.com ""Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-11-09. Retrieved 2011-11-09.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)". Retrieved 2011-11-9.
          30. **^** Shimabukuro, Jon O. (April 10, 2018). _Mississippi Court Halts Enforcement of New Abortion Law_ (PDF). Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 18 April 2018.
          31. **^** CNN, Laura Ly,. "Judge temporarily blocks 15-week abortion ban in Mississippi". _CNN_. Retrieved  2018-06-30.
          32. **^** North Dakota Personhood Bill Passes, First in US History - Standard Newswire
          33. **^** "US state's 'personhood' law would hit birth control: opponents" 2009-02-18 _AFP_
          34. **^** "Oklahoma lawmakers approve bill to revoke licenses of abortion doctors". _Reuters_. 2016-04-29. Retrieved  2016-05-19.
          35. **^** "Gov. Fallin vetoes bill that would make performing an abortion a felony". _KFOR.com_. 2016-05-20. Retrieved  2016-05-20.
          36. **^** S.D. Makes Abortion Rare Through Laws And Stigma - washingtonpost.com
          37. **^** HB 1233 establish a task force to study abortion and to
          38. **^** April 17, 2006 | The Nation
          39. **^** South Dakota has banned abortion - is your state next? : Indybay
          40. **^** South Dakota Nixes Abortion Ban; Michigan Voters OK Anti-Affirmative Action Initiative - Politics | Republican Party | Democratic Party | Political Spectrum - F...
          41. **^** Sarah Weddington (11 February 2013). "Roe v Wade". _The Handbook of Texas_. Texas State Historical Association. Retrieved  19 April 2014.
          42. **^** Feibel, Carrie. "Federal Judge Blocks Texas Restriction On Abortion Clinics". NPR. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
          43. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Rauner pulls trigger: Signs bill to ensure abortion remains legal". _Chicago Sun-Times_. Retrieved  2018-10-07.
          44. **^** "Where is abortion legal? Everywhere. But ..." USA Today. Retrieved  18 May 2019.
          45. **^** "State Facts About Abortion".
          46. **^** "An Overview of Abortion Laws". _Guttmacher Institute_. 2016-03-09. Retrieved  2019-05-15.
          47. **^** "Alabama :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          48. **^** "Alaska :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          49. **^** "Arizona :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          50. **^** "Arkansas :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          51. **^** "California :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          52. **^** "Colorado :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          53. **^** "Colorado :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          54. **^** "Connecticut :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          55. **^** "Delaware :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          56. **^** "Florida :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          57. **^** "Georgia :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          58. **^** "Hawaii :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Idaho :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          60. **^** "Idaho Gov. Signs Parental Consent Notification Law for Minors Seeking Abortion". Archived from the original on 2013-12-21.
          61. **^** "Illinois :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          62. **^** Indiana :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          63. **^** Iowa :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          64. **^** Kansas :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          65. **^** Kentucky :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          66. **^** "Requirements for Ultrasound" (PDF).
          67. **^** "Louisiana :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          68. **^** Maine :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          69. **^** Maryland :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          70. **^** Massachusetts :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          71. **^** Michigan :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          72. **^** Minnesota :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          73. **^** Mississippi :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          74. **^** Missouri :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          75. **^** Montana :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          76. **^** Nebraska :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          77. **^** Nevada :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          78. **^** New Hampshire :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          79. **^** New Jersey :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          80. **^** New Mexico :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          81. **^** https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/new-york-state-senate-passes-expansive-abortion-bill/
          82. **^** New York :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          83. **^** North Carolina :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          84. **^** North Dakota :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          85. **^** Ohio :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          86. **^** Oklahoma :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          87. **^** Oregon :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          88. **^** Pennsylvania :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          89. **^** Rhode Island :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          90. **^** South Carolina :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          91. **^** South Dakota :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          92. **^** Tennessee :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          93. **^** Texas :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          94. **^** Utah :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          95. **^** Vermont :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          96. **^** Virginia :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          97. **^** Washington :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          98. **^** West Virginia :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          99. **^** Reilly, Mollie (June 14, 2013). "Wisconsin Mandatory Ultrasound Bill Passes State Assembly, Heads To Scott Walker's Desk". _Huffington Post_.
          100. **^** Wisconsin :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          101. **^** Wyoming :: NARAL Pro-Choice America
          102. **^** "Map :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          103. **^** "Map :: NARAL Pro-Choice America".
          104. **^** http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/01/new-york-has-finally-updated-its-archaic-abortion-law.html
          105. **^** https://newyork.cbslocal.com/2019/01/22/reproductive-health-act-new-york-legislature-gov-andrew-cuomo-roe-v-wade/
          106. **^** Wadhwani, Anita. "Appeals court upholds vote count on Tennessee abortion measure Amendment 1". Retrieved 9 Jan 2018.
        

## External links[edit]

Legal

        
                  * Full Text of _Roe v. Wade_ Decision
          * Abortion Law at AOL
          * Interactive maps comparing US abortion restrictions by state
          * State Policies on Later-Term Abortions Guttmacher Institute
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

United States state-related lists

* * *

List of states and territories of the United States

Demographics|

        
                  * Educational attainment
          * Irreligion
          * Largest cities by population
          * Most popular given names
          * Most populous counties
          * Populated places
          * Population
            * Density
            * Growth rate
            * Birth and death rates
            * Historical
            * African American
            * Amish
            * Asian
            * Pacific Islander
            * Hispanic and Latino
            * Spanish-speaking
          * Religiosity
        

Economy|

        
                  * Billionaires
          * Budgets
          * Companies
          * Federal tax revenue
          * Federal taxation and spending
          * Gross domestic product
            * Growth rate
            * Per capita
          * Income
            * Inequality
          * Minimum wages
          * Poverty rates
          * Sales taxes
          * Sovereign wealth funds
          * State income taxes
          * Unemployment rates
          * Union affiliation
          * Vehicles per capita
        

Environment|

        
                  * Carbon dioxide emissions
          * Botanical gardens
          * Parks
          * National Wildlife Refuges
          * Nature centers
          * Renewable energy
          * Superfund sites
          * Wilderness areas
        

Geography|

        
                  * Area
          * Bays
          * Beaches
          * Coastline
          * Elevation
          * Extreme points
          * Forest
          * Geographic centers
          * Mountains
          * Regions
          * Volcanoes
        

Government|

        
                  * Agriculture commissioners
          * Attorneys general
          * Capitals
          * Capitol buildings
          * Comparison
          * Counties
            * Alphabetical
            * List
          * State legislators
          * Governors
            * Lieutenant governors
          * Legislatures
          * Libraries and archives
          * Official languages
          * Poets laureate
          * Political divisions
          * State auditors
          * State secretaries of state
          * State speakers
          * State superintendents of education
          * State supreme courts
          * State treasurers
          * Statewide elected executive officials
        

Health|

        
                  * Fertility rates
          * Hospitals
          * Human Development Index
            * American Human Development Index
          * Life expectancy
          * Obesity rates
        

History|

        
                  * Date of statehood
          * Name etymologies
          * Historical societies
          * Museums
          * National Historic Landmarks
          * National Register of Historic Places
          * State partitions
          * Historic regions
        

Law|

        
                  * Abortion
          * Age of consent
          * Alcohol
            * Dry communities
          * Alford plea
          * Cell phone use while driving
          * Constitutions
          * Firearms
            * Homicide
          * Law enforcement agencies
          * Legality of cannabis
          * Peace Index
          * Prisons
            * Incarceration rate
          * Same-sex unions
            * Former constitutional bans
            * Marriage law
          * Seat belt laws
          * Self-representation
          * Smoking bans
          * Speed limits (by jurisdiction)
          * Statutory codes
        

Miscellaneous|

        
                  * Abbreviations
          * Casinos
          * Demonyms
          * Fictional states
          * Flags
          * Hotels
          * Insignia
          * License plates
          * Malls
          * Numbered highways
          * Quarters 
            * 50 states
            * District of Columbia and territories
            * America the Beautiful Quarters
          * Symbols
          * Coats of arms
          * Tallest buildings
          * Time zones
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
          * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Commons
          * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portals
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abortion_in_the_United_States_by_state&oldid=900449585"

Categories:

        
                  * Abortion in the United States
          * History of women's rights in the United States
          * States of the United States-related lists
          * Reproductive rights in the United States
          * United States law
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
          * Wikipedia references cleanup from May 2019
          * All articles needing references cleanup
          * Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2019
          * All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * العربية
          * فارسی
          * اردو
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 19:12 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

