

![](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Military-

Machine.png)

    
        * Read
      * Aircraft
      * Ships & Boats
      * Tanks
      * Technology
      * History
    * Watch
    * __
    
    * Subscribe
    

__

__

__

    
        * Sign In
    

__

__

Home **Aircraft** F-22 Raptor vs F-35 Lightning II

Aircraft

# F-22 Raptor vs F-35 Lightning II

Date  
5/30/2019 By  
Colin Ritsick

![F-22 vs F-35](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-vs-F-35-850x478.jpg)

On one hand, you’ve got the world’s premier aircraft in air dominance. On the
other hand, you’ve got the most expensive weapons procurement program in world
history. Even though they're alike in so many ways, make no mistake - the F-22
Raptor and F-35 Lightning II are two totally different birds.

These two aircraft can carry out a lot of the same missions, but the F-35 was
ordered into production to fill in the gaps that that F-22 can’t fill.
Likewise, the F-35 has shortcomings where the F-22 shines. The bulk of what
makes the F-22 and the F-35 different is cost and capabilities.

![F-22 Raptor before refueling](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-before-refueling-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Air Force Staff Sgt. Colton Elliott
    

![F-22 Raptor over runway in Alaska](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-fly-over-150x150.jpg)

    
         Jamal Wilson
    

![F-22 Raptor fuselage](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-fuselage-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Air Force Tech Sgt. Natasha Stannard
    

![F-22 Raptor top view](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-top-view-150x150.jpg)

    
         Marine Corps Lance Corporal Sabrina Candiaflores
    

![F-35 Lightning formation](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-Lightning-formation-150x150.jpg)

    
         Air Force Staff Sgt. Andrew Lee
    

![F-35 aerial view](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-aerial-view-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Airforce Senior Airman Christine Groening
    

![F-35 Lightning fuselage](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-Lightning-fuselage-150x150.jpg)

    
         Air Force Staff Sgt. Andrew Lee
    

![F-35 Lightning during takeoff](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-Lightning-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Air Force Senior Airman Devante Williams
    

![F-22 Raptor climbing altitude](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-climbing-altitude-150x150.jpg)

    
         Jamal Wilson
    

![F-22 Raptor flight crew salutes Maj. Paul "Loco"

Lopez](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-

flight-crew-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Air Force Tech Sgt. Natasha Stannard
    

![F-22 vs F-35](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-vs-F-35-150x150.jpg)

    
         US Air Force - top photo: Staff Sgt. Natasha Stannard bottom photo: Staff Sgt. Andrew Lee
    

* * *

* * *

## F-22 vs F-35 Cost

The F-22 is expensive. The U.S. Air Force had to stop production early on the
F-22 because of soaring project costs. The cost of one aircraft alone is an
estimated $334 million which includes research and development (unit cost of
$150 million). The Air Force wanted 700 F-22s to be produced but had to cancel
production just shy of 200 because they were already over-budget. The flight
cost per hour for an F-22 is roughly $60,000.

With a price tag that high and no immediate threat in the open skies that
require the most dominant fighter jet in the world, the U.S. Military needed
to come up with a more viable, less expensive long-term solution.

The Pentagon is currently under contract to buy 90 new F-35s for $8.2 billion
from Lockheed Martin. Over 2,400 F-35s are expected to be produced for each
the Navy, Air Force and Marines once the program is all said and done. One
aircraft costs an estimated $91 million. The flight cost per hour is roughly
$67,000.

With the F-35s superior ability to engage targets on-land combined with its
much cheaper manufacturing costs, the U.S. Military will be producing the F-35
Lightning II until 2037. The last F-22 produced was delivered in 2012. _**Want
to test your knowledge of military aircraft prices?Take the quiz!**_

## F-22 vs F-35 Avionics

The Raptor is outfitted with a specially-designed AN/APG-77 radar from
Northrop Grumman. It gives the F-22 a nearly impossible advantage - it can
locate and engage the enemy without that aircraft ever even seeing the F-22 on
its radar. The AN/APG-77 uses an active and electronically scanned antenna
array of 2,000 transmitter/receiver modules. It can also communicate data
information over a secure link and jam enemy electronics system.

* * *

* * *

The F-22 also contains countermeasures. If a heat-seeking missile locks on to
an F-22 Raptor, it releases flares to misdirect the heat-seekers. If a radar-
guided missile locks on to an F-22 Raptor, it releases chaff (small pieces of
reflective material) to scurry the radar waves.

The F-35 Lightning is outfitted with Northrop Grumman's latest avionics
system, the AN/APG-81. The 81 model contains all the same air-to-air modes as
the AN/APG-71 but also includes: high-resolution mapping of the ground,
Advanced Electro-Optical Targeting System (EOTS), and a custom designed
AN/ASQ-239 Barracuda electronic warfare system. These systems, along with
others, provide the F-35 Lightning with never-before-seen 360 degrees
situational awareness. The F-35 also contains multispectral imaging
countermeasures.

## F-22 vs F-35 Speed and Size

![F-35 during landing](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-speed.jpg) US Marine Corps Lance Cpl. Mason Roy

A F-35 lands on the runway at Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Iwakuni, Japan.

__

When it comes to sheer speed, the F-35 just can't keep up. But it wasn't built
to. The F-35, with its air-to-ground combat design, is not designed for
breakaway speed. It has a top speed of 1.60 Mach, and less maneuverability
than the F-22 in dogfight scenarios. The F-22 can ramp it up all the way to
2.25 Mach. It climbs at a rate of 62,000 feet per minute whereas the F-35
climbs at 45,000 feet per minute.

* * *

* * *

![F-22 2016 Heritage Flight](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-2016-Heritage-Flight.jpg) US Air Force Senior
Airman Chris Massey

A F-22 during the 2016 Heritage Flight Training and Certification Course.

__

In every aspect of size - height, weight, wingspan, wing area, weight - the
F-22 Raptor is bigger than the F-35 Lightning. See the specs below for
details. _**Want to test your knowledge of different military aircraft models?
Take ourmilitary aircraft quiz.**_

## F-22 vs F-35 Weapons Bays

The biggest physical difference in the capabilities between the F-22 and the
F-35 are their weapon bays.

Designed for air-to-air combat, the F-22 has a weapons bay designed
accordingly. The main bay, located on the bottom of the fuselage, can hold six
LAU-142/A launchers for missiles designed for enemies that are out of visual
range. Each side weapons bay, on the left and right of the fuselage, holds an
LAU-141/A launcher for shorter-range missiles.

![F-22 Raptor weapons bay](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-Raptor-weapons-bay.jpg) Marine Corps Lance Cpl.
Sabrina Candiaflores

A F-22 Raptor opens its weapon bay doors during the 2018 Yuma Airshow.

__

The F-35, designed for a more versatile engagement approach, also has a unique
weapons bay. The bay on the F-35 is deeper and narrower than the F-22, in
order to carry heavier bombs mean for air-to-ground combat. The F-35 can carry
any of the following air-to-ground bombs: AIM-120 AMRAAM, AIM-132 ASRAAM
Brimstone anti-tank missiles, cluster munitions, Joint Direct Attack Munition
and Paveway series of bombs. Some of these weigh up to 2,000 pounds. The
heaviest bomb an F-22 can handle is 1,000 pounds.

* * *

* * *

![F-35 Lightning weapons bay](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/F-35-Lightning-weapons-bay.jpg) Marine Corps Cpl. Anne
K. Henry

A F-35 hovers over the flight deck of the USS Wasp.

__

## F-22 vs F-35 Comparison

![](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/F-22-vs-F-35.jpg)

### See F-22 vs F-35 Specifications

| F-22 Raptor | F-35 Lightning II  
---|---|---  
**Primary Function** | Air dominance, multi-role fighter | Multi-role fighter  
**Contractor** | Lockheed Martin, Boeing | Lockheed Martin  
**Power** | Two Pratt  & Whitney F119-PW-100 turbofan engines with
afterburners & two-dimensional thrust vectoring nozzles. | One Pratt & Whitney
F135-PW-100 turbofan engine  
**Thrust** | 35,000-pound class (each engine) | 43,000-pounds  
**Wingspan** | 44 feet, 6 inches (13.6 meters) | 35 feet (10.7 meters)  
**Length** | 62 feet, 1 inch (18.9 meters) | 51 feet (15.7 meters)  
**Height** | 16 feet, 8 inches (5.1 meters) | 14 feet (4.38 meters)  
**Maximum Takeoff Weight** | 83,500 pounds | 70,000 pound class  
**Fuel Capacity** | 18,000 pounds | 18,498 pounds  
**Speed** | Mach 2 with supercruise capability | Mach 1.6  
**Range** | More than 1,850 miles ferry range with two external wing fuel
tanks (1,600 nautical miles) | More than 1,350 miles with internal fuel
(1,200+ nautical miles), unlimited with aerial refueling  
**Ceiling** | Above 50,000 feet (15 kilometers) | Above 50,000 feet (15
kilometers)  
**Crew** | One | One  
**Unit Cost** | $334 million (with R+D), $150 million unit cost | $91 million  
![](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/f22-tshirt-251x300.jpg) F-22 T-shirt! Check these out
in different colors, as well as other aircraft. Click here:
https://amzn.to/2MXYm09 ![](https://militarymachine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/F35-t-shirt-239x300.jpg) F-35 T-shirt! Check these out
in different colors, as well as other aircraft. Click here:
https://amzn.to/2GoRFCR

### Watch This Comparison Between the F-35 and the F-22

_**Want to test your knowledge of different military aircraft?Take our quiz
and see if you can identify the different models.**_

Lockheed Martin

|

Air Force

* * *

* * *

__Previous Post

Next Post __

#### Recommended Posts

Aircraft

### Air Force One: Inside The President's Plane

Air Force One is not a specific aircraft, rather, it is the designation given
to any aircraft currently carrying the President of the United…

Tanks

### Military Tanks For Sale To Civilians

Tanks are incredible, powerful machines. And if you've got the real estate to
house one, the know-how to update or maintain one, and the…

Aircraft

### F-22 Raptor vs F-35 Lightning II

On one hand, you’ve got the world’s premier aircraft in air dominance. On the
other hand, you’ve got the most expensive weapons procurement program…

Aircraft

### F-35 Lightning II vs F-16 Fighting Falcon

Brought into existence to replace the aging line of U.S. fighters, the F-35
Lightning II is the latest and greatest multi-role attack aircraft in…

AircraftMembers

### Every Air Force Base In The United States

Here is every Air Force base in the United States, listed by state. Alabama
Maxwell Air Force Base This content is for members.

HistoryMembers

### Unusual Military Experiments Of The Past

The Nazi Sun Gun Aimed To Burn The Earth From Space The plans… This content is
for members.

## Popular Posts

![Leopard 1 Main Battle Tank, military tanks for sale to

civilians](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/1200px-

Leopard1_Bundeswehr_1983-380x253.jpg)

Tanks

### Military Tanks For Sale To Civilians

__May 30, 2019

    
        * ![F-22 vs F-35](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/F-22-vs-F-35-150x150.jpg)
    

AircraftTechnology

### F-22 Raptor vs F-35 Lightning II

__May 30, 2019

    
        * ![](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Screen-Shot-2018-11-02-at-11.06.58-AM-150x150.png)
    

Aircraft

### F-35 Lightning II vs F-16 Fighting Falcon

__May 30, 2019

    
        * ![Thunderbolts over Tinker AFB](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Thunderbolts-over-Tinker-AFB-150x150.jpg)
    

Aircraft

### Every Air Force Base In The United States

__April 29, 2019

    
        * ![military gas masks](https://militarymachine.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/military-experiments-6-1-150x150.jpg)
    

HistoryTechnology

### Unusual Military Experiments Of The Past

__April 29, 2019

## Since you're here…

...we want to let you in on something special. Exclusive stories, early access
to top content, and access to hundreds of hours of military videos, historical
footage, documentaries and more. All with no ads. Subscribe today and enjoy
all things military for just $4.99/ month.

    
        * Aircraft
    * Ships & Boats
    * Tanks
    * Technology
    * History
    * Watch
    * Get Paid To Write About Military Topics
    

Join Our Newsletter

    
        *     *     * Copyright © 2018 Military Machine. All rights reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | Contact Us
    

__

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

