

Skip to content

![Canadian Liver Foundation](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/Sm_CLF50_Logo_En_CMYK.png)

__

    
        * Your Liver
    * Patients & Caregivers
      * Liver Diseases
      * For Caregivers
      * Transplants
    * Health Professionals & Researchers
      * Health Professionals
      * Researchers
    * How You Can Help
      * Help in Your Region
      * Donate Now
    * We Are Liver
      * About CLF
      * Blog
      * Partners
      * Contact Us
      * STROLL for LIVER
      * LIVERight Gala
    * __|
    

### __Close Menu

    
        * Your Liver
    * Patients & Caregivers
      * Liver Diseases
      * For Caregivers
      * Transplants
    * Health Professionals & Researchers
      * Health Professionals
      * Researchers
    * How You Can Help
      * Help in Your Region
      * Donate Now
    * We Are Liver
      * About CLF
      * Blog
      * Partners
      * Contact Us
      * STROLL for LIVER
      * LIVERight Gala
    * __|
    

# Transplants

![A male doctor stands in front of his patient, greeting

him](https://www.liver.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/6104068209_d134b246f5_b-

cropped.jpg)

# Organ donation: The gift of life.

A liver transplant is a life-preserving operation that replaces a diseased and
poorly functioning liver with a healthy donated liver. A liver transplant
recipient can receive either an entire liver or a portion of a healthy liver.
Liver transplantation has become a well-recognized treatment option for people
with liver failure. In Canada, over 400 such operations are performed every
year. Livers are donated either from individuals who have been declared brain
dead and with the consent of their next of kin, or from a living donor such as
a relative or friend. Liver transplant centres match donors with recipients
based on compatible liver size and blood type.

![liver transplant process](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/TransplantProcess-Teal.png)

**Transplant Process**

![living with liver transplant](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/LivingWith-Teal.png)

**Living with a Transplant**

![liver donation](https://www.liver.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Donor-

Teal.png)

**Being a Liver Donor**

##

## **The Transplant Process**

A liver transplant is a major surgery with an operation lasting between six
and eight hours. As with any major medical procedure, liver transplantation
has risks. These risks along with the benefits are carefully considered before
a patient is placed on a waiting list for a new organ. A successful outcome
depends upon many factors. Patients who enter surgery very ill carry a higher
risk of dying. Similarly, older patients with cardiac or respiratory illnesses
will find the transplant a greater challenge.

When medical therapy is effective in stopping the progression of liver
disease, transplantation may be avoided or delayed. If a patient develops
advanced disease, with impaired liver function, which is non-reversible, liver
transplantation should be considered. Liver transplantation is not suitable
for everyone, so all potential transplant patients must be carefully assessed.
The assessment starts when the specialist or family doctor makes a referral to
the transplant team. Patients receive a comprehensive medical evaluation which
includes various tests and interviews by various team members to determine
whether transplantation is the best treatment option. The patient and/or
family members are extensively involved in the transplant assessment and
decision-making process.

The waiting time for a new liver may be uncertain and stressful. The sickest
patients receive priority for a transplant. Prioritization is based on
severity of the liver disease measured by a Model for End-stage Liver Disease
score (MELD). In children, a modified scoring system, called Pediatric End-
stage Liver disease score (PELD), is used to prioritize children in need of a
liver transplant. If patients and families are having difficulty in coping
during this time, it is recommended that they seek the assistance of a
qualified health professional.

**For more information please contact the Canadian Liver Foundation’s National
Help Line at1 (800) 563-5483.**

## **Living with a Transplant**

In Canada, the long-term success rate of transplantation for both adults and
children is over 80%. Immediately after surgery, patients are taken to the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) where they are placed on a machine known as a
mechanical ventilator that supports their breathing. They are carefully
monitored for signs of infection. Frequent tests are conducted to assess the
functioning of the new liver. Most patients spend one to three days in the ICU
before they are transferred to a step-down transplant unit. At this point,
they are able to breathe on their own but will continue to have intravenous
lines delivering medication. Following continued improvement and
physiotherapy, patients usually leave the hospital after 10 to 14 days. They
will be required to remain close to the transplant centre for several weeks
and will attend an outpatient clinic for continued monitoring of their new
liver. Most patients return to a good quality of life within three to six
months after surgery.

**At the age of 3, Alessandria was diagnosed with primary sclerosing
cholangitis (PSC), a disease that affects the bile ducts and can lead to
severe liver damage. Although PSC affects primarily middle-aged men, a growing
number of women and children are being diagnosed. The exact cause of this
liver disease is still unknown. Today, there is no cure and no specific
treatment. Alessandria’s parents fear that one day she may need a liver
transplant.**

**Donate now** **to support research that may one day lead to a cure for
people like Alessandria, and keep reading to learn about living donor
transplants.**

All liver transplant patients must take anti-rejection medications for life.
These medications must be monitored to ensure the right amount of medication
is present in the patient’s blood. These medications suppress the immune
system, which enables your body to accept the new liver without attacking it.
However, these medications also make all liver transplant patients more
susceptible to developing infections. Infection prevention techniques are very
important after receiving a transplant. The side effects associated with anti-
rejection medications are many and are specific to the medication regimen a
patient receives. Many patients experience some form of side effect during
their course of treatment; however, many of the side effects are temporary or
manageable. The risk of side effects also depends on the amount of anti-
rejection medications one requires to protect the transplanted organ. The
transplant team will often use the least amount of anti-rejection medications
needed in hopes of avoiding or minimizing the risk of unwanted side effects.
Furthermore, the transplant team monitors patients closely so that side
effects can be identified and dealt with quickly.

Most liver transplant recipients are able to return to a normal and healthy
lifestyle. Most report that they feel re-energized, have an improved quality
of life and enjoy everyday activities once more. Liver transplant recipients
are able to participate in normal exercise after their recuperation and women
are able to conceive and have normal post-transplant pregnancies and
deliveries.

## **Being a Liver Donor**

The long waiting time for a liver transplant and the progression of the liver
disease that occurs during this period has motivated many families to consider
living donation. It should be noted, however, that not all candidates are
suitable for this option. Liver transplant centres match donors with
recipients based on compatible liver size and blood type.

![A diagram showing that a portion of one liver is](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/Transplants-with-permission-from-mayoclinic.com-all-

rights-reserved-copy.jpg)Living donor transplants in babies involve
transplanting a small portion of the left lobe of the adult donor’s liver to
an infant. Adult to adult living donor transplant is achieved by using the
entire right lobe of the donor’s liver. Not all potential donors are suitable
for living donation and extra precautions are taken by the transplant team to
ensure that the decision to donate is without coercion and is unconditional.
The living donation operation is a major surgery and requires a five to 10-day
hospitalization and two to three-month period of recovery. The donor surgery
has a very low risk of death and within a few months, the donor’s liver
regenerates to within 90 per cent of its original size.

# We're here to help:

1 (800) 563-5483

# Subscribe & Follow

![](https://www.liver.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/iconmonstr-

email-10-240-e1507219661912.png) ![](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/iconmonstr-facebook-4-240-1-e1507219623936.png)
![](https://www.liver.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/iconmonstr-

twitter-4-240-1-e1507219638186.png) ![](https://www.liver.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/iconmonstr-youtube-4-240-e1507219650183.png)

# Additional Links

Contact Us  
Partners  
Press Releases  
Support Programs

# Additional Links

Disclaimer  
Privacy Policy  
Sitemap  
Donate Now

DONATE NOW

# Newsletter

Yes, add me to the list

Leave this field empty if you're human:

![English](//www.liver.ca/wp-content/plugins/gtranslate/flags/16/en-ca.png)
English ![Français](//www.liver.ca/wp-content/plugins/gtranslate/flags/16/fr-

qc.png) Français ![简体中文](//www.liver.ca/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/flags/16/zh-CN.png) 简体中文

© 2017 Canadian Liver Foundation. All rights reserved. Charitable Registration

# 10686 2949 RR0001 | Designed by TACK10, Powered by Performance

![](//www.googleadservices.com/pagead/conversion/1009240070/?label=1OGYCLSHzXsQhpCf4QM&guid=ON&script=0)

    
        * Your Liver
    * Patients & Caregivers
    

▼

    
          * Liver Diseases
      * For Caregivers
      * Transplants
    * Health Professionals & Researchers
    

▼

    
          * Health Professionals
      * Researchers
    * How You Can Help
    

▼

    
          * Help in Your Region
      * Donate Now
    * We Are Liver
    

▼

    
          * About CLF
      * Blog
      * Partners
      * Contact Us
      * STROLL for LIVER
      * LIVERight Gala
    *  __|
    

__

Send to Email Address

Your Name

Your Email Address

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

