

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act![Great Seal of the United

States](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg/140px-

Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg.png)

* * *

Long title| The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act  
Acronyms (colloquial)| PPACA, ACA  
Nicknames| Obamacare, Affordable Care Act, Health Insurance Reform, Healthcare
Reform  
Enacted by| the 111th United States Congress  
Effective| March 23, 2010; 9 years ago (2010-03-23)  
Most major provisions phased in by January 2014; remaining provisions phased
in by 2020; individual mandate repealed starting 2019  
Citations  
Public law| 111–148  
Statutes at Large| 124 Stat. 119 _through_ 124 Stat. 1025 (906 pages)  
Legislative history

    
        *  **Introduced in the House** **as** **the** "Service Members Home Ownership Tax Act of 2009" (H.R. 3590) **by** Charles Rangel (D–NY) **on** September 17, 2009
    *  **Committee consideration by** Ways and Means
    *  **Passed the House on** November 7, 2009 (220–215)
    *  **Passed the Senate as the** "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" **on** December 24, 2009 (60–39) **with amendment**
    *  **House agreed to Senate amendment on** March 21, 2010 (219–212)
    *  **Signed into law by President** Barack Obama **on** March 23, 2010
    

Major amendments  
Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010  
Comprehensive 1099 Taxpayer Protection and Repayment of Exchange Subsidy
Overpayments Act of 2011  
Public Law 115-97 proposed as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017  
United States Supreme Court cases  
_National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius_  
_Burwell v. Hobby Lobby_  
_King v. Burwell_  
| ![President Barack Obama, 2012 portrait

crop.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/55/President_Barack_Obama%2C_2012_portrait_crop.jpg/75px-

President_Barack_Obama%2C_2012_portrait_crop.jpg) |

This article is part of  
a series about

Barack Obama  
---|---  
* Political positions * Electoral history

* * *
    
        * Early life and career
    * Family
    * Public image
    

* * *

Pre-presidency

    
        * Illinois State Senator
    * 2004 DNC keynote address
    * U.S. Senator from Illinois
    

* * *

44th President of the United States

    
        * Presidency
      * Timeline
    

* * *

Policies

    
        * Economy
    * Energy
    * Foreign policy
      * Obama Doctrine
      * Foreign trips
    * Pardons
    * Social
    * Space
    

* * *

Appointments

    
        * Cabinet
    * Judges
    

* * *

First term

    
        * Campaign for the Presidency
      * 2008 general election
      * Primaries
    * Transition
    * 1st inauguration
    * First 100 days
    * Affordable Care Act
    * Iraq Withdrawal
    * Death of Osama bin Laden
    *       * Timeline: '09
      * '10
      * '11
      * '12
    

* * *

Second term

    
        * Reelection campaign
    
      * 2012 general election
      * Reactions
    * 2nd inauguration
    * Immigration executive action
    * Iran deal
    * Cuban thaw
    *       * Timeline: '13
      * '14
      * '15
      * '16
      * '17
    

* * *

Post-presidency

    
        * Planned Library
    * Obama Foundation
    * One America Appeal
    

* * *
    
        * _Dreams from My Father_
    * _The Audacity of Hope_
    * Nobel Peace Prize
    

* * *

![Barack Obama's

signature](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Barack_Obama_signature.svg/130px-

Barack_Obama_signature.svg.png)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/36/Seal_of_the_President_of_the_United_States.svg/70px-

Seal_of_the_President_of_the_United_States.svg.png)

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

The **Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act** ( **PPACA** ), often
shortened to the **Affordable Care Act** ( **ACA** ) or nicknamed
**Obamacare** , is a United States federal statute enacted by the 111th United
States Congress and signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23,
2010. Together with the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010
amendment, it represents the U.S. healthcare system's most significant
regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since the passage of Medicare
and Medicaid in 1965.[1][2][3][4]

The ACA's major provisions came into force in 2014. By 2016, the uninsured
share of the population had roughly halved, with estimates ranging from 20 to
24 million additional people covered during 2016.[5][6] The increased coverage
was due, roughly equally, to an expansion of Medicaid eligibility and to major
changes to individual insurance markets. Both involved new spending, funded
through a combination of new taxes and cuts to Medicare provider rates and
Medicare Advantage. Several Congressional Budget Office reports said that
overall these provisions reduced the budget deficit, that repealing the ACA
would increase the deficit,[7][8] and that the law reduced income inequality
by taxing primarily the top 1% to fund roughly $600 in benefits on average to
families in the bottom 40% of the income distribution.[9] The law also enacted
a host of delivery system reforms intended to constrain healthcare costs and
improve quality. After the law went into effect, increases in overall
healthcare spending slowed, including premiums for employer-based insurance
plans.[10]

The act largely retains the existing structure of Medicare, Medicaid, and the
employer market, but individual markets were radically overhauled around a
three-legged program.[1][11] Insurers in these markets are made to accept all
applicants and charge the same rates regardless of pre-existing conditions or
sex. To combat resultant adverse selection, the act mandates that individuals
buy insurance and insurers cover a list of "essential health benefits".
However, a repeal of the individual tax mandate, passed as part of the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, became effective on January 1, 2019. To help
households between 100–400% of the Federal Poverty Line afford these
compulsory policies, the law provides insurance premium subsidies. Other
individual market changes include health marketplaces and risk adjustment
programs.

Since being signed into law in 2010, the PPACA has faced strong political
opposition, calls for repeal (from Republicans) and numerous legal challenges;
its enactment is considered to be a catalyst for the Tea Party movement. In
_National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius_ , the Supreme Court
ruled that states could choose not to participate in the ACA's Medicaid
expansion, although it upheld the law as a whole.[12] The federal health
exchange, HealthCare.gov, faced major technical problems at the beginning of
its rollout in 2013. In 2017, a unified Republican government attempted but
failed to pass several different partial repeals of the ACA. The law spent
several years opposed by a slim plurality of Americans polled, although its
provisions were generally more popular than the law as a whole,[13] and the
law gained majority support by 2017.[14]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Provisions
      * 1.1 Insurance regulations
      * 1.2 Individual mandate
      * 1.3 Subsidies
      * 1.4 Exchanges
      * 1.5 Risk corridor program
      * 1.6 Temporary reinsurance
      * 1.7 Risk adjustment
      * 1.8 Medicaid expansion
      * 1.9 Medicare savings
      * 1.10 Taxes
        * 1.10.1 Medicare taxes
        * 1.10.2 Excise taxes
      * 1.11 SCHIP
      * 1.12 Dependents' health insurance
      * 1.13 Employer mandate
      * 1.14 Delivery system reforms
        * 1.14.1 Hospital quality
        * 1.14.2 Bundled Payments
        * 1.14.3 Accountable Care Organizations
      * 1.15 Medicare donut hole
      * 1.16 State waivers
      * 1.17 Other insurance provisions
      * 1.18 Menu calorie listings
    * 2 Legislative history
      * 2.1 Background
      * 2.2 Healthcare debate, 2008–10
        * 2.2.1 Senate
        * 2.2.2 House
    * 3 Impact
      * 3.1 Coverage
      * 3.2 Taxes
      * 3.3 Insurance exchanges
      * 3.4 Medicaid expansion
      * 3.5 Healthcare insurance costs
        * 3.5.1 Effect on deductibles and co-payments
      * 3.6 Health outcomes
      * 3.7 Distributional impact
      * 3.8 Federal deficit
        * 3.8.1 CBO estimates of revenue and impact on deficit
        * 3.8.2 Opinions on CBO projections
      * 3.9 Economic consequences
      * 3.10 Employer mandate and part-time work
      * 3.11 Hospitals
    * 4 Public opinion
    * 5 Political aspects
      * 5.1 "Obamacare"
      * 5.2 Common misconceptions
        * 5.2.1 "Death panels"
        * 5.2.2 Members of Congress
        * 5.2.3 Illegal immigrants
        * 5.2.4 Exchange "death spiral"
    * 6 Opposition
      * 6.1 Legal challenges
        * 6.1.1 _National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius_
        * 6.1.2 Contraception mandate
        * 6.1.3 _House v. Price_
        * 6.1.4 _Texas et al v. United States of America et al_
        * 6.1.5 Non-cooperation
      * 6.2 Repeal efforts
        * 6.2.1 2013 federal government shutdown
        * 6.2.2 2017 repeal effort
      * 6.3 Actions to hinder implementation
      * 6.4 Ending cost-sharing reduction (CSR) payments
    * 7 Implementation
      * 7.1 Murray—Alexander Individual Market Stabilization Bill
    * 8 See also
    * 9 References
    * 10 Further reading
      * 10.1 Preliminary CBO documents
      * 10.2 CMS Estimates of the impact of P.L. 111-148
      * 10.3 CMS Estimates of the impact of H.R. 3590
      * 10.4 Senate Finance Committee meetings
    * 11 External links
      * 11.1 PPACA text
    

## Provisions

Main article: Provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/Barack_Obama_reacts_to_the_passing_of_Healthcare_bill.jpg/220px-

Barack_Obama_reacts_to_the_passing_of_Healthcare_bill.jpg)

The President and White House Staff react to the House of Representatives
passing the bill on March 21, 2010.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/View_From_the_Speaker%27s_Office_Tonight_%284452690853%29.jpg/220px-

View_From_the_Speaker%27s_Office_Tonight_%284452690853%29.jpg)

Jim Clyburn and Nancy Pelosi celebrating after the House passes the amended
bill on March 21

The ACA includes provisions to take effect from 2010 to 2020, although most
took effect on January 1, 2014. It amended the Public Health Service Act of
1944 and inserted new provisions on affordable care into Title 42 of the
United States Code.[ _citation needed_ ] Few areas of the US health care
system were left untouched, making it the most sweeping health care reform
since the enactment of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965.[1][2][3][15][4] However,
some areas were more affected than others. The individual insurance market was
radically overhauled, and many of the law's regulations applied specifically
to this market,[1] while the structure of Medicare, Medicaid, and the employer
market were largely retained.[2] Most of the coverage gains were made through
the expansion of Medicaid,[16] and the biggest cost savings were made in
Medicare.[2] Some regulations applied to the employer market, and the law also
made delivery system changes that affected most of the health care system.[2]
Not all provisions took full effect. Some were made discretionary, some were
deferred, and others were repealed before implementation.

### Insurance regulations

    
        * Guaranteed issue prohibits insurers from denying coverage to individuals due to pre-existing conditions. States were required to ensure the availability of insurance for individual children who did not have coverage via their families.
    * Premiums must be the same for everyone of a given age, regardless of preexisting conditions. Premiums are allowed to vary by enrollee age, but those for the oldest enrollees (age 45–64, average expenses $5,542) can only be three times as large as those for adults 18–24 ($1,836).[17]
    * Essential health benefits must be provided. The National Academy of Medicine defines the law's "essential health benefits" as "ambulatory patient services; emergency services; hospitalization; maternity and newborn care; mental health and substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; prescription drugs; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; laboratory services; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and pediatric services, including oral and vision care"[18][19][20][21][22][23][24] and others[25] rated Level A or B by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.[26] In determining what would qualify as an essential benefit, the law required that standard benefits should offer at least that of a "typical employer plan".[23] States may require additional services.[27]
    * Additional preventive care and screenings for women.[28] The guidelines issued by the Health Resources and Services Administration to implement this provision mandate "[a]ll Food and Drug Administration approved contraceptive methods, sterilization procedures, and patient education and counseling for all women with reproductive capacity".[29] This mandate applies to all employers and educational institutions except for religious organizations.[30][31] These regulations were included on the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine.[32][33]
    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/Health_Care_Delivery_System_Reform_and_The_Patient_Protection_%26_Affodable_Care_Act.pdf/page1-220px-

Health_Care_Delivery_System_Reform_and_The_Patient_Protection_%26_Affodable_Care_Act.pdf.jpg)

In 2012 Senator Sheldon Whitehouse created this summary to explain his view on
the act.

    
        * Annual and lifetime coverage caps on essential benefits were banned.[34][35]
    * Prohibits insurers from dropping policyholders when they get sick.[36]
    * All health policies sold in the United States must provide an annual maximum out of pocket (MOOP) payment cap for an individual's or family's medical expenses (excluding premiums). After the MOOP payment cap is reached, all remaining costs must be paid by the insurer.[37]
    * A partial community rating requires insurers to offer the same premium to all applicants of the same age and location without regard to gender or most pre-existing conditions (excluding tobacco use).[38][39][40] Premiums for older applicants can be no more than three times those for the youngest.[41]
    * Preventive care, vaccinations and medical screenings cannot be subject to co-payments, co-insurance or deductibles.[42][43][44] Specific examples of covered services include: mammograms and colonoscopies, wellness visits, gestational diabetes screening, HPV testing, STI counseling, HIV screening and counseling, contraceptive methods, breastfeeding support/supplies and domestic violence screening and counseling.[45]
    * The law established four tiers of coverage: bronze, silver, gold and platinum. All categories offer the essential health benefits. The categories vary in their division of premiums and out-of-pocket costs: bronze plans have the lowest monthly premiums and highest out-of-pocket costs, while platinum plans are the reverse.[23][46] The percentages of health care costs that plans are expected to cover through premiums (as opposed to out-of-pocket costs) are, on average: 60% (bronze), 70% (silver), 80% (gold), and 90% (platinum).[47]
    * Insurers are required to implement an appeals process for coverage determination and claims on all new plans.[36]
    * Insurers must spend at least 80–85% of premium dollars on health costs; rebates must be issued to policyholders if this is violated.[48][49]
    

### Individual mandate

The individual mandate[50] was the requirement to buy insurance or pay a
penalty for everyone not covered by an employer sponsored health plan,
Medicaid, Medicare or other public insurance programs (such as Tricare). Also
exempt were those facing a financial hardship or who were members in a
recognized religious sect exempted by the Internal Revenue Service.[51]

The mandate and the limits on open enrollment[52][53] were designed to avoid
the insurance death spiral in which healthy people delay insuring themselves
until they get sick. In such a situation, insurers would have to raise their
premiums to cover the relatively sicker and thus more expensive
policies,[50][54][55] which could create a vicious cycle in which more and
more people drop their coverage.[56]

The purpose of the mandate was to prevent the healthcare system from
succumbing to adverse selection, which would result in high premiums for the
insured and little coverage (and thus more illness and medical bankruptcy) for
the uninsured.[54][57][58] Studies by the CBO, Gruber and Rand Health
concluded that a mandate was required.[59][60][61] The mandate increased the
size and diversity of the insured population, including more young and healthy
participants to broaden the risk pool, spreading costs.[62] Experience in New
Jersey and Massachusetts offered divergent outcomes.[57][60][63]

Among the groups who were not subject to the individual mandate are:

    
        * Illegal immigrants, estimated at around 8 million—or roughly a third of the 23 million projection—are ineligible for insurance subsidies and Medicaid.[64][65] They remain eligible for emergency services.
    * Eligible citizens not enrolled in Medicaid.[66]
    * Citizens who pay the annual penalty instead of purchasing insurance, mostly younger and single.[66]
    * Citizens whose insurance coverage would cost more than 8% of household income and are exempt from the penalty.[66]
    * Citizens who live in states that opt out of the Medicaid expansion and who qualify for neither existing Medicaid coverage nor subsidized coverage through the states' new insurance exchanges.[67]
    * All citizens as of December 20, 2017[68]
    

On December 20, 2017, the individual mandate was repealed starting in January
2019 via the "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017".[68]

### Subsidies

Households with incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level are
eligible to receive federal subsidies for policies purchased via an
exchange.[69][70] Households living in the federal poverty level are not
eligible to receive federal subsidies. Subsidies are provided as an
advanceable, refundable tax credits.[71][72] Additionally, small businesses
are eligible for a tax credit provided that they enroll in the SHOP
Marketplace.[73] Under the law, workers whose employers offer affordable
coverage will not be eligible for subsidies via the exchanges. To be eligible
the cost of employer-based health insurance must exceed 9.5% of the worker's
household income.

Subsidies (2014) for Family of 4[74][75][76][77][78] Income % of federal
poverty level | Premium Cap as a Share of Income | Incomea | Max Annual Out-
of-Pocket Premium | Premium Savingsb | Additional Cost-Sharing Subsidy  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
133% | 3% of income | $31,900 | $992 | $10,345 | $5,040  
150% | 4% of income | $33,075 | $1,323 | $9,918 | $5,040  
200% | 6.3% of income | $44,100 | $2,778 | $8,366 | $4,000  
250% | 8.05% of income | $55,125 | $4,438 | $6,597 | $1,930  
300% | 9.5% of income | $66,150 | $6,284 | $4,628 | $1,480  
350% | 9.5% of income | $77,175 | $7,332 | $3,512 | $1,480  
400% | 9.5% of income | $88,200 | $8,379 | $2,395 | $1,480

a. **^** Note: In 2014, the FPL was $11,800 for a single person and $24,000
for family of four.[79][80] See Subsidy Calculator for specific dollar
amount.[81] b. **^** DHHS and CBO estimate the average annual premium cost in
2014 would have been $11,328 for a family of 4 without the reform.[76]

### Exchanges

Established the creation of health insurance exchanges in all fifty states.
The exchanges are regulated, largely online marketplaces, administered by
either federal or state government, where individuals and small business can
purchase private insurance plans.[82][83][84]

Setting up an exchange gives a state partial discretion on standards and
prices of insurance.[85][86] For example, states approve plans for sale, and
influence (through limits on and negotiations with private insurers) the
prices on offer. They can impose higher or state-specific coverage
requirements—including whether plans offered in the state can cover
abortion.[87] States without an exchange do not have that discretion. The
responsibility for operating their exchanges moves to the federal
government.[85]

### Risk corridor program

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This section **containstoo many or too-lengthy quotations for an encyclopedic
entry**. Please help improve the article by presenting facts as a neutrally-
worded summary with appropriate citations. Consider transferring direct
quotations to Wikiquote. _( July 2017)_

---|--- 

The risk-corridor program was a temporary risk management device defined under
the PPACA section 1342[88]:1 to encourage reluctant insurers into the "new and
untested"[ _attribution needed_ ] ACA insurance market during the first three
years that ACA was implemented (2014–2016). For those years the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) "would cover some of the losses for insurers
whose plans performed worse than they expected. Insurers that were especially
profitable, for their part, would have to return to HHS some of the money they
earned on the exchanges"[89][90][ _attribution needed_ ]

According to an article in _Forbes_ , risk corridors "had been a successful
part of the Medicare prescription drug benefit, and the ACA's risk corridors
were modeled after Medicare's Plan D."[91] They operated on the principle that
"more participation would mean more competition, which would drive down
premiums and make health insurance more affordable"[ _attribution needed_ ]
and "[w]hen insurers signed up to sell health plans on the exchanges, they did
so with the expectation that the risk-corridor program would limit their
downside losses."[89][ _attribution needed_ ] The risk corridors succeeded in
attracting ACA insurers. The program did not pay for itself as planned with
"accumulated losses"[ _attribution needed_ ] up to $8.3 billion for 2014 and
2015 alone. Authorization had to be given so that HHS could pay insurers from
"general government revenues".[ _attribution needed_ ] Congressional
Republicans "railed against"[ _attribution needed_ ] the program as a
'bailout' for insurers. Then-Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.), on the Appropriations
Committee that funds the Department of Health and Human Services and the Labor
Department "[slipped] in a sentence"—Section 227—in the "massive"
appropriations Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2014 (H.R. 3547) that said
that no funds in the discretionary spending bill "could be used for risk-
corridor payments."[ _attribution needed_ ] This effectively "blocked the
administration from obtaining the necessary funds from other programs"[92][
_attribution needed_ ] and placed Congress in a potential breach of contract
with insurers who offered qualified health plans, under the Tucker Act[88] as
it did not pay the insurers.[93][93]

On February 10, 2017, in the Moda Health v the US Government, Moda, one of the
insurers that struggled financially because of the elimination of the risk
corridor program, won a "$214-million judgment against the federal
government".[ _attribution needed_ ] On appeal, judge Thomas C. Wheeler
stated, "the Government made a promise in the risk corridors program that it
has yet to fulfill. Today, the court directs the Government to fulfill that
promise. After all, to say to [Moda], 'The joke is on you. You shouldn't have
trusted us,' is hardly worthy of our great government."[94]

### Temporary reinsurance

Temporary reinsurance for insurance for insurers against unexpectedly high
claims was a program that ran from 2014 through 2016. It was intended to limit
insurer losses.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Risk adjustment

Of the three risk management programs, only risk adjustment was permanent.
Risk adjustment attempts to spread risk among insurers to prevent purchasers
with good knowledge of their medical needs from using insurance to cover their
costs (adverse selection). Plans with low actuarial risk compensate plans with
high actuarial risk.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Medicaid expansion

ACA revised and expanded Medicaid eligibility starting in 2014. Under the law
as written, all U.S. citizens and legal residents with income up to 133% of
the poverty line, including adults without dependent children, would qualify
for coverage in any state that participated in the Medicaid program. The
federal government paid 100% of the cost of Medicaid eligibility expansion in
participating states in 2014, 2015, and 2016; and will pay 95% in 2017, 94% in
2018, 93% in 2019, and 90% in 2020 and all subsequent years.[95][96][97] The
law provides a 5% "income disregard", making the effective income eligibility
limit for Medicaid 138% of the poverty level.[98]

However, the Supreme Court ruled in _NFIB v. Sebelius_ that this provision of
the ACA was coercive, and that the federal government must allow states to
continue at pre-ACA levels of funding and eligibility if they chose.

### Medicare savings

Spending reductions included a reduction in Medicare reimbursements to
insurers and drug companies for private Medicare Advantage policies that the
Government Accountability Office and Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
found to be excessively costly relative to government Medicare;[99][100] and
reductions in Medicare reimbursements to hospitals that failed standards of
efficiency and care.[99]

### Taxes

#### Medicare taxes

Income from self-employment and wages of single individuals in excess of
$200,000 annually are subject to an additional tax of 0.9%. The threshold
amount is $250,000 for a married couple filing jointly (threshold applies to
joint compensation of the two spouses), or $125,000 for a married person
filing separately.[101]

In the ACA's companion legislation, the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act of 2010, an additional Medicare tax of 3.8% was applied to
unearned income, specifically the lesser of net investment income or the
amount by which adjusted gross income exceeds $200,000 ($250,000 for a married
couple filing jointly; $125,000 for a married person filing separately.)[102]

#### Excise taxes

Excise taxes for the Affordable Care Act raised $16.3 billion in fiscal year
2015 (17% of all excise taxes collected by the Federal Government). $11.3
billion was raised by an excise tax placed directly on health insurers based
on their market share. The ACA also includes an excise tax of 40% ("Cadillac
tax") on total employer premium spending in excess of specified dollar amounts
($10,200 for single coverage and $27,500 for family coverage[103]) indexed to
inflation, originally scheduled to take effect in 2018, but delayed until 2020
by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016. Annual excise taxes totaling $3
billion were levied on importers and manufacturers of prescription drugs. An
excise tax of 2.3% on medical devices and a 10% excise tax on indoor tanning
services were applied as well.[104]

### SCHIP

The State Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) enrollment process was
simplified.[105]

### Dependents' health insurance

Dependents were permitted to remain on their parents' insurance plan until
their 26th birthday, including dependents who no longer live with their
parents, are not a dependent on a parent's tax return, are no longer a
student, or are married.[106][107]

### Employer mandate

Businesses that employ 50 or more people but do not offer health insurance to
their full-time employees pay a tax penalty if the government has subsidized a
full-time employee's healthcare through tax deductions or other means. This is
commonly known as the employer mandate.[108][109] This provision was included
to encourage employers to continue providing insurance once the exchanges
began operating.[110] Approximately 44% of the population was covered directly
or indirectly through an employer.[111][112]

### Delivery system reforms

The act includes a host of delivery system reforms intended to constrain
healthcare costs and improve quality. These include Medicare payment changes
to discourage hospital-acquired conditions and readmissions, bundled payment
initiatives, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, the Independent
Payment Advisory Board, and the creation of Accountable care organizations.

#### Hospital quality

Health care cost/quality initiatives including incentives to reduce hospital
infections, to adopt electronic medical records, and to coordinate care and
prioritize quality over quantity.[113]

The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRPP) was established as an
addition to the Social Security Act, in an effort to reduce hospital
readmissions. This program penalizes hospitals with higher than expected
readmission rates by decreasing their Medicare reimbursement rate.

#### Bundled Payments

The Medicare payment system switched from fee-for-service to bundled
payments.[114][115] A single payment was to be paid to a hospital and a
physician group for a defined episode of care (such as a hip replacement)
rather than individual payments to individual service providers. In addition,
the Medicare Part D coverage gap (commonly called the "donut hole") was to
shrink incrementally, closing completely by January 1, 2020.[116]

#### Accountable Care Organizations

The Act allowed the creation of Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), which
are groups of doctors, hospitals and other providers that commit to give
coordinated, high quality care to Medicare patients. ACOs were allowed to
continue using a fee for service billing approach. They receive bonus payments
from the government for minimizing costs while achieving quality benchmarks
that emphasize prevention and mitigation of chronic disease. If they fail to
do so, they are subject to penalties.[117]

Unlike Health Maintenance Organizations, ACO patients are not required to
obtain all care from the ACO. Also, unlike HMOs, ACOs must achieve quality of
care goals.[117]

### Medicare donut hole

Medicare Part D participants received a 50% discount on brand name drugs
purchased after exhausting their initial coverage and before reaching the
catastrophic-coverage threshold.[118] The United States Department of Health
and Human Services began mailing rebate checks in 2010.[119] By the year 2020,
the donut hole will be completely phased out.[120]

### State waivers

From 2017 onwards, states can apply for a "waiver for state innovation" that
allows them to conduct experiments that meet certain criteria.[121] To obtain
a waiver, a state must pass legislation setting up an alternative health
system that provides insurance at least as comprehensive and as affordable as
ACA, covers at least as many residents and does not increase the federal
deficit.[122] These states can be exempt from some of ACA's central
requirements, including the individual and employer mandates and the provision
of an insurance exchange.[123] The state would receive compensation equal to
the aggregate amount of any federal subsidies and tax credits for which its
residents and employers would have been eligible under ACA plan, if they
cannot be paid under the state plan.[121]

In May 2011, Vermont enacted Green Mountain Care, a state-based single-payer
system for which they intended to pursue a waiver to implement.[124][125][126]
In December 2014, Vermont decided not to continue due to high expected
costs.[127]

### Other insurance provisions

    
        * The Community Living Assistance Services and Supports Act (or CLASS Act) established a voluntary and public long-term care insurance option for employees,[128][129][130]
    * Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans (CO-OP), member-governed non-profit insurers, could start providing health care coverage, based on a 5-year federal loan.[131]
    

### Menu calorie listings

Nutrition labeling requirements of the Affordable Care Act were signed into
federal law in 2010, but implementation was delayed by the FDA several times
until they went into effect on May 7, 2018.[132]

## Legislative history

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Obama_signs_health_care-20100323.jpg/300px-

Obama_signs_health_care-20100323.jpg)

President Obama signing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act on
March 23, 2010

### Background

Main articles: Health care reform in the United States and Health care reform
debate in the United States

An individual mandate coupled with subsidies for private insurance as a means
for universal healthcare was considered the best way to win the support of the
Senate because it had been included in prior bipartisan reform proposals. The
concept goes back to at least 1989, when the conservative The Heritage
Foundation proposed an individual mandate as an alternative to single-payer
health care.[133][134] It was championed for a time by conservative economists
and Republican senators as a market-based approach to healthcare reform on the
basis of individual responsibility and avoidance of free rider problems.
Specifically, because the 1986 Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor
Act (EMTALA) requires any hospital participating in Medicare (nearly all do)
to provide emergency care to anyone who needs it, the government often
indirectly bore the cost of those without the ability to pay.[135][136][137]

President Bill Clinton proposed a healthcare reform bill in 1993 that included
a mandate for employers to provide health insurance to all employees through a
regulated marketplace of health maintenance organizations. Republican Senators
proposed an alternative that would have required individuals, but not
employers, to buy insurance.[136] Ultimately the Clinton plan failed amid an
unprecedented barrage of negative advertising funded by politically
conservative groups and the health insurance industry and due to concerns that
it was overly complex.[138] Clinton negotiated a compromise with the 105th
Congress to instead enact the State Children's Health Insurance Program
(SCHIP) in 1997.[139]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/76/U.S._Senator_John_Chafee.jpg)

John Chafee

The 1993 Republican alternative, introduced by Senator John Chafee as the
Health Equity and Access Reform Today Act, contained a "universal coverage"
requirement with a penalty for noncompliance—an individual mandate—as well as
subsidies to be used in state-based 'purchasing groups'.[140] Advocates for
the 1993 bill included prominent Republicans such as Senators Orrin Hatch,
Chuck Grassley, Bob Bennett and Kit Bond.[141][142] Of 1993's 43 Republican
Senators, 20 supported the HEART Act.[133][143] Another Republican proposal,
introduced in 1994 by Senator Don Nickles (R-OK), the Consumer Choice Health
Security Act, contained an individual mandate with a penalty provision;[144]
however, Nickles subsequently removed the mandate from the bill, stating he
had decided "that government should not compel people to buy health
insurance".[145] At the time of these proposals, Republicans did not raise
constitutional issues with the mandate; Mark Pauly, who helped develop a
proposal that included an individual mandate for George H. W. Bush, remarked,
"I don't remember that being raised at all. The way it was viewed by the
Congressional Budget Office in 1994 was, effectively, as a tax."[133]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/33/P112912PS-0444_-_President_Barack_Obama_and_Mitt_Romney_in_the_Oval_Office_-

_crop.jpg/220px-P112912PS-0444_-_President_Barack_Obama_and_Mitt_Romney_in_the_Oval_Office_-

_crop.jpg)

Mitt Romney's Massachusetts went from 90% of its residents insured to 98%, the
highest rate in the nation.[146]

In 2006, an insurance expansion bill was enacted at the state level in
Massachusetts. The bill contained both an individual mandate and an insurance
exchange. Republican Governor Mitt Romney vetoed the mandate, but after
Democrats overrode his veto, he signed it into law.[147] Romney's
implementation of the 'Health Connector' exchange and individual mandate in
Massachusetts was at first lauded by Republicans. During Romney's 2008
presidential campaign, Senator Jim DeMint praised Romney's ability to "take
some good conservative ideas, like private health insurance, and apply them to
the need to have everyone insured". Romney said of the individual mandate:
"I'm proud of what we've done. If Massachusetts succeeds in implementing it,
then that will be the model for the nation."[148]

In 2007, a year after the Massachusetts reform, Republican Senator Bob Bennett
and Democratic Senator Ron Wyden introduced the Healthy Americans Act, which
featured an individual mandate and state-based, regulated insurance markets
called "State Health Help Agencies".[137][148] The bill initially attracted
bipartisan support, but died in committee. Many of the sponsors and co-
sponsors remained in Congress during the 2008 healthcare debate.[149]

By 2008 many Democrats were considering this approach as the basis for
healthcare reform. Experts said that the legislation that eventually emerged
from Congress in 2009 and 2010 bore similarities to the 2007 bill[140] and
that it was deliberately patterned after Romney's state healthcare plan.[150]

### Healthcare debate, 2008–10

See also: Health care reforms proposed during the Obama administration

Healthcare reform was a major topic during the 2008 Democratic presidential
primaries. As the race narrowed, attention focused on the plans presented by
the two leading candidates, Hillary Clinton and the eventual nominee, Barack
Obama. Each candidate proposed a plan to cover the approximately 45 million
Americans estimated to not have health insurance at some point each year.
Clinton's proposal would have required all Americans to obtain coverage (in
effect, an individual mandate), while Obama's proposal provided a subsidy but
rejected the use of an individual mandate.[151][152]

During the general election, Obama said that fixing healthcare would be one of
his top four priorities as president.[153] Obama and his opponent, Sen. John
McCain, proposed health insurance reforms though they differed greatly.
Senator John McCain proposed tax credits for health insurance purchased in the
individual market, which was estimated to reduce the number of uninsured
people by about 2 million by 2018. Obama proposed private and public group
insurance, income-based subsidies, consumer protections, and expansions of
Medicaid and SCHIP, which was estimated at the time to reduce the number of
uninsured people by 33.9 million by 2018.[154]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Joint_blog_close_PS-0774.jpg/220px-

Joint_blog_close_PS-0774.jpg)

President Obama addressing Congress regarding healthcare reform, September 9,
2009

After his inauguration, Obama announced to a joint session of Congress in
February 2009 his intent to work with Congress to construct a plan for
healthcare reform.[155][156] By July, a series of bills were approved by
committees within the House of Representatives.[157] On the Senate side, from
June to September, the Senate Finance Committee held a series of 31 meetings
to develop a healthcare reform bill. This group—in particular, Democrats Max
Baucus, Jeff Bingaman and Kent Conrad, along with Republicans Mike Enzi, Chuck
Grassley and Olympia Snowe—met for more than 60 hours, and the principles that
they discussed, in conjunction with the other committees, became the
foundation of the Senate healthcare reform bill.[158][159][160]

Congressional Democrats and health policy experts like MIT economics professor
Jonathan Gruber[161] and David Cutler argued that guaranteed issue would
require both community rating and an individual mandate to ensure that adverse
selection and/or "free riding" would not result in an insurance "death
spiral".[162] This approach was taken because the president and congressional
leaders had concluded that more progressive plans, such as the (single-payer)
Medicare for All act, could not obtain filibuster-proof support in the Senate.
By deliberately drawing on bipartisan ideas—the same basic outline was
supported by former Senate majority leaders Howard Baker, Bob Dole, Tom
Daschle and George J. Mitchell—the bill's drafters hoped to garner the votes
necessary for passage.[163][164]

However, following the adoption of an individual mandate, Republicans came to
oppose the mandate and threatened to filibuster any bills that contained
it.[133] Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, who led the Republican
congressional strategy in responding to the bill, calculated that Republicans
should not support the bill, and worked to prevent defections:[165]

> It was absolutely critical that everybody be together because if the
proponents of the bill were able to say it was bipartisan, it tended to convey
to the public that this is O.K., they must have figured it out.[166]

Republican Senators, including those who had supported previous bills with a
similar mandate, began to describe the mandate as "unconstitutional".
Journalist Ezra Klein wrote in _The New Yorker_ that "a policy that once
enjoyed broad support within the Republican Party suddenly faced unified
opposition."[137] Reporter Michael Cooper of _The New York Times_ wrote that:
"the provision ... requiring all Americans to buy health insurance has its
roots in conservative thinking."[136][143]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/9.12_tea_party_in_DC.jpg/220px-9.12_tea_party_in_DC.jpg)

Tea Party protesters at the Taxpayer March on Washington, September 12, 2009

The reform negotiations also attracted attention from lobbyists,[167]
including deals between certain lobby groups and the advocates of the law to
win the support of groups that had opposed past reforms, as in 1993.[168][169]
The Sunlight Foundation documented many of the reported ties between "the
healthcare lobbyist complex" and politicians in both parties.[170]

During the August 2009 summer congressional recess, many members went back to
their districts and held town hall meetings on the proposals. The nascent Tea
Party movement organized protests and many conservative groups and individuals
attended the meetings to oppose the proposed reforms.[156] Many threats were
made against members of Congress over the course of the debate.[171][172]

When Congress returned from recess, in September 2009 President Obama
delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress supporting the ongoing
Congressional negotiations.[173] He acknowledged the polarization of the
debate, and quoted a letter from the late Senator Edward "Ted" Kennedy urging
on reform: "what we face is above all a moral issue; that at stake are not
just the details of policy, but fundamental principles of social justice and
the character of our country."[174] On November 7, the House of
Representatives passed the Affordable Health Care for America Act on a 220–215
vote and forwarded it to the Senate for passage.[156]

#### Senate

The Senate began work on its own proposals while the House was still working.
The United States Constitution requires all revenue-related bills to originate
in the House.[175] To formally comply with this requirement, the Senate used
H.R. 3590, a bill regarding housing tax changes for service members.[176] It
had been passed by the House as a revenue-related modification to the Internal
Revenue Code. The bill became the Senate's vehicle for its healthcare reform
proposal, discarding the bill's original content.[177] The bill ultimately
incorporated elements of proposals that were reported favorably by the Senate
Health and Finance committees. With the Republican Senate minority vowing to
filibuster, 60 votes would be necessary to pass the Senate.[178] At the start
of the 111th Congress, Democrats had only 58 votes; the Senate seat in
Minnesota ultimately won by Al Franken was still undergoing a recount, while
Arlen Specter was still a Republican (he became a Democrat in April, 2009).

Negotiations were undertaken attempting to satisfy moderate Democrats and to
bring Republican senators aboard; particular attention was given to
Republicans Bennett, Enzi, Grassley and Snowe. On July 7 Franken was sworn
into office, providing a potential 60th vote. On August 25 Ted Kennedy—a
longtime healthcare reform advocate—died. Paul Kirk was appointed as Senator
Kennedy's temporary replacement on September 24.

After the Finance Committee vote on October 15, negotiations turned to
moderate Democrats. Majority leader Harry Reid focused on satisfying
centrists. The holdouts came down to Joe Lieberman of Connecticut, an
independent who caucused with Democrats, and conservative Nebraska Democrat
Ben Nelson. Lieberman's demand that the bill not include a public
option[162][179] was met,[180] although supporters won various concessions,
including allowing state-based public options such as Vermont's Green Mountain
Care.[180][181]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/111th_Congress_1st_session_Senate_roll_call_396.svg/300px-111th_Congress_1st_session_Senate_roll_call_396.svg.png)

**Senate vote by state**

Democratic yes (58)

Independent yes (2)

Republican no (39)

Republican not voting (1)

The White House and Reid addressed Nelson's concerns[182] during a 13-hour
negotiation with two concessions: a compromise on abortion, modifying the
language of the bill "to give states the right to prohibit coverage of
abortion within their own insurance exchanges", which would require consumers
to pay for the procedure out of pocket if the state so decided; and an
amendment to offer a higher rate of Medicaid reimbursement for
Nebraska.[156][183] The latter half of the compromise was derisively termed
the "Cornhusker Kickback"[184] and was repealed in the subsequent
reconciliation amendment bill.

On December 23, the Senate voted 60–39 to end debate on the bill: a cloture
vote to end the filibuster.[185] The bill then passed, also 60–39, on December
24, 2009, with all Democrats and two independents voting for it, and all
Republicans against (except Jim Bunning, who did not vote).[186] The bill was
endorsed by the AMA and AARP.[187]

On January 19, 2010, Massachusetts Republican Scott Brown was elected to the
Senate in a special election to replace Kennedy, having campaigned on giving
the Republican minority the 41st vote needed to sustain Republican
filibusters.[156][188][189] His victory had become significant because of its
effects on the legislative process. The first was psychological: the symbolic
importance of losing Kennedy's traditionally Democratic Massachusetts seat
made many Congressional Democrats concerned about the political cost of
passing a bill.[190][191]

#### House

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/111th_Congress_roll_call_165.svg/300px-111th_Congress_roll_call_165.svg.png)

**House vote by congressional district**

Democratic yes (219)

Democratic no (34)

Republican no (178)

No representative seated (4)

Brown's election meant Democrats could no longer break a filibuster in the
Senate. In response, White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel argued that
Democrats should scale back to a less ambitious bill; House Speaker Nancy
Pelosi pushed back, dismissing Emanuel's scaled-down approach as "Kiddie
Care".[192][193]

Obama remained insistent on comprehensive reform. The news that Anthem Blue
Cross in California intended to raise premium rates for its patients by as
much as 39% gave him new evidence of the need for reform.[192][193] On
February 22, he laid out a "Senate-leaning" proposal to consolidate the
bills.[194] He held a meeting with both parties' leaders on February 25. The
Democrats decided that the House would pass the Senate's bill, to avoid
another Senate vote.

House Democrats had expected to be able to negotiate changes in a House–Senate
conference before passing a final bill. Since any bill that emerged from
conference that differed from the Senate bill would have to pass the Senate
over another Republican filibuster, most House Democrats agreed to pass the
Senate bill on condition that it be amended by a subsequent bill.[191] They
drafted the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, which could be
passed by the reconciliation process.[192][195][196]

Per the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, reconciliation cannot be subject to
a filibuster. But reconciliation is limited to budget changes, which is why
the procedure was not used to pass ACA in the first place; the bill had
inherently non-budgetary regulations.[197][198] Although the already-passed
Senate bill could not have been passed by reconciliation, most of House
Democrats' demands were budgetary: "these changes—higher subsidy levels,
different kinds of taxes to pay for them, nixing the Nebraska Medicaid
deal—mainly involve taxes and spending. In other words, they're exactly the
kinds of policies that are well-suited for reconciliation."[195]

The remaining obstacle was a pivotal group of pro-life Democrats led by Bart
Stupak who were initially reluctant to support the bill. The group found the
possibility of federal funding for abortion significant enough to warrant
opposition. The Senate bill had not included language that satisfied their
concerns, but they could not address abortion in the reconciliation bill as it
would be non-budgetary. Instead, Obama issued Executive Order 13535,
reaffirming the principles in the Hyde Amendment.[199] This won the support of
Stupak and members of his group and assured the bill's passage.[196][200] The
House passed the Senate bill with a 219–212 vote on March 21, 2010, with 34
Democrats and all 178 Republicans voting against it.[201] The next day,
Republicans introduced legislation to repeal the bill.[202] Obama signed ACA
into law on March 23, 2010.[203] Since passage, Republicans have voted to
repeal all or parts of the Affordable Care Act over sixty times; no such
attempt by Republicans has been successful.[204] The amendment bill, The
Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, cleared the House on March 21;
the Senate passed it by reconciliation on March 25, and Obama signed it on
March 30.

## Impact

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/Health_Insurance_Coverage_in_the_U.S._2016_-_v1.png/450px-

Health_Insurance_Coverage_in_the_U.S._2016_-_v1.png)

U.S. health insurance coverage by source in 2016. CBO estimated ACA/Obamacare
was responsible for 23 million persons covered via exchanges and Medicaid
expansion.[5]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/93/ACA_Panel_Chart_v1.png/450px-

ACA_Panel_Chart_v1.png)

This chart illustrates several aspects of the Affordable Care Act, including
number of persons covered, cost before and after subsidies, and public
opinion.

### Coverage

See also: Health insurance coverage in the United States

The law has caused a significant reduction in the number and percentage of
people without health insurance. The CDC reported that the percentage of
people without health insurance fell from 16.0% in 2010 to 8.9% from January
to June 2016.[205] The uninsured rate dropped in every congressional district
in the U.S. from 2013 to 2015.[206] The Congressional Budget Office reported
in March 2016 that there were approximately 12 million people covered by the
exchanges (10 million of whom received subsidies to help pay for insurance)
and 11 million made eligible for Medicaid by the law, a subtotal of 23 million
people. An additional 1 million were covered by the ACA's "Basic Health
Program," for a total of 24 million.[5] CBO also estimated that the ACA would
reduce the net number of uninsured by 22 million in 2016, using a slightly
different computation for the above figures totaling ACA coverage of 26
million, less 4 million for reductions in "employment-based coverage" and
"non-group and other coverage."[5]

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) estimated that 20.0
million adults (aged 18–64) gained healthcare coverage via ACA as of February
2016, a 2.4 million increase over September 2015. HHS estimated that this 20.0
million included: a) 17.7 million from the start of open enrollment in
2013–2016; and b) 2.3 million young adults aged 19–25 who initially gained
insurance from 2010 to 2013, as they were allowed to remain on their parent's
plans until age 26. Of the 20.0 million, an estimated 6.1 million were aged
19–25.[6] Similarly, the Urban Institute issued a report in December 2016 that
said that about 19.2 million non-elderly Americans had gained health insurance
coverage from 2010 to 2015.[207] In March 2016, the CBO reported that there
were approximately 27 million people without insurance in 2016, a figure they
expected would range from 26 to 28 million through 2026. CBO also estimated
the percentage of insured among all U.S. residents would remain at 90% during
that period, 92–93% excluding unauthorized immigrants.[5]

States that expanded Medicaid had a 7.3% uninsured rate on average in the
first quarter of 2016, while those that did _not_ expand it had a 14.1%
uninsured rate, among adults aged 18–64.[208] As of December 2016 there were
32 states (including Washington DC) that had adopted the Medicaid extension,
while 19 states had not.[209]

By 2017, nearly 70% of those on the exchanges could purchase insurance for
less than $75 per month after subsidies, which rose to offset significant pre-
subsidy price increases in the exchange markets.[210] Healthcare premium cost
increases in the employer market continued to lessen. For example, healthcare
premiums for those covered by employers rose by 69% from 2000 to 2005, but
only 27% from 2010 to 2015,[10] with only a 3% increase from 2015 to
2016.[211]

The ACA also helps reduce income inequality measured after taxes, due to
higher taxes on the top 5% of income earners and both subsidies and Medicaid
expansion for lower-income persons.[212] The CBO estimated that subsidies paid
under the law in 2016 averaged $4,240 per person for 10 million individuals
receiving them, roughly $42 billion. For scale, the subsidy for the employer
market, in the form of exempting from taxation those health insurance premiums
paid on behalf of employees by employers, was approximately $1,700 per person
in 2016, or $266 billion total in the employer market. The employer market
subsidy was not changed by the law.[5]

### Taxes

![Excise taxes percentage

2015](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/71/Excise_taxes.jpg/450px-

Excise_taxes.jpg)

Excise taxes for the Affordable Care Act raised $16.3 billion in fiscal year
2015. $11.3 billion was an excise tax placed directly on health insurers based
on their market share. The ACA was going to impose a 40% "Cadillac tax" on
expensive employer sponsored health insurance but that was postponed until
2018.[213] Annual excise taxes totaling $3 billion were levied on importers
and manufacturers of prescription drugs. An excise tax of 2.32% on medical
devices and a 10% excise tax on indoor tanning services were applied as well.
The Individual mandate was $695 per individual or $2,085 per family minimum
who wasn't insured and was as high as 2.5% of household income (whichever was
higher). The individual mandate was repealed by Republicans ending at the end
of 2018.[213] 0.9 percent payroll tax and a 3.8 percent tax on net investment
income for individuals with incomes exceeding $200,000 and couples with
incomes exceeding $250,000.[214][215]

### Insurance exchanges

As of August 2016, 15 states operated their own exchanges. Other states either
used the federal exchange, or operated in partnership with or supported by the
federal government.[216]

### Medicaid expansion

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/ACA_Medicaid_expansion_by_state.svg/300px-

ACA_Medicaid_expansion_by_state.svg.png)

Medicaid expansion by state, as of November 7, 2018[217]

Adopted the Medicaid expansion

Medicaid expansion under discussion

Not adopting Medicaid expansion

As of December 2016 there were 32 states (including Washington DC) that had
adopted the Medicaid extension, while 19 states had not.[209] Those states
that expanded Medicaid had a 7.3% uninsured rate on average in the first
quarter of 2016, while those that did _not_ expand Medicaid had a 14.1%
uninsured rate, among adults aged 18 to 64.[208] Following the Supreme Court
ruling in 2012, which held that states would not lose Medicaid funding if they
didn't expand Medicaid under the ACA, several states rejected expanded
Medicaid coverage. Over half of the national uninsured population lived in
those states.[218] In a report to Congress, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) estimated that the cost of expansion was $6,366 per
person for 2015, about 49 percent above previous estimates. An estimated 9
million to 10 million people had gained Medicaid coverage, mostly low-income
adults.[219] The Kaiser Family Foundation estimated in October 2015 that 3.1
million additional people were not covered because of states that rejected the
Medicaid expansion.[220]

States that rejected the Medicaid expansion could maintain their Medicaid
eligibility thresholds, which in many states were significantly below 133% of
the poverty line.[221] Many states did not make Medicaid available to
childless adults at any income level.[222] Because subsidies on exchange
insurance plans were not available to those below the poverty line, such
individuals had no new options.[223][224] For example, in Kansas, where only
able-bodied adults with children and with an income below 32% of the poverty
line were eligible for Medicaid, those with incomes from 32% to 100% of the
poverty level ($6,250 to $19,530 for a family of three) were ineligible for
both Medicaid and federal subsidies to buy insurance. Absent children, able-
bodied adults were not eligible for Medicaid in Kansas.[218]

Studies of the impact of state decisions to reject the Medicaid expansion
calculated that up to 6.4 million people could fall into this status.[225] The
federal government initially paid for 100% of the expansion (through 2016).
The subsidy tapered to 90% by 2020 and continued to shrink thereafter.[226]
Several states argued that they could not afford their 10%
contribution.[226][227] Studies suggested that rejecting the expansion would
cost more than expanding Medicaid due to increased spending on uncompensated
emergency care that otherwise would have been partially paid for by Medicaid
coverage,[228]

A 2016 study led by Harvard University health economics professor Benjamin
Sommers found that residents of Kentucky and Arkansas, which both accepted the
Medicaid expansion, were more likely to receive health care services and less
likely to incur emergency room costs or have trouble paying their medical
bills than before the expansion. Residents of Texas, which did not accept the
Medicaid expansion, did not see a similar improvement during the same
period.[229] Kentucky opted for increased managed care, while Arkansas
subsidized private insurance. The new Arkansas and Kentucky governors have
proposed reducing or modifying their programs. From 2013 to 2015, the
uninsured rate dropped from 42% to 14% in Arkansas and from 40% to 9% in
Kentucky, compared with 39% to 32% in Texas. Specific improvements included
additional primary and preventive care, fewer emergency departments visits,
reported higher quality care, improved health, improved drug affordability,
reduced out-of-pocket spending and increased outpatient visits, increased
diabetes screening, glucose testing among diabetes patients and regular care
for chronic conditions.[230]

A 2016 DHHS study found that states that expanded Medicaid had lower premiums
on exchange policies, because they had fewer low-income enrollees, whose
health on average is worse than that of those with higher income.[231]

### Healthcare insurance costs

See also: Health care prices in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/US_healthcare_cost_panel_v1.png/450px-

US_healthcare_cost_panel_v1.png)

U.S. healthcare cost information, including rate of change, per-capita, and
percent of GDP. (Data source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services[232])

The law is designed to pay subsidies in the form of tax credits to the
individuals or families purchasing the insurance, based on income levels.
Higher income consumers receive lower subsidies. While pre-subsidy prices rose
considerably from 2016 to 2017, so did the subsidies, to reduce the after-
subsidy cost to the consumer. For example, a study published in 2016 found
that the average requested 2017 premium increase among 40-year-old non-smokers
was about 9 percent, according to an analysis of 17 cities, although Blue
Cross Blue Shield proposed increases of 40 percent in Alabama and 60 percent
in Texas.[233] However, some or all of these costs are offset by subsidies,
paid as tax credits. For example, the Kaiser Foundation reported that for the
second-lowest cost "Silver plan" (a plan often selected and used as the
benchmark for determining financial assistance), a 40-year old non-smoker
making $30,000 per year would pay effectively the same amount in 2017 as they
did in 2016 (about $208/month) after the subsidy/tax credit, despite large
increases in the pre-subsidy price. This was consistent nationally. In other
words, the subsidies increased along with the pre-subsidy price, fully
offsetting the price increases.[234]

Healthcare premium cost increases in the employer market continued to moderate
after the implementation of the law. For example, healthcare premiums for
those covered by employers rose by 69% from 2000 to 2005, but only 27% from
2010 to 2015,[10] with only a 3% increase from 2015 to 2016.[211] From 2008 to
2010 (before passage of the ACA) health insurance premiums rose by an average
of 10% per year.[235]

Several studies found that the financial crisis and accompanying recession
could not account for the entirety of the slowdown and that structural changes
likely share at least partial credit.[236][237][238][239] A 2013 study
estimated that changes to the health system had been responsible for about a
quarter of the recent reduction in inflation.[240] Paul Krawzak claimed that
even if cost controls succeed in reducing the amount spent on healthcare, such
efforts on their own may be insufficient to outweigh the long-term burden
placed by demographic changes, particularly the growth of the population on
Medicare.[241]

In a 2016 review of the ACA published in _JAMA_ , Barack Obama himself wrote
that from 2010 through 2014 mean annual growth in real per-enrollee Medicare
spending was negative, down from a mean of 4.7% per year from 2000 through
2005 and 2.4% per year from 2006 to 2010; similarly, mean real per-enrollee
growth in private insurance spending was 1.1% per year over the period,
compared with a mean of 6.5% from 2000 through 2005 and 3.4% from 2005 to
2010.[242]

#### Effect on deductibles and co-payments

While health insurance premium costs have moderated, some of this is because
of insurance policies that have a higher deductible, co-payments and out-of-
pocket maximums that shift costs from insurers to patients. In addition, many
employees are choosing to combine a health savings account with higher
deductible plans, making the impact of the ACA difficult to determine
precisely.

For those who obtain their insurance through their employer ("group market"),
a 2016 survey found that:

    
        * Deductibles grew by 63% from 2011 to 2016, while premiums increased 19% and worker earnings grew by 11%.
    * In 2016, 4 in 5 workers had an insurance deductible, which averaged $1,478. For firms with less than 200 employees, the deductible averaged $2,069.
    * The percentage of workers with a deductible of at least $1,000 grew from 10% in 2006 to 51% in 2016. The 2016 figure drops to 38% after taking employer contributions into account.[243]
    

For the "non-group" market, of which two-thirds are covered by the ACA
exchanges, a survey of 2015 data found that:

    
        * 49% had individual deductibles of at least $1,500 ($3,000 for family), up from 36% in 2014.
    * Many marketplace enrollees qualify for cost-sharing subsidies that reduce their net deductible.
    * While about 75% of enrollees were "very satisfied" or "somewhat satisfied" with their choice of doctors and hospitals, only 50% had such satisfaction with their annual deductible.
    * While 52% of those covered by the ACA exchanges felt "well protected" by their insurance, in the group market 63% felt that way.[244]
    

### Health outcomes

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/U.S._Mortality_-

_Premature_Death_Rates_by_County.png/450px-U.S._Mortality_-

_Premature_Death_Rates_by_County.png)

The map illustrates the frequency of premature deaths (those under age 75)
adjusted for the age of persons in the county.[245]

Insurance coverage helps save lives, by encouraging early detection and
prevention of dangerous medical conditions. According to a 2014 study, the ACA
likely prevented an estimated 50,000 preventable patient deaths from 2010 to
2013.[246] City University public health professors David Himmelstein and
Steffie Woolhandler wrote in January 2017 that a rollback of the ACA's
Medicaid expansion alone would cause an estimated 43,956 deaths annually.[247]

The Federal Reserve publishes data on premature death rates by county, defined
as those dying below age 74.[245] According to the Kaiser Foundation,
expanding Medicaid in the remaining 19 states would cover up to 4.5 million
persons.[248] Since expanding Medicaid expands coverage[248] and expanding
coverage reduces mortality,[246] therefore expanding Medicaid reduces
mortality by syllogism. Texas, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia,
Tennessee, Missouri and South Carolina, indicated on the map at right as
having many counties with high premature mortality rates[245] could therefore
reduce mortality by expanding Medicaid, other things equal.

Two 2018 _JAMA_ studies found the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program was
associated with increased post-discharge mortality for patients hospitalized
for heart failure and pneumonia.[249][250][251] A 2019 _JAMA_ study found that
the ACA decreased emergency department and hospital use by uninsured
individuals.[252]

### Distributional impact

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/1b-ACA_Distribution_in_2014.png/450px-1b-ACA_Distribution_in_2014.png)

The distributional impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA or Obamacare) during
2014. The ACA raised taxes mainly on the top 1% to fund approximately $600 in
benefits on average for the bottom 40% of families.

In March 2018, the CBO reported that the ACA had reduced income inequality in
2014, saying that the law led the lowest and second quintiles (the bottom 40%)
to receive an average of an additional $690 and $560 respectively while
causing households in the top 1% to pay an additional $21,000 due mostly to
the net investment income tax and the additional Medicare tax. The law placed
relatively little burden on households in the top quintile (top 20%) outside
of the top 1%.[9]

### Federal deficit

#### CBO estimates of revenue and impact on deficit

See also: United States public debt and Provisions of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act

The CBO reported in several studies that the ACA would reduce the deficit, and
that repealing it would increase the deficit.[7][8][253][254] The 2011
comprehensive CBO estimate projected a net deficit reduction of more than $200
billion during the 2012–2021 period:[8][255] it calculated the law would
result in $604 billion in total outlays offset by $813 billion in total
receipts, resulting in a $210 billion net deficit reduction.[8] The CBO
separately predicted that while most of the spending provisions do not begin
until 2014,[256][257] revenue would exceed spending in those subsequent
years.[258] The CBO claimed that the bill would "substantially reduce the
growth of Medicare's payment rates for most services; impose an excise tax on
insurance plans with relatively high premiums; and make various other changes
to the federal tax code, Medicare, Medicaid, and other
programs"[259]—ultimately extending the solvency of the Medicare trust fund by
8 years.[260]

This estimate was made prior to the Supreme Court's ruling that enabled states
to opt out of the Medicaid expansion, thereby forgoing the related federal
funding. The CBO and JCT subsequently updated the budget projection,
estimating the impact of the ruling would reduce the cost estimate of the
insurance coverage provisions by $84 billion.[261][262][263]

The CBO in June 2015 forecast that repeal of ACA would increase the deficit
between $137 billion and $353 billion over the 2016–2025 period, depending on
the impact of macroeconomic feedback effects. The CBO also forecasted that
repeal of ACA would likely cause an increase in GDP by an average of 0.7% in
the period from 2021 to 2025, mainly by boosting the supply of labor.[7]

Although the CBO generally does not provide cost estimates beyond the 10-year
budget projection period because of the degree of uncertainty involved in the
projection, it decided to do so in this case at the request of lawmakers, and
estimated a second decade deficit reduction of $1.2 trillion.[259][264] CBO
predicted deficit reduction around a broad range of one-half percent of GDP
over the 2020s while cautioning that "a wide range of changes could
occur".[265]

#### Opinions on CBO projections

The CBO cost estimates were criticized because they excluded the effects of
potential legislation that would increase Medicare payments by more than $200
billion from 2010 to 2019.[266][267][268] However, the so-called "doc fix" is
a separate issue that would have existed whether or not ACA became law –
omitting its cost from ACA was no different from omitting the cost of other
tax cuts.[269][270][271]

Uwe Reinhardt, a Princeton health economist, wrote. "The rigid, artificial
rules under which the Congressional Budget Office must score proposed
legislation unfortunately cannot produce the best unbiased forecasts of the
likely fiscal impact of any legislation", but went on to say "But even if the
budget office errs significantly in its conclusion that the bill would
actually help reduce the future federal deficit, I doubt that the financing of
this bill will be anywhere near as fiscally irresponsible as was the financing
of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003."[272] Douglas Holtz-Eakin, CBO
director during the George W. Bush administration, who later served as the
chief economic policy adviser to U.S. Senator John McCain's 2008 presidential
campaign, alleged that the bill would increase the deficit by $562 billion
because, he argued, it front-loaded revenue and back-loaded benefits.[273]

Scheiber and Cohn rejected critical assessments of the law's deficit impact,
arguing that predictions were biased towards underestimating deficit
reduction. They noted that for example, it is easier to account for the cost
of definite levels of subsidies to specified numbers of people than account
for savings from preventive healthcare, and that the CBO had a track record of
overestimating costs and underestimating savings of health
legislation;[274][275] stating, "innovations in the delivery of medical care,
like greater use of electronic medical records[276] and financial incentives
for more coordination of care among doctors, would produce substantial savings
while also slowing the relentless climb of medical expenses ... But the CBO
would not consider such savings in its calculations, because the innovations
hadn't really been tried on such large scale or in concert with one
another—and that meant there wasn't much hard data to prove the savings would
materialize."[274]

In 2010, David Walker, former U.S. Comptroller General then working for The
Peter G. Peterson Foundation, stated that the CBO estimates are not likely to
be accurate, because they were based on the assumption that the law would not
change.[277] The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities objected that Congress
had a good record of implementing Medicare savings. According to their study,
Congress followed through on the implementation of the vast majority of
provisions enacted in the past 20 years to produce Medicare savings, although
not the payment reductions addressed by the annual "doc fix".[278][279]

### Economic consequences

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Obamacare_Panel_2.png/450px-

Obamacare_Panel_2.png)

Coverage rate, employer market cost trends, budgetary impact, and income
inequality aspects of the Affordable Care Act

CBO estimated in June 2015 that repealing the ACA would:

    
        * Decrease aggregate demand (GDP) in the short-term, as low-income persons who tend to spend a large fraction of their additional resources would have fewer resources (e.g., ACA subsidies would be eliminated). This effect would be offset in the long-run by the labor supply factors below.
    * Increase the supply of labor and aggregate compensation by about 0.8 and 0.9 percent over the 2021–2025 period. CBO cited the ACA's expanded eligibility for Medicaid and subsidies and tax credits that rise with income as disincentives to work, so repealing the ACA would remove those disincentives, encouraging workers to supply more hours of labor.
    * Increase the total number of hours worked by about 1.5% over the 2021–2025 period.
    * Remove the higher tax rates on capital income, thereby encouraging additional investment, raising the capital stock and output in the long-run.[7]
    

In 2015 the Center for Economic and Policy Research found no evidence that
companies were reducing worker hours to avoid ACA requirements[280] for
employees working over 30 hours per week.[281]

The CBO estimated that the ACA would slightly reduce the size of the labor
force and number of hours worked, as some would no longer be tethered to
employers for their insurance. Cohn, citing CBO's projections, claimed that
ACA's primary employment effect was to alleviate job lock: "People who are
only working because they desperately need employer-sponsored health insurance
will no longer do so."[282] He concluded that the "reform's only significant
employment impact was a reduction in the labor force, primarily because people
holding onto jobs just to keep insurance could finally retire", because they
have health insurance outside of their jobs.[283]

### Employer mandate and part-time work

Further information on health insurance mandates: Health insurance mandate

The employer mandate requires employers meeting certain criteria to provide
health insurance to their workers. The mandate applies to employers with more
than 50 employees that do not offer health insurance to their full-time
workers.[284] Critics claimed that the mandate created a perverse incentive
for business to keep their full-time headcount below 50 and to hire part-time
workers instead.[285][286] Between March 2010 and 2014 the number of part-time
jobs declined by 230,000, while the number of full-time jobs increased by 2
million.[287][288] In the public sector full-time jobs turned into part-time
jobs much more than in the private sector.[287][289] A 2016 study found only
limited evidence that ACA had increased part-time employment.[290]

Several businesses and the state of Virginia added a 29-hour-a-week cap for
their part-time employees,[291][ _unreliable source?_ ][292][ _unreliable
source?_ ] to reflect the 30-hour-or-more definition for full-time
worker.[284] As of yet, however, only a small percent of companies have
shifted their workforce towards more part-time hours (4% in a survey from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis).[286] Trends in working hours[293] and
the effects of the Great Recession correlate with part-time working hour
patterns.[294][295] The impact of this provision may have been offset by other
factors, including that health insurance helps attract and retain employees,
increases productivity and reduces absenteeism; and the lower training and
administration costs of a smaller full-time workforce over a larger part-time
work force.[286][293][296] Relatively few firms employ over 50 employees[286]
and more than 90% of them offered insurance.[297] Workers without employer
insurance could purchase insurance on the exchanges.[298]

Most policy analysts (on both right and left) were critical of the employer
mandate provision.[285][297] They argued that the perverse incentives
regarding part-time hours, even if they did not change existing plans, were
real and harmful;[299][300] that the raised marginal cost of the 50th worker
for businesses could limit companies' growth;[301] that the costs of reporting
and administration were not worth the costs of maintaining employer
plans;[299][300] and noted that the employer mandate was not essential to
maintain adequate risk pools.[302][303] The effects of the provision generated
vocal opposition from business interests and some unions not granted
exemptions.[300][304]

A 2013/4 survey by the National Association for Business Economics found that
about 75 percent of those surveyed said ACA hadn't influenced their planning
or expectations for 2014, and 85 percent said the law wouldn't prompt a change
in their hiring practices. Some 21 percent of 64 businesses surveyed said that
the act would have a harmful effect and 5 percent said it would be
beneficial.[305]

### Hospitals

From the start of 2010 to November 2014, 43 hospitals in rural areas closed.
Critics claimed that the new law caused these hospitals to close. Many of
these rural hospitals were built using funds from the 1946 Hill–Burton Act, to
increase access to medical care in rural areas. Some of these hospitals
reopened as other medical facilities, but only a small number operated
emergency rooms (ER) or urgent care centers.[306]

Between January 2010 and 2015, a quarter of emergency room doctors said they
had seen a major surge in patients, while nearly half had seen a smaller
increase. Seven in ten ER doctors claimed that they lacked the resources to
deal with large increases in the number of patients. The biggest factor in the
increased number of ER patients was insufficient primary care providers to
handle the larger number of insured patients.[307]

Insurers claimed that because they have access to and collect patient data
that allow evaluations of interventions, they are essential to ACO success.
Large insurers formed their own ACOs. Many hospitals merged and purchased
physician practices. The increased market share gave them more leverage in
negotiations with insurers over costs and reduced patient care options.[117]

## Public opinion

Prior to the law's passage, polling indicated the public's views became
increasingly negative in reaction to specific plans discussed during the
legislative debate over 2009 and 2010. Polling statistics showed a general
negative opinion of the law; with those in favor at approximately 40% and
those against at 51%, as of October 2013.[308][309] About 29% of whites
approved of the law, compared with 61% of Hispanics and 91% of African
Americans.[310] Opinions were divided by age of the person at the law's
inception, with a solid majority of seniors opposing the bill and a solid
majority of those younger than forty years old in favor.[311]

![Congressional Democrats celebrating the 6th anniversary of the Affordable

Care Act in March 2016 on the steps of the U.S.

Capitol.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/6th_anniversary_of_the_Affordable_Care_Act.jpg/220px-6th_anniversary_of_the_Affordable_Care_Act.jpg)

Congressional Democrats celebrating the 6th anniversary of the Affordable Care
Act in March 2016 on the steps of the U.S. Capitol

Specific elements were popular across the political spectrum, while others,
such as the mandate to purchase insurance, were widely disliked. In a 2012
poll 44% supported the law, with 56% against. By party affiliation, 75% of
Democrats, 27% of Independents and 14% of Republicans favored the law overall.
82% favored banning insurance companies from denying coverage to people with
pre-existing conditions, 61% favored allowing children to stay on their
parents' insurance until age 26, 72% supported requiring companies with more
than 50 employees to provide insurance for their employees, and 39% supported
the individual mandate to own insurance or pay a penalty. By party
affiliation, 19% of Republicans, 27% of Independents, and 59% of Democrats
favored the mandate.[312] Other polls showed additional provisions receiving
majority support, including the creation of insurance exchanges, pooling small
businesses and the uninsured with other consumers so that more people can take
advantage of large group pricing benefits and providing subsidies to
individuals and families to make health insurance more affordable.[313][314]

In a 2010 poll, 62% of respondents said they thought ACA would "increase the
amount of money they personally spend on health care", 56% said the bill
"gives the government too much involvement in health care", and 19% said they
thought they and their families would be better off with the legislation.[315]
Other polls found that people were concerned that the law would cost more than
projected and would not do enough to control costs.[316]

Some opponents believed that the reform did not go far enough: a 2012 poll
indicated that 71% of Republican opponents rejected it overall, while 29%
believed it did not go far enough; independent opponents were divided 67% to
33%; and among the much smaller group of Democratic opponents, 49% rejected it
overall and 51% wanted more.[312] In June 2013, a majority of the public
(52–34%) indicated a desire for "Congress to implement or tinker with the law
rather than repeal it".[317] After the Supreme Court upheld the individual
mandate, a 2012 poll held that "most Americans (56%) want to see critics of
President Obama's health care law drop efforts to block it and move on to
other national issues".[318]A 2014 poll reported that 48.9% of respondents had
an unfavorable view of ACA vs. 38.3% who had a favorable view (of more than
5,500 individuals).[319]

A 2014 poll reported that 26% of Americans support ACA.[320] Another held that
8% of respondents say that the Affordable Care Act "is working well the way it
is".[321] In late 2014, a Rasmussen poll reported Repeal: 30%, Leave as is:
13%, Improve: 52%.[322]

In 2015, a CBS News / New York Times poll reported that 47% of Americans
approved the health care law. This was the first time that a major poll
indicated that more respondents approved ACA than disapproved of it.[323] The
recurring Kaiser Health Tracking Poll from December 2016 reported that: a) 30%
wanted to expand what the law does; b) 26% wanted to repeal the entire law; c)
19% wanted to move forward with implementing the law as it is; and d) 17%
wanted to scale back what the law does, with the remainder undecided.[324]

Separate polls from Fox News and NBC/WSJ both taken during January 2017
indicated more people viewed the law favorably than did not for the first
time. One of the reasons for the improving popularity of the law is that
Democrats who opposed it in the past (many prefer a "Medicare for All"
approach) have shifted their positions since the ACA is under threat of
repeal.[325]

A January 2017 Morning Consult poll showed that 35% of respondents either
believed that "Obamacare" and the "Affordable Care Act" were different or did
not know.[326] Approximately 45% were unsure whether the "repeal of Obamacare"
also meant the "repeal of the Affordable Care Act."[326] 39% did not know that
"many people would lose coverage through Medicaid or subsidies for private
health insurance if the A.C.A. were repealed and no replacement enacted," with
Democrats far more likely (79%) to know that fact than Republicans (47%).[326]

A 2017 study found that personal experience with public health insurance
programs leads to greater support for the Affordable Care Act, and the effects
appear to be most pronounced among Republicans and low-information
voters.[327]

## Political aspects

### "Obamacare"

The term "Obamacare" was originally coined by opponents as a pejorative. The
term emerged in March 2007 when healthcare lobbyist Jeanne Schulte Scott used
it in a health industry journal, writing "We will soon see a 'Giuliani-care'
and 'Obama-care' to go along with 'McCain-care', 'Edwards-care', and a totally
revamped and remodeled 'Hillary-care' from the 1990s".[328][329] According to
research by Elspeth Reeve, the expression was used in early 2007, generally by
writers describing the candidate's proposal for expanding coverage for the
uninsured.[330] It first appeared in a political campaign by Mitt Romney in
May 2007 in Des Moines, Iowa. Romney said, "In my state, I worked on
healthcare for some time. We had half a million people without insurance, and
I said, 'How can we get those people insured without raising taxes and without
having government take over healthcare?' And let me tell you, if we don't do
it, the Democrats will. If the Democrats do it, it will be socialized
medicine; it'll be government-managed care. It'll be what's known as
Hillarycare or Barack Obamacare, or whatever you want to call it."[328]

By mid-2012, Obamacare had become the colloquial term used by both supporters
and opponents. In contrast, the use of "Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act" or "Affordable Care Act" became limited to more formal and official
use.[330] Use of the term in a positive sense was suggested by Democrat John
Conyers.[331] Obama endorsed the nickname, saying, "I have no problem with
people saying Obama cares. I do care."[332]

In March 2012, the Obama reelection campaign embraced the term "Obamacare",
urging Obama's supporters to post Twitter messages that begin, "I like

# Obamacare because ...".[333]

In October 2013, the Associated Press and NPR began cutting back on use of the
term.[334] Stuart Seidel, NPR's managing editor, said that the term "seems to
be straddling somewhere between being a politically-charged term and an
accepted part of the vernacular".[335]

### Common misconceptions

#### "Death panels"

Main article: Death panel

On August 7, 2009, Sarah Palin pioneered the term "death panels" to describe
groups that would decide whether sick patients were "worthy" of medical
care.[336] "Death panel" referred to two claims about early drafts.

One was that under the law, seniors could be denied care due to their age[337]
and the other that the government would advise seniors to end their lives
instead of receiving care. The ostensible basis of these claims was the
provision for an Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB).[338] IPAB was
given the authority to recommend cost-saving changes to Medicare by
facilitating the adoption of cost-effective treatments and cost-recovering
measures when the statutory levels set for Medicare were exceeded within any
given 3-year period. In fact, the Board was prohibited from recommending
changes that would reduce payments to certain providers before 2020, and was
prohibited from recommending changes in premiums, benefits, eligibility and
taxes, or other changes that would result in rationing.[339][340]

The other related issue concerned advance-care planning consultation: a
section of the House reform proposal would have reimbursed physicians for
providing patient-requested consultations for Medicare recipients on end-of-
life health planning (which is covered by many private plans), enabling
patients to specify, on request, the kind of care they wished to receive.[341]
The provision was not included in ACA.[342]

In 2010, the Pew Research Center reported that 85% of Americans were familiar
with the claim, and 30% believed it was true, backed by three contemporaneous
polls.[343] A poll in August 2012 found that 39% of Americans believed the
claim.[344] The allegation was named PolitiFact's "Lie of the Year",[336][345]
one of FactCheck.org's "whoppers"[346][347] and the most outrageous term by
the American Dialect Society.[348] AARP described such rumors as "rife with
gross—and even cruel—distortions".[349]

#### Members of Congress

ACA requires members of Congress and their staffs to obtain health insurance
either through an exchange or some other program approved by the law (such as
Medicare), instead of using the insurance offered to federal employees (the
Federal Employees Health Benefits Program).[350][351][352][353][354]

#### Illegal immigrants

ACA does not provide benefits to illegal immigrants.[355] It explicitly denies
insurance subsidies to "unauthorized (illegal) aliens".[64][65][356]

#### Exchange "death spiral"

![Affordable Care Act \(ObamaCare\). County By County Projected Insurer

Participation in Health Insurance

Exchanges.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d1/County_By_County_Projected_Insurer_Participation_in_Health_Insurance_Exchanges.png/400px-

County_By_County_Projected_Insurer_Participation_in_Health_Insurance_Exchanges.png)

One argument against the ACA is that the insurers are leaving the
marketplaces, as they cannot profitably cover the available pool of customers,
which contains too many unhealthy participants relative to healthy
participants. A scenario where prices rise, due to an unfavorable mix of
customers from the insurer's perspective, resulting in fewer customers and
fewer insurers in the marketplace, further raising prices, has been called a
"death spiral."[357] During 2017, the median number of insurers offering plans
on the ACA exchanges in each state was 3.0, meaning half the states had more
and half had fewer insurers. There were five states with one insurer in 2017;
13 states with two; 11 states with three; and the remainder had four insurers
or more. Wisconsin had the most, with 15 insurers in the marketplace. The
median number of insurers was 4.0 in 2016, 5.0 in 2015, and 4.0 in 2014.[358]

Further, the CBO reported in January 2017 that it expected enrollment in the
exchanges to rise from 10 million during 2017 to 13 million by 2027, assuming
laws in place at the end of the Obama administration were continued.[359]
Following a 2015 CBO report that reached a similar conclusion, Paul Krugman
wrote: "But the truth is that this report is much, much closer to what
supporters of reform have said than it is to the scare stories of the
critics—no death spirals, no job-killing, major gains in coverage at
relatively low cost."[360]

## Opposition

Opposition and efforts to repeal the legislation have drawn support from
sources that include labor unions,[361][362] conservative advocacy
groups,[363][364] Republicans, small business organizations and the Tea Party
movement.[365] These groups claimed that the law would disrupt existing health
plans, increase costs from new insurance standards, and increase the
deficit.[366] Some opposed the idea of universal healthcare, viewing insurance
as similar to other unsubsidized goods.[367][368] President Donald Trump has
repeatedly promised to "repeal and replace" it.[369][370]

As of 2013[update] unions that expressed concerns about ACA included the AFL-
CIO,[371] which called ACA "highly disruptive" to union health care plans,
claiming it would drive up costs of union-sponsored plans; the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters, United Food and Commercial Workers International
Union, and UNITE-HERE, whose leaders sent a letter to Reid and Pelosi arguing,
" ACA will shatter not only our hard-earned health benefits, but destroy the
foundation of the 40-hour work week that is the backbone of the American
middle class."[362] In January 2014, Terry O'Sullivan, president of the
Laborers' International Union of North America (LIUNA) and D. Taylor,
president of Unite Here sent a letter to Reid and Pelosi stating, "ACA, as
implemented, undermines fair marketplace competition in the health care
industry."[361]

In October 2016, Mark Dayton, the governor of Minnesota and a member of the
Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party, said that the ACA had "many good
features" but that it was "no longer affordable for increasing numbers of
people" and called on the Minnesota legislature to provide emergency relief to
policyholders.[372] Dayton later said he regretted his remarks after they were
seized on by Republicans seeking to repeal the law.[373]

### Legal challenges

Main article: Constitutional challenges to the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act

See also: National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, King v.
Burwell, and Efforts to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

#### _National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius_

Opponents challenged ACA's constitutionality in multiple lawsuits on multiple
grounds.[374][375][ _not in citation given_ ] In _National Federation of
Independent Business v. Sebelius_ , the Supreme Court ruled on a 5–4 vote that
the individual mandate was constitutional when viewed as a tax, although not
under the Commerce Clause.

The Court further determined that states could not be forced to participate in
the Medicaid expansion. ACA withheld all Medicaid funding from states
declining to participate in the expansion. The Court ruled that this
withdrawal of funding was unconstitutionally coercive and that individual
states had the right to opt out without losing preexisting Medicaid
funding.[12]

#### Contraception mandate

In March 2012, the Roman Catholic Church, while supportive of ACA's
objectives, voiced concern through the United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops that aspects of the mandate covering contraception and sterilization
and HHS's narrow definition of a religious organization violated the First
Amendment right to free exercise of religion and conscience. Various lawsuits
addressed these concerns.[376][377]

On June 25, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6–3 that federal subsidies for
health insurance premiums could be used in the 34 states that did not set up
their own insurance exchanges.[378]

#### _House v. Price_

In _United States House of Representatives v. Price_ (previously _United
States House of Representatives v. Burwell_ ) the House sued the
administration alleging that the money for premium subsidy payments to
insurers had not been appropriated, as required for any federal government
spending. The ACA subsidy that helps customers pay premiums was not part of
the suit.

Without the cost-sharing subsidies, the government estimated that premiums
would increase by 20 percent to 30 percent for silver plans.[379] In 2017, the
uncertainty about whether the payments would continue caused Blue Cross Blue
Shield of North Carolina to try to raise premiums by 22.9 percent the next
year, as opposed to an increase of only 8.8 percent that it would have sought
if the payments were assured.[380]

#### _Texas et al v. United States of America et al_

Texas and nineteen other states filed a civil suit in the United States
District Court for the Northern District of Texas in February 2018, arguing
that with the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which eliminate
the tax penalty for not having health insurance starting January 1, 2019, the
constitutionality of the individual mandate that formed the basis of the ACA,
as determined in _National Federation of Independent Business_ , was no longer
valid, and thus the entire ACA was no longer constitutional.[381] During the
prosecution of the case, the Justice Department said it would no longer defend
the ACA in court, but seventeen states led by California stepped in to defend
it.[382]

District judge Reed O'Connor of Texas ruled in favor of the plaintiffs on
December 14, 2018, stating [that the] "Individual Mandate can no longer be
fairly read as an exercise of Congress's Tax Power and is still impermissible
under the Interstate Commerce Clause—meaning the Individual Mandate is
unconstitutional." He then further reasoned that the individual mandate is an
essential part of the entire law, and thus inseverable, leading to declaring
the entire law unconstitutional.[383][384] Judge O'Connor's decision regarding
severability turned on several passages from the Congressional record during
the ACA debate that focused on the importance of the mandate in supporting the
healthcare marketplace.[385] While O'Connor ruled the law unconstitutional, he
did not declare the law overturned with this decision.[382] Through Twitter
messages following the decision, President Trump urged Congress, particularly
Mitch McConnell and Nancy Pelosi, to enact a replacement for the ACA with
stronger protections for pre-existing conditions.[386][387]

Several states with Democratic leadership state they plan to appeal the
decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, and
observers believe this case will ultimately be seen by the Supreme Court.[388]
O'Connor wrote in a December 30, 2018 order that his decision is to be held
back while such appeals are in progress, allowing the ACA to continue to be
used after January 1, 2019.[389]

#### Non-cooperation

Officials in Texas, Florida, Alabama, Wyoming, Arizona, Oklahoma and Missouri
opposed those elements of ACA over which they had discretion.[390][391] For
example, Missouri declined to expand Medicaid or establish a health insurance
marketplace engaging in active non-cooperation, enacting a statute forbidding
any state or local official to render any aid not specifically required by
federal law.[392] Other Republican politicians discouraged efforts to
advertise the benefits of the law. Some conservative political groups launched
ad campaigns to discourage enrollment.[393][394]

### Repeal efforts

Main article: Efforts to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

ACA was the subject of unsuccessful repeal efforts by Republicans in the
111th, 112th, and 113th Congresses: Representatives Steve King (R-IA) and
Michele Bachmann (R-MN) introduced bills in the House to repeal ACA the day
after it was signed, as did Senator Jim DeMint (R-SC) in the Senate.[395] In
2011, after Republicans gained control of the House of Representatives, one of
the first votes held was on a bill titled "Repealing the Job-Killing Health
Care Law Act" (H.R. 2), which the House passed 245–189.[396] All Republicans
and 3 Democrats voted for repeal.[397] House Democrats proposed an amendment
that repeal not take effect until a majority of the Senators and
Representatives had opted out of the Federal Employees Health Benefits
Program; Republicans voted down the measure.[398] In the Senate, the bill was
offered as an amendment to an unrelated bill, but was voted down.[399]
President Obama had stated that he would have vetoed the bill even if it had
passed both chambers of Congress.[400]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2c/2017_House_budget.pdf/page1-220px-2017_House_budget.pdf.jpg)

2017 House Budget

Following the 2012 Supreme Court ruling upholding ACA as constitutional,
Republicans held another vote to repeal the law on July 11;[401] the House of
Representatives voted with all 244 Republicans and 5 Democrats in favor of
repeal, which marked the 33rd, partial or whole, repeal attempt.[402][403] On
February 3, 2015, the House of Representatives added its 67th repeal vote to
the record (239 to 186). This attempt also failed.[404]

#### 2013 federal government shutdown

Strong partisan disagreement in Congress prevented adjustments to the Act's
provisions.[405] However, at least one change, a proposed repeal of a tax on
medical devices, has received bipartisan support.[406] Some Congressional
Republicans argued against improvements to the law on the grounds they would
weaken the arguments for repeal.[300][407]

Republicans attempted to defund its implementation,[391][408] and in October
2013, House Republicans refused to fund the federal government unless
accompanied with a delay in ACA implementation, after the President
unilaterally deferred the employer mandate by one year, which critics claimed
he had no power to do. The House passed three versions of a bill funding the
government while submitting various versions that would repeal or delay ACA,
with the last version delaying enforcement of the individual mandate. The
Democratic Senate leadership stated the Senate would only pass a "clean"
funding bill without any restrictions on ACA. The government shutdown began on
October 1.[409][410][411] Senate Republicans threatened to block appointments
to relevant agencies, such as the Independent Payment Advisory Board[412] and
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.[413][414]

#### 2017 repeal effort

Main article: 2017 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act replacement
proposals

During a midnight congressional session starting January 11, 2017, the Senate
of the 115th Congress of the United States voted to approve a "budget
blueprint" which would allow Republicans to repeal parts of the law "without
threat of a Democratic filibuster."[415][416] The plan, which passed 51–48, is
a budget blueprint named by Senate Republicans the "Obamacare 'repeal
resolution.'"[417] Democrats opposing the resolution staged a protest during
the vote.[418]

House Republicans announced their replacement for the ACA, the American Health
Care Act, on March 6, 2017.[419] On March 24, 2017 the effort, led by Paul
Ryan and Donald Trump, to repeal and replace the ACA failed amid a revolt
among Republican representatives.[420]

May 4, 2017, the United States House of Representatives voted to pass the
American Health Care Act (and thereby repeal most of the Affordable Care Act)
by a narrow margin of 217 to 213, sending the bill to the Senate for
deliberation.[421] The Senate Republican leadership announced that Senate
Republicans would write their own version of the bill, instead of voting on
the House version.[422]

The Senate process began with an unprecedented level of secrecy; Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell named a group of 13 Republican Senators to
draft the Senate's substitute version in private, raising bipartisan concerns
about a lack of transparency.[423][424][425] On June 22, 2017, Republicans
released the first discussion draft for an amendment to the bill, which would
rename it to the "Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017" (BCRA).[426] On July
25, 2017, although no amendment proposal had yet garnered majority support,
Senate Republicans voted to advance the bill to the floor and begin formal
consideration of amendments. Senators Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski were
the only two dissenting Republicans making the vote a 50–50 tie. Vice
President Mike Pence then cast the tiebreaking vote in the affirmative.[427]

All specific bills were defeated, however. The revised BCRA failed on a vote
of 43–57. A subsequent "Obamacare Repeal and Reconciliation Act" abandoned the
"repeal and replace" approach in favor of a straight repeal, but failed on a
vote of 45–55. Finally, the "Health Care Freedom Act", nicknamed "skinny
repeal" because it would have made the least change to the ACA, failed by
49–51, with Collins, Murkowski, and Senator John McCain joining all the
Democrats and independents in voting against it.[428]

### Actions to hinder implementation

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/36/2-TCJA_Number_Uninsured_v1.png/450px-2-TCJA_Number_Uninsured_v1.png)

Tax Cuts and Jobs Act - Number of additional persons uninsured[429]

Under both the ACA (current law) and the AHCA, CBO reported that the health
exchange marketplaces would remain stable (i.e., no "death spiral").[430]
However, Republican politicians have taken a variety of steps to undermine it,
creating uncertainty that has adversely impacted enrollment and insurer
participation while increasing premiums.[431] Insisting the exchanges are in
difficulty was also used as an argument for passing reforms such as AHCA or
BCRA. Past and ongoing Republican attempts to weaken the law have included,
among others:

    
        * Lawsuits such as _King v. Burwell_ , which resulted in a decision by the Supreme Court that limited Medicaid expansion but upheld the mandates and insurance subsidies. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, not expanding Medicaid in 19 states has increased the number uninsured by an estimated 4.5 million persons.[432]
    * Lawsuits pending ( _House v. Price_ ) such as whether cost-sharing subsidies must be paid. President Trump threatened not to pay these subsidies in early 2017 and later decided to stop paying them. CBO estimated in September 2017 that discontinuing the payments would add an average of 15–20 percentage points to health insurance costs on the exchanges in 2018 while increasing the budget deficit nearly $200 billion over a decade.[433]
    * Prevention of appropriations for transitional financing ("risk corridors") to steady insurance markets, resulting the bankruptcy of many co-ops offering insurance. This action was attributed to Senator Marco Rubio.[434]
    * Weakening of the individual mandate through his first executive order, which resulted in limiting enforcement of mandate penalties by the IRS. For example, tax returns without indications of health insurance ("silent returns") will still be processed, overriding instructions from the Obama administration to the IRS to reject them.[435]
    * Reduction to funding for advertising for the 2017 and 2018 exchange enrollment periods by up to 90%, with other reductions to support resources used to answer questions and help people sign-up for coverage.[436] CBO said in September 2017 that the reductions would lead to reduced ACA enrollment.[433]
    * The Trump administration reduced the enrollment period for 2018 by half, to 45 days. The NYT editorial board referred to this as part of a concerted "sabotage" effort.[437]
    * Public statements by Trump that the exchanges are unstable or in a death spiral.[438]
    * Trump's October 12, 2017 executive order and a related action the same day ending federal subsidies of questionable legality[439] used to help those buying insurance through exchanges with their co-payments and deductibles. About 6 million people were helped at a cost of $7 billion a year but that amount was expected to double in 10 years. State officials claimed the action caused insurance premiums to go up dramatically. Many states sued in federal court on the grounds that Trump was not legally allowed to take the action.[440]
    * Several insurers and actuary groups cited uncertainty created by President Trump, specifically non-enforcement of the individual mandate and not funding cost sharing reduction subsidies, as contributing 20–30 percentage points to premium increases for the 2018 plan year on the ACA exchanges. In other words, absent Trump's actions against the ACA, premium increases would have averaged 10% or less, rather than the estimated 28–40% under the uncertainty his actions created.[441]
    * The progressive think tank Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) maintains a timeline of many "sabotage" efforts by the Trump Administration.[442]
    

### Ending cost-sharing reduction (CSR) payments

Main article: Cost sharing reductions subsidy

President Trump announced on October 12, 2017,[443] he would end the smaller
of the two types of subsidies under the ACA, the cost sharing reduction (CSR)
subsidies. This controversial decision significantly raised premiums on the
ACA exchanges along with the premium tax credit subsidies that rise with them,
with the CBO estimating a $200 billion increase in the budget deficit over a
decade. The reasons for this are complex and require discussion of how the two
major subsidies work.[444]

The CSR subsidies are paid to insurance companies to reduce copayments and
deductibles for a smaller group of ACA enrollees, those earning less than 250%
of the federal poverty line (FPL). The second and larger type of subsidy, the
premium tax credits designed to reduce the post-subsidy cost of monthly
premiums, apply to all enrollees earning less than 400% of the FPL. For scale,
during 2017, approximately $7 billion in CSR subsidies will be paid, versus
$34 billion for the premium tax credits.[445] A court decision meant that CSR
subsidies were treated as discretionary spending, meaning Congress must decide
to appropriate funds for them each year. This effectively gave the President
the power to end them, as Democrats with a minority in Congress could not
appropriate the funds, let alone override his veto of an appropriations
bill.[444]

However, the premium tax credits are mandatory spending, meaning all those
eligible under the ACA receive them without Congressional appropriation. These
adjust with premium increases to limit after-subsidy premium payments by ACA
enrollees to a fixed percentage of income. Based on President Trump's threats
to end the CSR payments during early 2017, several insurers and actuarial
groups estimated this resulted in a 20 percentage point or more increase in
premiums for the 2018 plan year. In other words, premium increases expected to
be 10% or less in 2018 became 28–40% instead.[441][444]

The CBO reported in August 2017 (prior to President Trump's decision) that
ending the CSR payments might increase ACA premiums by 20 percentage points or
more, with a resulting increase of nearly $200 billion in the budget deficit
over a decade, as the premium tax credit subsidies would rise along with
premium prices. CBO also estimated that initially up to one million fewer
would have health insurance coverage, although more might have it in the long-
run as the subsidies expand. CBO expected the exchanges to remain stable
(i.e., no "death spiral" before or after Trump's action) as the premiums would
increase and prices would stabilize at the higher (non-CSR) level.[446]

CBO estimated that of the 12 million with private insurance via the ACA
exchanges in 2017, about 10 million receive premium tax credit subsidies and
will be shielded from premium increases, as their after-subsidy premiums are
limited as a percentage of income under the ACA. However, those 2 million who
do not receive subsidies face the brunt of the 20%+ premium increases, without
subsidy assistance. This may adversely impact enrollment in 2018 and beyond.
Another 13 million who are covered under the ACA's Medicaid expansion (in the
31 states that chose to expand coverage) should not be directly affected by
Trump's action.[446][445]

President Trump's argument that the CSR payments were a "bailout" for
insurance companies and therefore should be stopped, actually results in the
government paying more to insurance companies ($200B over a decade) due to
increases in the premium tax credit subsidies.[444]

## Implementation

Main article: Implementation history of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act

At various times during and after the ACA debate, Obama stated that "if you
like your health care plan, you'll be able to keep your health care
plan".[447][448] However, in fall 2013 millions of Americans with individual
policies received notices that their insurance plans were terminated,[449] and
several million more risked seeing their current plans
cancelled.[450][451][452] However, Poltifact cited various estimates that only
about 2% of the total insured population (4 million out of 262 million)
received such notices.[453] Obama's previous unambiguous assurance that
consumers' could keep their own plans became a focal point for critics, who
challenged his truthfulness.[454][455] On November 7, 2013, President Obama
stated: "I am sorry that [people losing their plans] are finding themselves in
this situation based on assurances they got from me."[456] Various bills were
introduced in Congress to allow people to keep their plans.[457]

In 2010 small business tax credits took effect.[458] Then Pre-Existing
Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP) took effect to offer insurance to those that
had been denied coverage by private insurance companies because of a pre-
existing condition.[458] By 2011, insurers had stopped marketing child-only
policies in 17 states, as they sought to escape this requirement.[459] In
_National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius_ decided on June 28,
2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the individual mandate was constitutional
when the associated penalties were construed as a tax. The decision allowed
states to opt out of the Medicaid expansion.[460][461][462]

In 2013, the Internal Revenue Service ruled that the cost of covering only the
individual employee would be considered in determining whether the cost of
coverage exceeded 9.5% of income. Family plans would not be considered even if
the cost was above the 9.5% income threshold.[463][464] In July 2 it was
announced the implementation of the employer mandate would be delayed until
2015.[297][465][466] The launch for both the state and federal exchanges was
troubled due to management and technical failings. HealthCare.gov, the website
that offers insurance through the exchanges operated by the federal
government, crashed on opening and suffered endless problems.[467] Operations
stabilized in 2014, although not all planned features were complete.[468][469]

The Government Accountability Office released a non-partisan study in 2014
that concluded that the administration did not provide "effective planning or
oversight practices" in developing the ACA website.[470] In _Burwell v. Hobby
Lobby_ the Supreme Court exempted closely held corporations with religious
convictions from the contraception rule.[471] At the beginning of the 2015,
11.7 million had signed up (ex-Medicaid).[472] By the end of the year about
8.8 million consumers had stayed in the program.[473] The December spending
bill delayed the onset of the "Cadillac tax" on expensive insurance plans by
two years, until 2020.[474] In January 2018, the implementation of the
"Cadillac Tax" was postponed until 2022.

An estimated 9 million to 10 million people had gained Medicaid coverage in
2016, mostly low-income adults.[219] A survey of New York businesses found an
increase of 8.5 percent in health care costs, less than the prior year's
survey had expected.[475] The five major national insurers expected to lose
money on ACA policies in 2016.[476] One of the causes of insurer losses is the
lower income, older and sicker enrollee population.[477]

More than 9.2 million people signed up for care on the national exchange
(healthcare.gov) for 2017, down some 400,000 from 2016. This decline was due
primarily to the election of President Trump.[478] Of the 9.2 million, 3.0
million were new customers and 6.2 million were returning. The 9.2 million
excludes the 11 states that run their own exchanges, which have signed up
around 3 million additional people.[478] The IRS announced that it would not
require that tax returns indicate that a person has health insurance, reducing
the effectiveness of the individual mandate, in response to an executive order
from President Donald Trump.[479] The CBO reported in March that the
healthcare exchanges were expected to be stable.[430] In May the United States
House of Representatives voted to repeal the ACA using the American Health
Care Act of 2017.[480][481] The individual mandate was repealed starting in
2019 via the "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017".[68] The CBO estimated that the
repeal would cause 13 million people to lose their health insurance by
2027.[482]

By 2019, 35 states and the District of Columbia had either expanded coverage
via traditional Medicare or via an alternative program.[483]

### Murray—Alexander Individual Market Stabilization Bill

Main article: Murray—Alexander Individual Market Stabilization Bill

Senator Lamar Alexander and Senator Patty Murray reached a compromise to amend
the Affordable Care Act to fund cost cost-sharing reductions.[484] President
Trump had stopped paying the cost sharing subsidies and the Congressional
Budget Office estimated his action would cost $200 billion, cause insurance
sold on the exchange to cost 20% more and cause one million people to lose
insurance.[485] The proposed legislation will also provide more flexibility
for state waivers, allow a new "Copper Plan" or catastrophic coverage for all,
allow interstate insurance compacts, and redirect consumer fees to states for
outreach.

## See also

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg/28px-Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg.png)Government of the United States portal
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg/32px-Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg.png)Law portal
    * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/WHO_Rod.svg/12px-WHO_Rod.svg.png)Medicine portal
    
    * Acronyms in healthcare
    * Community Living Assistance Services and Supports Act ("Class Act")
    * Comparison of the health care systems in Canada and the United States
    * EBSA form 700
    * Health care reform
    * Health systems by country
    * Individual shared responsibility provision
    * King v. Burwell
    * Massachusetts health care reform (sometimes called "Romneycare")
    * Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (Reform to the American Health Care system signed into law by President Obama)
    * National health insurance
    * Single-payer health care
    * Universal health care
    * Universal health coverage by country
    * U.S. health care compared with 8 other countries (tabular form)
    * Florida shuffle
    

## References

    
        1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Oberlander, Jonathan (June 1, 2010). "Long Time Coming: Why Health Reform Finally Passed". _Health Affairs_. **29** (6): 1112–1116. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0447. ISSN 0278-2715. PMID 20530339. Archived from the original on December 5, 2016.
    2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Blumenthal, David; Abrams, Melinda; Nuzum, Rachel (June 18, 2015). "The Affordable Care Act at 5 Years". _New England Journal of Medicine_. **372** (25): 2451–2458. doi:10.1056/NEJMhpr1503614. ISSN 0028-4793. PMID 25946142.
    3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohen, Alan B.; Colby, David C.; Wailoo, Keith A.; Zelizer, Julian E. (June 1, 2015). _Medicare and Medicaid at 50: America's Entitlement Programs in the Age of Affordable Care_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190231569.
    4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Vicini, James; Stempel, Jonathan; Biskupic, Joan (June 28, 2017). "Top court upholds healthcare law in Obama triumph". _Reuters_.
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ "Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65:2016 to 2026". _CBO_. Retrieved  November 23, 2016.
    6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Health Insurance Coverage and the Affordable Care Act, 2010–2016". Retrieved  December 7, 2016.
    7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Budgetary and Economic Effects of Repealing the Affordable Care Act". Congressional Budget Office. June 18, 2015. Retrieved  June 19, 2015.
    8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "CBO's Analysis of the Major Health Care Legislation Enacted in March 2010". Congressional Budget Office. March 30, 2011. Retrieved  April 6, 2012.
    9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ CBO-The Distribution of Household Income, 2014-March 19, 2018
    10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Employer Health Benefits 2015". _Kaiser Family Foundation_. Retrieved  November 19, 2016.
    11. **^** Gruber, Jonathan (2011). "The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable Are the Projections?". _National Tax Journal_. **64** (3): 893–908. doi:10.17310/ntj.2011.3.06. Retrieved  July 23, 2017.
    12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Analysis: U.S. Supreme Court Upholds the Affordable Care Act: Roberts Rules?". _The National Law Review_. von Briesen  & Roper, S.C. June 29, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2012.
    13. **^** Kirzinger, Ashley; Sugarman, Elise; Brodie, Mollyann (December 1, 2016). "Kaiser Health Tracking Poll: November 2016". Kaiser Family Foundation. Retrieved July 23, 2017.
    14. **^** "Gallup: ObamaCare has majority support for first time". _The Hill_. Retrieved  November 18, 2017.
    15. **^** Stolberg, Sheryl Gay; Pear, Robert (March 23, 2010). "Obama Signs Health Care Overhaul Into Law". _The New York Times_.
    16. **^** Greenberg, Jon (January 15, 2017). "Rand Paul goes too far on Obamacare Medicaid growth". _politifact_.
    17. **^** Amadeo, Kimberly. "How Much Will Obamacare Cost Me". _The Balance_. Retrieved  November 11, 2016.
    18. **^** "The Patients' Bill of Rights: Ending annual and lifetime limits" (PDF) (Press release). FamiliesUSA. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
    19. **^** "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009: Health Insurance Exchanges" (PDF). National Association of Insurance Commissioners. April 20, 2010. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
    20. **^** "HHS and states move to establish Affordable Insurance Exchanges, give Americans the same insurance choices as members of Congress" (Press release). HHS. July 11, 2011. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved  April 9, 2012.
    21. **^** "Essential Health Benefits". HealthCare.gov. September 23, 2010. Retrieved  February 9, 2016.
    22. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (June 12, 2013). "You Call This Insurance?". _The New Republic_.
    23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Levitt, Larry; Claxton, Gary; Pollitz, Karen (October 18, 2011). "Questions About Essential Health Benefits". Kaiser Family.
    24. **^** "Essential Health Benefits". HealthCare.gov, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    

"What does Marketplace health insurance cover?". HealthCare.Gov, managed by
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

    
        25. **^** "Preventive Services Covered Under the Affordable Care Act".
    26. **^** "Login". Retrieved  February 18, 2015.
    27. **^** "Quick Take: Essential Health Benefits: What Have States Decided for Their Benchmark?". Kaiser Family. December 7, 2012.
    28. **^** PPACA, 2713,(a)(4)
    29. **^** Women's Preventive Services Guidelines HRSA, US Department of Health and Human Services
    30. **^** "Women's Preventive Services Coverage and Non-Profit Religious Organizations". Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Retrieved  September 8, 2013.
    31. **^** Kliff, Sarah (August 1, 2012). "Five facts about the health law's contraceptive mandate". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 29, 2012.
    32. **^** Dept. Health and Human Services (February 10, 2012). "Group Health Plans and Health Insurance Issuers Relating to Coverage of Preventive Services Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act – Final Rules" (77 FR 8725). Federal Register. Retrieved February 15, 2012. "Summary: _These regulations finalize, without change, interim final regulations authorizing the exemption of group health plans and group health insurance coverage sponsored by certain religious employers from having to cover certain preventive health services under provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act_."
    33. **^** Park, Madison (July 19, 2011). "Birth control should be fully covered under health plans, report says". CNN. Retrieved August 27, 2012.
    34. **^** "Provisions of the Affordable Care Act, By Year". HealthCare.gov. Archived from the original on September 9, 2011. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.
    35. **^** "Key Features of the Affordable Care Act By Year". HHS. June 7, 2013. Retrieved  June 7, 2013.
    36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Binckes, Jeremy; Wing, Nick (March 22, 2010). "The Top 18 Immediate Effects Of The Health Care Bill". The Huffington Post. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
    37. **^** "How do out-of-pocket maximums work?". Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan.
    38. **^** U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (June 28, 2010). "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Requirements for Group Health Plans and Health Insurance Issuers Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Relating to Preexisting Condition Exclusions, Lifetime and Annual Limits, Rescissions, and Patient Protections; Final Rule and Proposed Rule". _Federal Register_. **75** (123): 37187–37241. Retrieved  July 26, 2010.
    39. **^** Pool, Gentrie (October 7, 2010). "After PPACA: The Future of the Health Insurance Underwriter". Asjonline.com. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
    40. **^** "Selected Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) implementation dates of interest to RNs as caregivers, RNs as patients, and RNs as employees" (PDF). Nursingworld.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
    41. **^** "Age Band Rating (ACA)". National Association of Personal Financial Advisors.
    42. **^** Bowman, Lee (March 22, 2010). "Health reform bill will cause several near-term changes". Scripps Howard News Service. Archived from the original on December 27, 2010. Retrieved March 23, 2010.
    43. **^** "Summary of the Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Kaiser Family Foundation. April 23, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2013.
    44. **^** "Health Insurance Market Reforms: Prevention". Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. December 21, 2010. Retrieved  September 8, 2013.
    45. **^** "Next Steps to Comply with Health Care Reform". _The National Law Review_. October 10, 2012. Retrieved  October 10, 2012.
    46. **^** "How do I choose Marketplace insurance?". HealthCare.Gov, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    47. **^** "Health Plan Categories". HealthCare.Gov, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    48. **^** "Medical Loss Ratio". Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. Retrieved  October 2, 2013.
    49. **^** "Medical Loss Ratio Requirements Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act". Federal Register. December 7, 2011. p. 76573. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Minimum Coverage Provision ("individual mandate")". American Public Health Association (APHA). Archived from the original on July 1, 2014.
    51. **^** Galewitz, Phil (March 26, 2010). "Consumers Guide To Health Reform". Kaiser Health News.
    52. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (August 5, 2013). "Burn Your Obamacare Card, Burn Yourself". _The New Republic_.
    53. **^** McClanahan, Carolyn (August 4, 2013). "Reader's Questions About Obamacare – Misinformation Abounds". _Forbes_. Retrieved  August 15, 2013.
    54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pippenger, Nathan (March 28, 2012). "Health Care Reform Without The Mandate?". _The New Republic_.
    55. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (April 9, 2010). "Common Sense". _The New Republic_.
    

Cohn, Jonathan (April 2, 2012). "What If the Mandate Goes?". _The New
Republic_.

    
        56. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (July 15, 2013). "Obamacare's Individual Mandate Can't Wait". _The New Republic_.
    

Cohn, Jonathan (April 2, 2012). "What If the Mandate Goes?". _The New
Republic_.

    
        57. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jonathan (March 21, 2012). "Reform With No Mandate? Ask New Jersey About That". _The New Republic_.
    58. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (June 8, 2012). "Just in Case: How Reform Might Survive Without the Mandate". _The New Republic_.
    59. **^** Banthin, Jessica (March 20, 2012). "Effects of Eliminating the Individual Mandate to Obtain Health Insurance". CBO.
    60. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jonathan Gruber (economist) (February 2011). "Health Care Reform without the Individual Mandate" (PDF). Center for American Progress. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 22, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2013.
    61. **^** Eibner, Christine; Price, Carter (2012). "The Effect of the Affordable Care Act on Enrollment and Premiums, With and Without the Individual Mandate" (PDF). Rand Health.
    62. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (April 9, 2010). "Common Sense". _The New Republic_.
    

Cohn, Jonathan (April 2, 2012). "What If the Mandate Goes?". _The New
Republic_.  
Cohn, Jonathan (December 26, 2011). "Was the Mandate a Mistake?". _The New
Republic_.

    
        63. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (December 26, 2011). "Was the Mandate a Mistake?". _The New Republic_.
    64. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Cost Estimate for Pending Health Care Legislation" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. March 20, 2010. Retrieved March 28, 2010.
    65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chaikind, Hinda; Copeland, Curtis W.; Redhead, C. Stephen; Staman, Jennifer (March 2, 2011). "PPACA: A Brief Overview of the Law, Implementation, and Legal Challenges" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. R41664. Retrieved December 22, 2013.
    66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Trumbull, Mark (March 23, 2010). "Obama signs health care bill: Who won't be covered?". _The Christian Science Monitor_. Retrieved  March 24, 2010.
    67. **^** Fox, Emily Jane (July 24, 2012). "6 million will lose out on Medicaid expansion". CNNMoney. Retrieved July 25, 2012.
    68. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Hatch, Orrin (December 20, 2017). "Sen. Orrin Hatch: Repealing the individual mandate tax is the beginning of the end of the ObamaCare era". Fox News. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
    69. **^** "Explaining Health Care Reform: Questions About Health Insurance Subsidies". Kaiser Family Foundation. July 1, 2012. Retrieved  July 1, 2012.
    70. **^** Luhby, Tami (April 23, 2013). "Millions eligible for Obamacare subsidies, but most don't know it". CNNMoney. Retrieved June 22, 2013.
    71. **^** "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act/Title I/Subtitle E/Part I/Subpart A".
    72. **^** Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: Title I: Subtitle E: Part I: Subpart A: Premium Calculation
    73. **^** "Small Business Health Care Tax Credit and the SHOP Marketplace". Internal Revenue Service. October 20, 2016. Retrieved  January 11, 2017.
    74. **^** "Treasury Lays the Foundation to Deliver Tax Credits" (PDF).
    75. **^** "Health Insurance Premium Credits in the PPACA" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. April 28, 2010.
    76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Explaining Health Care Reform". Kaiser Family Foundation.
    77. **^** "Explaining Health Care Reform" (PDF). Kaiser Family Foundation.
    78. **^** "Health Insurance Premium Credits Under PPACA" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. 2014.
    79. **^** "An Analysis of Health Insurance Premiums Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act".
    80. **^** "Policies to Improve Affordability and Accountability". The White House. Archived from the original on December 30, 2012.
    81. **^** "Kaiser Family Foundation:Health Reform Subsidy Calculator – Premium Assistance for Coverage in Exchanges/Gateways".
    82. **^** "Welcome to the Marketplace". HealthCare.Gov, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    

"What is the Health Insurance Marketplace?". HealthCare.Gov, managed by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

    
        83. **^** "Insurance Exchanges". American Public Health Association (APHA). Archived from the original on August 1, 2013.
    84. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (April 29, 2013). "Obamacare Sticker Shock: Not Very Shocking". _The New Republic_.
    85. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "State Decisions For Creating Health Insurance Exchanges, as of May 28, 2013 – Notes". Kaiser Family Foundation. May 28, 2013.
    86. **^** "State Health Insurance Exchange Laws: The First Generation". The CommonWealth Fund. July 25, 2012.
    87. **^** Adams, Rebecca (July 22, 2013). "The Question of Abortion Coverage in Health Exchanges". _Roll Call_.
    88. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Legislative Attorneys, American Law Division (January 5, 2016), _Lawsuits to Recover Payments under the Risk Corridors Program of the Affordable Care Act_ (PDF), Congressional Research Service, p. 6, retrieved February 11, 2017
    89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Nicholas Bagley (November 24, 2016), "Trouble on the Exchanges – Does the United States Owe Billions to Health Insurers?", __New England Journal of Medicine __, **375** (21): 2017–2019, doi:10.1056/NEJMp1612486, PMID 27959725
    90. **^** _Risk Corridors and Budget Neutrality_ (PDF), Washington, DC: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), April 11, 2014 Department of Health and Human Services
    91. **^** _Yes, Marco Rubio Led The Effort To End Obamacare's Health_, _Forbes_ , December 15, 2015, retrieved February 10, 2017
    92. **^** Kessler, Glenn (December 23, 2015). "Rubio's inaccurate claim that he 'inserted' a provision restricting Obamacare 'bailout' funds". _The Washington Post_.
    93. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michael Hiltzik (February 10, 2017), _With billions at stake, a federal judge just nullified the GOP's most cynical attack on Obamacare_, LA Times , retrieved February 10, 2017
    94. **^** _Moda Health Plan, Inc. v. The United States_, US Courts, February 10, 2017, p. 40 , retrieved February 10, 2017
    95. **^** HHS Press Office (March 29, 2013). "HHS finalizes rule guaranteeing 100 percent funding for new Medicaid beneficiaries". Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. Retrieved April 23, 2013. "effective January 1, 2014, the federal government will pay 100 percent of defined cost of certain newly eligible adult Medicaid beneficiaries. These payments will be in effect through 2016, phasing down to a permanent 90 percent matching rate by 2020."
    

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (April 2, 2013). "Medicaid program:
Increased federal medical assistance percentage changes under the Affordable
Care Act of 2010: Final rule". _Federal Register_. **78** (63): 19917–19947. "
(A) 100 percent, for calendar quarters in calendar years (CYs) 2014 through
2016; (B) 95 percent, for calendar quarters in CY 2017; (C) 94 percent, for
calendar quarters in CY 2018; (D) 93 percent, for calendar quarters in CY
2019; (E) 90 percent, for calendar quarters in CY 2020 and all subsequent
calendar years."

    
        96. **^** https://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2013pres/03/20130329a.html
    97. **^** http://www.cbpp.org/cms/?fa=view&id=3801
    98. **^** "Medicaid Expansion". Is Medicaid eligibility expanding to 133 or 138 percent FPL, and what is MAGI?: American Public Health Association (APHA). Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved  July 24, 2013.
    99. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Affordable Care Act Update: Implementing Medicare Cost Savings" (PDF). Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. August 2, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 18, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2013.
    100. **^** "Higher Spending Relative to Medicare Fee-for-Service May Not Ensure Lower Out-of-Pocket Costs for Beneficiaries". Government Accountability Office. February 8, 2008. Retrieved  October 7, 2013.
    101. **^** "PPACA, section 9015 as modified by section 10906" (PDF).
    102. **^** "HCERA section 1402" (PDF).
    103. **^** Nowak, Sarah; Eibner, Christine (December 18, 2015). "Rethinking the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax": A More Equitable Way to Encourage "Chevy" Consumption". Commonwealth Fund.
    104. **^** "Briefing Book". Tax Policy Center.
    105. **^** "Where are States Today? Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility Levels for Children and Non-Disabled Adults". Kaiser Family Foundation. March 28, 2013.
    106. **^** H.R. 3590 Enrolled, section 1001 (adding section 2714 to the Public Health Service Act): "A group health plan and a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage that provides dependent coverage of children shall continue to make such coverage available for an adult child (who is not married) until the child turns 26 years of age."
    107. **^** "Young Adults and the Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2016.
    108. **^** "Explaining Health Care Reform: What is Employer "Pay-or-Play" Requirement?". Kaiser Family Foundation. May 1, 2009. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.
    109. **^** McNamara, Kristen (March 25, 2010). "What Health Overhaul Means for Small Businesses". _The Wall Street Journal_.
    110. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (May 21, 2013). "Weaseling Out of Obamacare". _The New Republic_.
    111. **^** "Health Coverage & Uninsured". Kaiser Family Foundation. June 20, 2013.
    

"Health Insurance Coverage of the Total Population". Kaiser Family Foundation.
June 20, 2013.

    
        112. **^** "Pg 14 of 'Kaiser Health Tracking Poll: June 2013 '" (PDF). Kaiser Family Foundation. June 2013.
    113. **^** Chait, Jonathan (May 29, 2013). "Yuval Levin Dissembles Madly". _New York_.
    114. **^** "Access". Medscape. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.(registration required)
    115. **^** "Key Healthcare Reform Initiatives: Medicare Bundled Payment Pilots". Huron Consulting Group. November 19, 2010. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.
    116. **^** "More savings in the drug coverage gap coming through 2020". Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Archived from the original on September 23, 2013. Retrieved  September 27, 2013.
    117. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Accountable Care Organizations, Explained". Kaiser Health News. September 14, 2015. Retrieved  August 18, 2016.
    118. **^** "What the Affordable Care Act means for prescription coverage". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  August 7, 2016.
    119. **^** Claffey, Jason (August 14, 2010). "Medicare 'Doughnut Hole' Checks in the Mail". _Foster's Daily Democrat_. Retrieved December 26, 2012.
    120. **^** "Closing the Coverage Gap – Medicare Prescription Drugs Are Becoming More Affordable" (PDF). CMS. January 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 23, 2013.
    121. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Public Law 111 – 148, section 1332". Government Printing Office. Retrieved  June 29, 2012.
    122. **^** "Preparing for Innovation: Proposed Process for States to Adopt Innovative Strategies to Meet the Goals of the Affordable Care Act". U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. November 16, 2011. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    123. **^** Goldstein, Amy; Balz, Dan (March 1, 2011). "Obama offers states more flexibility in health-care law". _The Washington Post_.
    124. **^** "Gov. Shumlin issued the following statement on health care rules". Governor.vermont.gov. March 14, 2011. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    125. **^** Estes, Adam Clark (May 26, 2011). "Vermont Becomes First State to Enact Single-Payer Health Care". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    126. **^** Wing, Nicholas (May 26, 2011). "Vermont Single-Payer Health Care Law Signed By Governor". The Huffington Post.
    127. **^** "Costs derail Vermont's single-payer health plan". The Boston Globe.
    128. **^** Span, Paula (March 29, 2010). "Options Expand for Affordable Long-Term Care". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  March 29, 2010.
    129. **^** PriceWaterHouseCoopers. "The CLASS Act." HRS Insight: Human Resource Services. 2010: 1–6. Web.
    130. **^** Carney, Timothy (February 28, 2011) So, yeah, the health-care bill was really an awful piece of legislation that sent the revolving door spinning faster[ _permanent dead link_ ], _Washington Examiner_
    131. **^** "Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans (CO-OPs)".
    132. **^** Affordable Care Act's calorie count rules go into effect
    133. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Roy, Avik (February 7, 2012). "The Tortuous History of Conservatives and the Individual Mandate". _Forbes Magazine_.
    134. **^** Butler, Stuart M. (1989). "Assuring Affordable Healthcare for All Americans" (PDF). The Heritage Foundation.
    135. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (April 9, 2010). "Common Sense". _The New Republic_.
    136. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Cooper, Michael (February 14, 2012). "Conservatives Sowed Idea of Health Care Mandate, Only to Spurn It Later". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  July 2, 2012.
    137. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Klein, Ezra (June 25, 2012). "Unpopular Mandate". _The New Yorker_. Retrieved  June 19, 2012.
    138. **^** Cohn, Bob; Clift, Eleanor (September 18, 1994). "The Lost Chance". _Newsweek_. Retrieved  July 2, 2012.
    139. **^** Fouhy, Beth (October 5, 2007). "Hillary Claims Credit for Child Program". Associated Press for NewsMax. Archived from the original on January 23, 2008.
    140. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Chart: Comparing Health Reform Bills: Democrats and Republicans 2009, Republicans 1993". Kaiser Health News. February 23, 2010. Retrieved  July 29, 2012.
    

"Summary Of A 1993 Republican Health Reform Plan". Kaiser Health News.
February 23, 2010. Retrieved July 29, 2012.

    
        141. **^** "In 1993, Republicans Proposed A Mandate First". NPR. March 31, 2012.
    142. **^** "History of the Individual Health Insurance Mandate, 1989–2010 Republican Origins of Democratic Health Care Provision". ProCon.org. February 9, 2012.
    143. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Facebook post says Republicans embraced individual mandate in 1993". PolitiFact. April 19, 2012.
    144. **^** "AG Suthers couldn't be more wrong in his decision to file lawsuit". _Colorado Statesman_. Retrieved  July 29, 2012.
    145. **^** "G.O.P. and Health Mandate". _The New York Times_. February 26, 2012.
    146. **^** "Romneycare's 98% Success Rate Defies Gripes on Obama Law". Bloomberg. March 26, 2012.
    147. **^** Ball, Molly (May 31, 2012). "Was Mitt Romney a Good Governor?". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved  October 28, 2013.
    148. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lizza, Ryan (June 6, 2011). "Romney's dilemma". _The New Yorker_. Retrieved  June 19, 2012.
    149. **^** "Bill Summary & Status – S.334". Library of Congress THOMAS. Retrieved  September 24, 2013.
    150. **^** Kuttner, Robert (June 28, 2011). "RomneyCare vs. ObamaCare". _The Boston Globe_. Retrieved  September 23, 2013.
    151. **^** Cline, Andrew. "How Obama Broke His Promise on Individual Mandates". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved  September 26, 2013.
    152. **^** "CNN Democratic presidential debate". CNN. January 21, 2008. Retrieved  September 26, 2013.
    153. **^** "The First Presidential Debate". _The New York Times_. September 26, 2008.
    154. **^** Rustgi, Sheila; Collins, Sara R.; Davis, Karen; Nicholson, Jennifer L. "The 2008 Presidential Candidates' Health Reform Proposals: Choices for America".
    155. **^** "Remarks of President Barack Obama – Address to Joint Session of Congress". The White House. February 24, 2009. Archived from the original on March 8, 2010. Retrieved  March 24, 2010.
    156. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "Timeline: Milestones in Obama's quest for healthcare reform". Reuters. March 22, 2010. Retrieved  March 22, 2010.
    157. **^** Kruger, Mike (October 29, 2009). "Affordable Health Care for America Act". United States House Committee on Education and Labor. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved March 24, 2010.
    158. **^** "Health Care Reform from Conception to Final Passage". Retrieved  November 23, 2010.
    159. **^** "Senate Finance Committee Hearings for the 111th Congress recorded by C-SPAN". C-SPAN. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012.
    160. **^** "Senate Finance Committee hearings for 111th Congress". Finance.Senate.Gov. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    161. **^** "Jonathan Gruber (economist)". MIT Department of Economics. Retrieved  September 2, 2013."Jonathan Gruber: short biography". MIT Department of Economics. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2013.
    162. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jonathan (May 21, 2010). "How They Did It". _The New Republic_.
    163. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (September 4, 2009). "Party Is Such Sweet Sorrow". _The New Republic_.
    164. **^** Chait, Jonathan (April 22, 2010). "Obama's Moderate Health Care Plan". _The New Republic_.
    

Chait, Jonathan (December 19, 2009). "The Republican Health Care Blunder".
_The New Republic_.

    
        165. **^** Chait, Jonathan (December 19, 2009). "The Republican Health Care Blunder". _The New Republic_.
    166. **^** Hulse, Carl; Nagourney, Adam (March 16, 2010). "Senate G.O.P. Leader Finds Weapon in Unity". _The New York Times_.
    167. **^** Eaton, Joe; Pell, M. B.; Mehta, Aaron (March 26, 2010). "Lobbying Giants Cash In On Health Overhaul". NPR. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
    168. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (August 25, 2009). "Drug Deal". _The New Republic_.
    169. **^** Grim, Ryan (August 13, 2009). "Internal Memo Confirms Big Giveaways In White House Deal With Big Pharma". The Huffington Post.
    170. **^** "Visualizing The Health Care Lobbyist Complex". Sunlight Foundation. July 22, 2009. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    171. **^** Horwitz, Sari; Pershing, Ben (April 9, 2010). "Anger over health-care reform spurs rise in threats against Congress members". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  April 9, 2010.
    172. **^** Kellman, Laurie; Abrams, Jim (March 26, 2010). "Threats against lawmakers spread after health vote". Associated Press.
    173. **^** "Remarks by the President to a Joint Session of Congress on Health Care". The White House. September 10, 2009. Archived from the original on March 8, 2010. Retrieved  March 24, 2010.
    174. **^** Kennedy, Edward M. (May 12, 2009). "Text of letter to the President from Senator Edward M. Kennedy". White House Press Secretary. Archived from the original on September 10, 2009. Retrieved  September 10, 2009.
    175. **^** U.S. Const. art. I, § 7, cl. 1.
    176. **^** "Summary: H.R.3590 — 111th Congress (2009–2010)". Library of Congress. July 30, 2017.
    177. **^** S.Amdt. 2786
    178. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (September 7, 2009). "Why Reform Survived August". _The New Republic_.
    179. **^** Hacker, Jacob S. (December 20, 2009). "Why I Still Believe in This Bill". _The New Republic_.
    180. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jonathan (March 12, 2010). "The Public Option, Still Dead". _The New Republic_.
    181. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (December 15, 2009). "What Public Option Supporters Won". _The New Republic_.
    182. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (December 17, 2009). "Ben Nelson, Still a Big Problem (Updated)". _The New Republic_.
    183. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (December 19, 2009). "Nelson Says Yes; That Makes 60". _The New Republic_.
    184. **^** " 'Cornhusker' Out, More Deals In: Health Care Bill Gives Special Treatment". Fox News. March 19, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
    185. **^** "Roll Call vote No. 395 – On the Cloture Motion (Motion to Invoke Cloture on H.R. 3590)". U.S. Senate. Retrieved  July 20, 2017.
    186. **^** "Roll Call vote No. 396 – On Passage of the Bill (H.R. 3590 as Amended)". U.S. Senate. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.
    187. **^** "AARP, AMA Announce Support For Health Care Bill: Largest Doctors And Retiree Groups Backing Legislation". _The Huffington Post_ , March 19, 2010.
    188. **^** Applewhite, J. Scott. "Senator-elect Scott Brown welcomed as Republican hero after upset victory in Massachusetts". McClatchy-Tribune News Service. Associated Press. Retrieved April 19, 2012.
    189. **^** "Public Statements – Project Vote Smart" (Press release). Votesmart.org. January 13, 2010. Retrieved  April 9, 2012.
    190. **^** Silver, Nate (January 21, 2010). "Will the Base Abandon Hope?". FiveThirtyEight.
    191. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jonathan (January 17, 2010). "How to Pass the Bill--Whatever Happens Tuesday". _The New Republic_.
    192. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Stolberg, Sheryl; Zeleny, Jeff; Hulse, Carl (March 20, 2010). "Health Vote Caps a Journey Back From the Brink". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  March 23, 2010.
    193. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Brown, Carrie; Thrush, Glenn (March 20, 2010). "Pelosi steeled W.H. for health push". _Politico_. Retrieved  March 23, 2010.
    194. **^** "White House Unveils Revamped Reform Plan, GOP And Industry React". Kaiser Health News. February 22, 2010. Retrieved  June 29, 2012.
    195. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chait, Jonathan (February 20, 2010). "A Brief Reconciliation Primer". _The New Republic_.
    196. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Silver, Nate (December 26, 2009). "For Pelosi, Many Paths to 218". FiveThirtyEight.
    197. **^** Silver, Nate (January 21, 2010). "1. Reconciliation! 2. ??? 3. Profit!". FiveThirtyEight.
    198. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (September 21, 2009). "Reconciliation: Why Most Dems Don't Want to Go There". _The New Republic_.
    199. **^** Executive Order 13535 of March 24, 2010 — _Ensuring Enforcement and Implementation of Abortion Restrictions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act_ , Vol. 75, No. 59 75 FR 15599, March 29, 2010.
    200. **^** Chait, Jonathan (March 21, 2010). "Stupak Makes A Deal, Reform To Pass". _The New Republic_.
    201. **^** "Roll Call vote No. 165: On Motion to Concur in Senate Amendments (Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)". Office of the Clerk: House of Representatives. March 21, 2010. Retrieved  April 9, 2012.
    202. **^** Aro, Margaret; Mooney, Mark (March 22, 2010). "Pelosi Defends Health Care Fight Tactics". _ABC News_. Retrieved  March 23, 2010.
    203. **^** Stolberg, Sheryl; Pear, Robert (March 23, 2010). "Obama Signs Health Care Overhaul Bill, With a Flourish". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  March 24, 2010.
    204. **^** Benen, Steve (February 2, 2016). "On Groundhog Day, Republicans vote to repeal Obamacare". MSNBC.
    205. **^** "National Health Interview Survey, January to June 2016" (PDF). _CDC.gov_. Retrieved  November 23, 2016.
    206. **^** Barry-Jester, Anna Maria; Ben, Casselman (September 22, 2016). "Obamacare Has Increased Insurance Coverage Everywhere". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved October 12, 2016.
    207. **^** Garrett, Bowen (December 2016). "Who Gained Health Insurance Coverage Under the ACA, and Where Do They Live?" (PDF). _Urban Institute_. p. 2. Retrieved April 22, 2017.
    208. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Health Reform Monitoring Survey". Retrieved  December 5, 2016.
    209. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Current Status of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions". Retrieved  December 5, 2016.
    210. **^** "Rates Up 22 Percent For Obamacare Plans, But Subsidies Rise, Too". Retrieved  November 19, 2016.
    211. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Average Annual Workplace Family Health Premiums Rise Modest 3%". _Kaiser Family Foundation_. Retrieved  November 23, 2016.
    212. **^** "The Economic Record of the Obama Administration: Progress Reducing Inequality" (PDF). _Whitehouse.gov_. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016.
    213. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ https://www.fool.com/taxes/2018/01/07/what-the-individual-mandate-repeal-means-for-the-a.aspx
    214. **^** https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/what-tax-changes-did-affordable-care-act-make
    215. **^** https://money.cnn.com/2018/03/03/news/economy/obamacare-tax-penalty/index.html
    216. **^** Nussbaum, Alex (March 4, 2015). "Health Insurance Exchanges". _Bloomberg View_. Retrieved  August 12, 2016.
    217. **^** "Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision, as of September 1, 2015". Kaiser Family Foundation. June 22, 2015.
    218. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Robert Pear (May 24, 2013). "States' Policies on Health Care Exclude Some of the Poorest". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  May 25, 2013. "In most cases, [Sandy Praeger, Insurance Commissioner of Kansas], said adults with incomes from 32 percent to 100 percent of the poverty level ($6,250 to $19,530 for a family of three) "will have no assistance"."
    219. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Cost of Obamacare Medicaid Expansion 49% Higher Than Previously Estimated". August 12, 2016. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved  August 13, 2016.
    220. **^** "The Impact of the Coverage Gap for Adultsin States not Expanding Medicaid". October 26, 2015.
    221. **^** Kliff, Sarah (July 5, 2012). "What Happens if a State Opts Out of Medicaid, in One Chart". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  July 15, 2012.
    222. **^** "Health Reform and MedicaidExpansion". _HealthCare Reform Magazine_. July 13, 2010. Retrieved  January 9, 2012.
    223. **^** "Analyzing the Impact of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions". Kaiser Family Foundation. July 17, 2013.
    224. **^** "Enrollment Policy Provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Families USA. Retrieved April 1, 2012.
    225. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (July 19, 2013). "We Don't Know Everything About Obamacare. But We Know Who's Trying to Sabotage It". _The New Republic_.
    226. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Tami Luhby (July 1, 2013). "States forgo billions by opting out of Medicaid expansion". CNN.
    227. **^** "Is Medicaid Expansion Good for the States?". _U.S. News & World Report_. n.d.
    228. **^** Evan Soltas (June 4, 2013). "Wonkbook: The terrible deal for states rejecting Medicaid". _The Washington Post_.
    229. **^** Rutkin, Aviva. "Obamacare has already improved health of low-income Americans". Retrieved August 15, 2016.
    230. **^** "Medicaid expansion under ACA linked with better health care, improved health for low-income adults | News | Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health". _www.hsph.harvard.edu_. Retrieved  August 30, 2016.
    231. **^** Sanger-katz, Margot (August 25, 2016). "How Expanding Medicaid Can Lower Insurance Premiums for All". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved  September 4, 2016.
    232. **^** "NationalHealthAccountsProjected". February 15, 2017.
    233. **^** Mali, Meghashyam (August 11, 2016). "Next president faces possible ObamaCare meltdown". Retrieved August 15, 2016.
    234. **^** "2017 Premium Changes and Insurer Participation in the Affordable Care Act's Health Insurance Marketplaces". _Kaiser Family Foundation_. Retrieved  November 23, 2016.
    235. **^** "New Analysis of Health Insurance Premium Trends in the Individual Market Finds Average Yearly Increases of 10 Percent or More Prior to the Affordable Care Act". _Commonwealth Fund_. June 5, 2014.
    236. **^** Lowrey, Annie (May 7, 2013). "Slowdown in Rise of Healthcare Costs May Persist". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  June 10, 2013.
    237. **^** Chait, Jonathan (May 10, 2013). "The Facts Are In and Paul Ryan Is Wrong". _New York_.
    238. **^** Chait, Jonathan (September 26, 2013). "Someone Tell Ted Cruz the Obamacare War Is Over". _New York_.
    239. **^** Wayne, Alex (June 18, 2013). "Health Cost Growth Slows Further Even as Economy Rebounds". Bloomberg L.P.
    240. **^** "Assessing the Effects of the Economy on the Recent Slowdown in Health Spending". Kaiser Family Foundation. April 22, 2013.
    241. **^** Krawzak, Paul (June 14, 2013). "In Spending Debate, Baby Boomer Issue Remains a Headache for Legislators". _Roll Call_.
    242. **^** Obama, B, JD. United States Health Care Reform – Progress to Date and Next Steps. JAMA. Published online July 11, 2016. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.9797
    243. **^** Johnson, Carolyn Y. (September 14, 2016). "How companies are quietly changing your health plan to make you pay more". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  September 14, 2016.
    244. **^** "Survey of Non-Group Health Insurance Enrollees, Wave 3". _kff.org_. Kaiser Family Foundation. May 20, 2016. Retrieved  September 14, 2016.
    245. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ The FRED Blog-There's Death and then there's Death-Nov 2, 2017
    246. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Obama's claim the Affordable Care Act was a 'major reason' in preventing 50,000 patient deaths". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  November 10, 2016.
    247. **^** "Repealing the Affordable Care Act will kill more than 43,000 people annually". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  January 23, 2017.
    248. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kaiser Family Foundation-The Coverage Gap: Uninsured Poor Adults in States that Do Not Expand Medicaid-November 1, 2017
    249. **^** Fonarow, Gregg C.; Yancy, Clyde W.; Matsouaka, Roland A.; Peterson, Eric D.; Hernandez, Adrian F.; Heidenreich, Paul A.; DeVore, Adam D.; Cox, Margueritte; Bhatt, Deepak L. (January 1, 2018). "Association of the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program Implementation With Readmission and Mortality Outcomes in Heart Failure". _JAMA Cardiology_. **3** (1): 44–53. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2017.4265. ISSN 2380-6583.
    250. **^** Yeh, Robert W.; Shen, Changyu; Haneuse, Sebastien; Wasfy, Jason H.; Maddox, Karen E. Joynt; Wadhera, Rishi K. (December 25, 2018). "Association of the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program With Mortality Among Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized for Heart Failure, Acute Myocardial Infarction, and Pneumonia". _JAMA_. **320** (24): 2542–2552. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.19232. ISSN 0098-7484.
    251. **^** "It Sure Looks Like This Obamacare Program Has Led to More People Dying". _Reason.com_. December 27, 2018. Retrieved  June 6, 2019.
    252. **^** Pines, Jesse M.; Thode, Henry C.; Singer, Adam J. (April 5, 2019). "US Emergency Department Visits and Hospital Discharges Among Uninsured Patients Before and After Implementation of the Affordable Care Act". _JAMA Network Open_. **2** (4): e192662–e192662. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.2662.
    253. **^** Elmendorf, Douglas W. (March 30, 2011). "CBO's Analysis of the Major Health Care Legislation Enacted in March 2010" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. Retrieved July 15, 2012.
    254. **^** Elmendorf, Douglas W. (June 21, 2011). "CBO's 2011 Long-Term Budget Outlook" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. p. 44. "Through those changes and numerous others, the 2010 legislation significantly decreased Medicare outlays relative to what they would have been under prior law."
    255. **^** "Another Comment on CBO's Estimates for the Insurance Coverage Provisions of the Affordable Care Act". Congressional Budget Office. March 16, 2012. Retrieved  April 6, 2012.
    256. **^** "H.R. 4872, Reconciliation Act of 2010" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. March 18, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
    257. **^** Dennis, Steven (March 18, 2010). "CBO: Health Care Overhaul Would Cost $940 Billion". _Roll Call_. Retrieved  March 22, 2010.
    258. **^** Klein, Ezra (March 22, 2010). "What does the health-care bill do in its first year?". _The Washington Post_.
    259. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Correction Regarding the Longer-Term Effects of the Manager's Amendment to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. December 19, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
    260. **^** Judith Solomon; Paul N. Van de Water (April 18, 2012). "Letter: Improving the Strength and Solvency of Medicare". The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
    261. **^** Pecquet, Julian (March 13, 2012). "CBO: Obama's health law to cost less, cover fewer people than first thought". _The Hill_. Retrieved  June 29, 2012.
    262. **^** "CBO's Estimates for the Insurance Coverage Provisions of the Affordable Care Act Updated for the Recent Supreme Court Decision". Congressional Budget Office. July 24, 2012. Retrieved  August 6, 2012.
    263. **^** Sahadi, Jeanne (March 13, 2012). "Health reform coverage cost falls slightly". CNN. Retrieved June 29, 2012.
    264. **^** "Where does health care reform stand?". CNN. March 18, 2010. Retrieved  May 12, 2010.
    265. **^** Farley, Robert (March 18, 2010). "Pelosi: CBO says health reform bill would cut deficits by $1.2 trillion in second decade". PolitiFact.com. Retrieved April 7, 2010.
    266. **^** "Sen. Tom Coburn: Obamacare PR campaign anchored in spin, not reality". _The Washington Examiner_. July 8, 2006. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    267. **^** James Capretta. "Obamacare's Cooked Books and the 'Doc Fix'". _National Review_.
    268. **^** Hogberg, David (November 22, 2010). "GOP Might Target ObamaCare As Part Of A Medicare 'Doc Fix'". _Investor's Business Daily_. Archived from the original on January 26, 2011. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    269. **^** "Responses to Questions About CBO's Preliminary Estimate of the Direct Spending and Revenue Effects of H.R. 4872, the Reconciliation Act of 2010" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. March 19, 2010. Retrieved April 1, 2012.
    270. **^** Chait, Jonathan (March 24, 2010). "The Doc Fix Myth And The Right's Misinformation Feedback Loop". _The New Republic_.
    271. **^** Van de Water, Peter. "Debunking False Claims About Health Reform, Jobs, and the Deficit". Center for Budget and Policy Priorities.
    272. **^** Uwe Reinhardt (March 24, 2010). "Wrapping Your Head Around the Health Bill". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  October 9, 2010.
    273. **^** Holtz-Eakin, Douglas (March 21, 2010). "The Real Arithmetic of Health Care Reform". _The New York Times_.
    274. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jonathan (January 21, 2011). "The GOP's Trick Play". _The New Republic_.
    275. **^** Scheiber, Noam (September 17, 2009). "Is the CBO Biased Against Health Care Reform?". _The New Republic_.
    276. **^** "Electronic Medical Records (Health Information Technology)".
    277. **^** James, Frank (March 19, 2010). "Health Overhaul Another Promise U.S. Can't Afford: Expert". NPR. Retrieved April 7, 2010.
    278. **^** "Congress Has Good Record of Implementing Medicare Savings". CBPP. Retrieved  March 28, 2010.
    279. **^** "Can Congress cut Medicare costs?". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  March 28, 2010.
    280. **^** "The Affordable Care Act and Employers". Retrieved  August 11, 2016.
    281. **^** "Is the Affordable Care Act a Hidden Jobs Killer?". _Center for Economic and Policy Research_. CEPR. Retrieved  August 26, 2015.
    282. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (February 11, 2011). "Sorry, The CBO Did Not Say Health Reform Kills 800,000 Jobs". _The New Republic_.
    283. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (June 13, 2012). "Obamacare, Good for the Economy". _The New Republic_.
    284. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Government Printing Office. "Title 26 – Internal Revenue Code" (PDF).
    285. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chait, Jonathan (July 3, 2013). "Obama Employer Mandate Delay Train Wreck! Or Not". _New York_.
    286. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Sarah Kliff (May 6, 2013). "Will Obamacare lead to millions more part-time workers? Companies are still deciding". _The Washington Post_.
    287. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ungar, Rick. "The Real Numbers On 'The Obamacare Effect' Are In-Now Let The Crow Eating Begin". _Forbes_. Retrieved  November 11, 2014.
    288. **^** "Employment Situation Summary". Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved  November 11, 2014.
    289. **^** Conover, Chris. "Who Can Deny It? Obamacare Is Accelerating U.S. Towards A Part-Time Nation". _Forbes_. Retrieved  November 11, 2014.
    290. **^** Moriya, A. S.; Selden, T. M.; Simon, K. I. (January 5, 2016). "Little Change Seen In Part-Time Employment As A Result Of The Affordable Care Act". _Health Affairs_. **35** (1): 119–123. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0949.
    291. **^** Bill Sizemore (February 8, 2013). "Va. workers' part-time hours capped due to health law". _The Virginian-Pilot_.
    

Annie-Rose Strasser (February 11, 2013). "Virginia Cuts State Employees' Hours
To Avoid Providing Obamacare Coverage". ThinkProgress.

    
        292. **^** Ned Resnikoff (January 14, 2013). "Colleges roll back faculty hours in response to Obamacare". MSNBC.
    

Sy Mukherjee (January 14, 2013). "Four Public Colleges Will Cut Adjunct
Faculty Hours To Avoid Providing Health Coverage Under Obamacare".
ThinkProgress.

    
        293. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "As Health Law Changes Loom, A Shift To Part-Time Workers". NPR. April 29, 2013.
    294. **^** Jared Bernstein (September 4, 2013). "Stop Blaming Obamacare for Part-Time Workers". Teagan Goddard's Wonkwire. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014.
    295. **^** Matthew Yglesias (July 15, 2013). "Obamacare's Not To Blame For Increasing Part-time Work". Slate.
    296. **^** Timothy Jost (July 2, 2013). "Implementing Health Reform: A One-Year Employer Mandate Delay". Health Affairs.
    297. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Cohn, Jonathan (July 2, 2013). "Some Bad News About Obamacare That Isn't Bogus". _The New Republic_.
    298. **^** "Am I eligible for coverage in the Marketplace?". HealthCare.Gov, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    299. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Robert Greenstein; Judith Solomon (July 3, 2013). "Finance Committee Makes Flawed Employer Requirement in Health Reform Bill Still More Problematic". Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
    300. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Ezra Klein (July 2, 2013). "Will Obamacare lead to millions more part-time workers? Companies are still deciding". _The Washington Post_.
    301. **^** Matthew Yglesias (July 3, 2013). "Delaying Employer Responsibility Fines Is a Good Idea—the Real Problem Comes Later". Slate.
    302. **^** Chait, Jonathan (July 3, 2013). "Obamacare Haters Struggling to Understand What 'Nonessential' Means". _New York_.
    

Chait, Jonathan (July 3, 2013). "Obamacare Still Not Collapsing". _New York_.

    
        303. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (July 15, 2013). "Obamacare's Individual Mandate Can't Wait". _The New Republic_.
    304. **^** "Union Letter: Obamacare Will 'Destroy The Very Health and Wellbeing' of Workers", _The Wall Street Journal_ , July 12, 2013.
    305. **^** Torres, Carlos (January 27, 2014). "Economists See Little Effect on Hiring From U.S. Health-Care Law". _www.businessweek.com_. Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved  January 27, 2014.
    306. **^** O'Donnell, Jayne; Ungar, Laura; Hoyer, Meghan (November 12, 2014). "Rural hospitals in critical condition". _USA Today_. Retrieved  January 28, 2015.
    

Hamada, Omar L. (November 18, 2014). "Obamacare has detrimental effect on
rural hospitals". _The Tennessean_. Retrieved January 28, 2015.

    
        307. **^** Howell, Tom Jr. (May 4, 2015). "ER visits up under Obamacare despite promises, doctors' poll finds". _The Washington Times_. Retrieved  May 6, 2015.
    308. **^** "Obama and Democrats' Health Care Plan". RealClearPolitics. October 13, 2013. Retrieved  March 26, 2014.
    309. **^** Swanson, Emily (July 30, 2009). "Health Care Plan: Favor/Oppose". _Pollster.com_.
    310. **^** "As Health Care Law Proceeds, Opposition and Uncertainty Persist" (PDF). Pew Research Center. September 16, 2013.
    311. **^** Page, Susan (March 24, 2010). "Poll: Health care plan gains favor". _USA Today_. Retrieved  March 24, 2010.
    312. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zengerle, Patricia (June 24, 2012). "Reuters-Most Americans Oppose Health Law But Like the Provisions". Reuters. Retrieved June 28, 2012.
    313. **^** Ezra Klein (June 26, 2012). "Republicans hate 'Obamacare', but like most of what it does". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  June 28, 2012.
    314. **^** Greg Sargent (June 25, 2012). "Republicans Support Obama's Health Reforms – As Long As His Name Isn't On Them". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  June 28, 2012.
    315. **^** "CNN Opinion Research Poll" (PDF). CNN. March 22, 2010.
    316. **^** Rasmussen, Scott; Schoen, Doug (March 9, 2010). "Why Obama Can't Move the Health-Care Numbers". _The Wall Street Journal_.
    317. **^** Chait, Jonathan (June 13, 2013). "Obamacare, Public Opinion, and Conservative Self-Delusion". _New York Magazine_.
    318. **^** Jackson, David. "Poll: Most oppose blocking Obama health care law". _USA Today_. Retrieved July 8, 2012.
    319. **^** "RAND Health Reform Opinion Study". RAND Health. May 1, 2014. Retrieved  May 10, 2014.
    320. **^** "AP-GfK Poll: Obama's health care fails to gain support". Associated Press. March 28, 2014. Retrieved  March 30, 2014.
    321. **^** "The ObamaCare 8%". _The Wall Street Journal_. April 30, 2014. Retrieved  May 1, 2014.
    322. **^** Alan Colmes, "Poll: Voters No Longer Want To Repeal Obamacare", _Liberaland_ , December 1, 2014.
    323. **^** "Poll: Obamacare and the Supreme Court". CBS News. Retrieved  June 23, 2015.
    324. **^** "After the Election, the Public Remains Sharply Divided on Future of the Affordable Care Act". Kaiser Family Foundation. December 3, 2016.
    325. **^** "Obamacare More Popular Than Ever, Now That It May Be Repealed". NYT. February 1, 2017.
    326. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Dropp, Kyle; Nyhan, Brendan (February 7, 2017). "One-Third Don't Know Obamacare and Affordable Care Act Are the Same". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved  February 8, 2017.
    327. **^** Lerman, Amy E.; McCabe, Katherine T. (January 24, 2017). "Personal Experience and Public Opinion: A Theory and Test of Conditional Policy Feedback". _The Journal of Politics_. **79** (2): 624–641. doi:10.1086/689286. ISSN 0022-3816.
    328. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wallace, Gregory (June 25, 2012). "'Obamacare': The word that defined the health care debate". CNN. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
    329. **^** Amanda Cox; Alicia Desantis; Jeremy White (March 25, 2012). "Fighting to Control the Meaning of 'Obamacare'". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  June 29, 2012.
    330. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Baker, Peter (August 3, 2012). "Democrats Embrace Once Pejorative 'Obamacare' Tag". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  August 6, 2012.
    331. **^** Nelson, Steven (June 8, 2011). "Democratic Rep. John Conyers wants to reclaim 'ObamaCare', make it a compliment". The Daily Caller. Retrieved April 1, 2012.
    332. **^** Madison, Lucy (August 15, 2011). "On bus tour, Obama embraces 'Obamacare', says 'I do care'". CBS News. Retrieved April 28, 2012.
    333. **^** Strauss, Daniel (March 23, 2012). "Obama camp's pitch to supporters: 'Hell yeah, I'm for Obamacare'". _The Hill_. Retrieved  March 27, 2012.
    334. **^** Prince, Richard (October 2, 2013). "AP, NPR Curb Use of "Obamacare" Term". Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 5, 2013.
    335. **^** Gold, Hadas (October 4, 2013). "AP, NPR to cut back on 'Obamacare '". _Politico_. Retrieved  October 19, 2013.
    336. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Sarah Palin falsely claims Barack Obama runs a "death panel "". PolitiFact. August 10, 2009.
    337. **^** "Seniors Beware". Snopes. August 23, 2012.
    338. **^** Beutler, Brian (August 13, 2013). "A new kind of birther and death panel insanity explodes". Salon. Retrieved December 3, 2013.
    339. **^** Ebeler, Jack; Neuman, Tricia; Cubanski, Juliette (April 13, 2011). "The Independent Payment Advisory Board: A New Approach to Controlling Medicare Spending". Kaiser Family Foundation. p. 3. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
    340. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (April 20, 2011). "Here We Go Again, With the Death Panels". _The New Republic_.
    341. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (August 13, 2009). "Mandatory Death Counseling – exposed!". _The New Republic_.
    342. **^** Parsons, Christi; Zajac, Andrew (August 14, 2009). "Senate committee scraps healthcare provision that gave rise to 'death panel' claims; Though the claims are widely discredited, the Senate Finance Committee is withdrawing from its bill the inclusion of advance-care planning consultations, calling them too confusing". _Los Angeles Times_.
    343. **^** Nyhan, Brendan (2010). "Why the "Death Panel" Myth Wouldn't Die: Misinformation in the Health Care Reform Debate" (PDF). _The Forum_. **8** (1). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.692.9614. doi:10.2202/1540-8884.1354.
    344. **^** Viebeck, Elise (September 26, 2012). "Poll: Four in 10 believe in Obama healthcare law 'death panels'". _The Hill_.
    345. **^** Drobnic Holan, Angie (December 19, 2009). "PolitiFact's Lie of the Year: 'Death panels'". PolitiFact. Retrieved November 19, 2010.
    346. **^** Henig, Jess; Robertson, Lori (July 29, 2010). "False Euthanasia Claims". FactCheck.org.
    347. **^** Lori Robertson (December 24, 2009). "Whoppers of 2009—We review the choicest falsehoods from a year that kept us busy". FactCheck.org. Retrieved April 28, 2011.
    348. **^** " 'Tweet' 2009 Word of the Year, 'Google' Word of the Decade, as voted by American Dialect Society" (PDF). American Dialect Society. January 8, 2010. Retrieved October 8, 2010.
    349. **^** "Euthanasia Counseling". Snopes. August 13, 2009.
    350. **^** Public Law 111 – 148, section 1312: "... the only health plans that the Federal Government may make available to Members of Congress and congressional staff with respect to their service as a Member of Congress or congressional staff shall be health plans that are (I) created under this Act (or an amendment made by this Act); or (II) offered through an Exchange established under this Act (or an amendment made by this Act)."
    351. **^** Chait, Jonathan (August 6, 2013). "Congress Exempts Itself From Obamacare! Or Something!". _New York_.
    352. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (August 13, 2013). "The Latest Obamacare Lie That Just Won't Die". _The New Republic_.
    353. **^** Bowers, Becky (August 14, 2013). "Sen. Ted Cruz says Obama 'just granted all of Congress an exception' to Obamacare". PolitiFact. Retrieved August 19, 2013.
    354. **^** Robertson, Lori (January 20, 2010). "Congress Exempt from Health Bill?". FactCheck.org.
    355. **^** Viebeck, Elise (February 27, 2013). "Poll: Four in 10 think illegals are covered by Obama healthcare law". The Hill. Retrieved December 7, 2013.
    356. **^** Farley, Robert (January 21, 2010). "The Democrats' health care bills would provide 'free health care for illegal immigrants'". PolitiFact. Retrieved August 19, 2013.
    357. **^** "The Once and Future Obamacare Death Spiral". Bloomberg. January 18, 2017.
    358. **^** "Number of Insurers Participating in the Individual Health Insurance Marketplaces". Kaiser Family Foundation. January 30, 2017.
    359. **^** "CBO The Budget and Economic Outlook 2017–2027". CBO. January 24, 2017.
    360. **^** "Obamacare and Labor Supply". New York Times. June 20, 2015.
    361. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Labor leaders' letter to Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi". The Washington Post. January 27, 2014. Retrieved  February 13, 2014.
    362. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Union Letter: Obamacare Will 'Destroy The Very Health and Wellbeing' of Workers". The Wall Street Journal. July 12, 2013. Retrieved  October 7, 2013.
    363. **^** Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (October 18, 2013). "States Are Focus of Effort to Foil Health Care Law". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  October 19, 2013.
    364. **^** The Editorial Board (January 25, 2014). "The Koch Party". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  January 25, 2014.
    365. **^** Peters, Jeremy (January 20, 2011). "Conservatives' Aggressive Ad Campaign Seeks to Cast Doubt on Health Law". _The New York Times_.
    366. **^** Chait, Jonathan (July 23, 2013). "Conservatives Brace for the Possibility Obamacare Won't Totally Suck". _The New Republic_.
    367. **^** Michael Cannon (July 6, 2007). "The Anti-Universal Coverage Club Manifesto". Cato Institute.
    368. **^** Chait, Jonathan (June 25, 2012). "Health Care As a Privilege: What the GOP Won't Admit". _New York_.
    369. **^** Schoen, John W. (November 9, 2016). "Here's what's coming from the Trump administration". _CNBC_. Retrieved  November 16, 2016.
    370. **^** Haberman, Maggie; Pear, Robert (January 10, 2017). "Trump Tells Congress to Repeal and Replace Health Care Law 'Very Quickly'". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  January 25, 2017.
    371. **^** "Resolution 54: AFL-CIO Convention Resolution on the Affordable Care Act". AFL-CIO. September 11, 2013. Retrieved  October 7, 2013.
    372. **^** Pradhan, Rachana (October 12, 2016). "Democratic governor: Obamacare 'no longer affordable' for many". Politico.
    373. **^** Demko, Paul (October 21, 2016). "Democratic governor expresses regret over Obamacare comments, requests emergency relief for rate hikes". Politico.
    374. **^** Cauchi, Richard (November 15, 2013). "State Legislation and Actions Challenging Certain Health Reforms". National Conference of State Legislatures. Retrieved November 28, 2013.
    375. **^** "Health Care Lawsuit Case Challenges". Independent Women's Forum. November 26, 2013. Retrieved  November 28, 2013.
    376. **^** "March 14, 2012 Statement on Religious Freedom and HHS Mandate". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. March 14, 2012. Retrieved  April 28, 2012.
    377. **^** Goodstein, Laurie (May 21, 2012). "Catholics File Suits on Contraceptive Coverage". _The New York Times_.
    378. **^** Taylor, Audrey; Seanz, Arlette; Levine, Mike (June 25, 2015). "Supreme Court Upholds Obamacare Subsidies, President Says ACA 'Is Here to Stay'". ABC News. Retrieved June 25, 2015.
    379. **^** Haberkorn, Jennifer (May 12, 2016). "House GOP wins Obamacare lawsuit". Politico. Retrieved August 21, 2016.
    380. **^** Sargent, Greg (May 26, 2017), "Trump's latest tantrum will hurt hundreds of thousands of people. Here's how.", _The Washington Post_ , retrieved May 29, 2017
    381. **^** [1]
    382. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ de Vogue, Ariane; Luhby, Tami (December 14, 2018). "Federal judge in Texas strikes down Affordable Care Act". _CNN_. Retrieved  December 14, 2018.
    383. **^** Sullivan, Peter (December 14, 2018). "Federal judge in Texas strikes down ObamaCare". _TheHill_. Retrieved  December 15, 2018.
    384. **^** Armour, Stephanie (December 14, 2018). "Federal Judge Rules Affordable Care Act Is Unconstitutional Without Insurance-Coverage Penalty". _The Wall Street Journal_.
    385. **^** https://lawshelf.com/blog/post/federal-judge-in-texas-strikes-down-obamacare
    386. **^** Trump, Donald J. (December 14, 2018). "As I predicted all along, Obamacare has been struck down as an UNCONSTITUTIONAL disaster! Now Congress must pass a STRONG law that provides GREAT healthcare and protects pre-existing conditions. Mitch and Nancy, get it done!". _@realDonaldTrump_. Retrieved  December 15, 2018.
    387. **^** Axelrod, Tal (December 14, 2018). "Trump touts ruling against ObamaCare: 'Mitch and Nancy' should pass new health-care law". _TheHill_. Retrieved  December 15, 2018.
    388. **^** Goldstein, Amy (December 14, 2018). "Federal judge in Texas rules entire Obama health-care law is unconstitutional". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved  December 14, 2018.
    389. **^** Sullivan, Kate; Luhby, Tami (December 30, 2018). "Judge says Affordable Care Act will remain in effect during appeal". _CNN_. Retrieved  December 31, 2018.
    390. **^** Somashekhar, Sandhya (August 29, 2013). "States find new ways to resist health law". _The Washington Post_.
    391. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ornstein, Norm (July 24, 2013). "The Unprecedented and Contemptible Attempts to Sabotage Obamacare". _National Journal_.
    392. **^** Pear, Robert (August 2, 2013). "Missouri Citizens Face Obstacles to Coverage". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  August 3, 2013.
    393. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (July 25, 2013). "The Right's Latest Scheme to Sabotage Obamacare". _The New Republic_.
    394. **^** Kliff, Sarah (August 1, 2013). "Inside the Obamacare Resistance". _The Washington Post_.
    395. **^** O'Brien, Michael (March 22, 2010). "GOP quick to release 'repeal' bills". _The Hill_. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    396. **^** "Bill Summary & Status – 112th Congress (2011–2012) – H.R. 2". THOMAS. January 19, 2011.
    397. **^** "Final Vote Results for passage of Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act (H.R. 2)". THOMAS. January 19, 2011.
    398. **^** Beutler, Brian (January 19, 2011). "Dems Press GOPers To Repeal Their Own Benefits Along With Health Care Law". Talking Points Memo. Retrieved January 21, 2011.
    399. **^** "Motion to Waive All Applicable Budgetary Discipline Re: McConnell Amdt. No. 13". U.S. Senate. February 2, 2011. Retrieved  April 1, 2012.
    400. **^** "House Passes Health Care Repeal 245–189". C-SPAN. January 19, 2011. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved  January 21, 2011.
    401. **^** Boles, Corey (June 28, 2012). "Romney, GOP Pledge to Repeal Health Law". _The Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved  June 29, 2012.
    402. **^** "House Obamacare Repeal: Thirty-Third Time's the Charm?". ABC News. July 11, 2012.
    403. **^** Walker, Andrea K. (July 11, 2012). "House of representatives votes to repeal health reform for the 31st time". _The Baltimore Sun_. Retrieved  July 12, 2012.
    404. **^** Deirdre Walsh (February 3, 2015). "House votes -again-to repeal Obamacare". Reuters. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
    405. **^** Jonathan Weisman; Robert Pear (May 26, 2013). "Partisan Gridlock Thwarts Effort to Alter Health Law". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  May 27, 2013. "we cannot use any of the normal tools to resolve ambiguities or fix problems"
    406. **^** Lipton, Eric (March 19, 2013). "In Shift, Lobbyists Look for Bipartisan Support to Repeal a Tax". _The New York Times_.
    407. **^** Chait, Jonathan (July 3, 2013). "Obamacare Still Not Collapsing". _New York_.
    408. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (December 23, 2010). "What Defunding Health Reform Would Do". _The New Republic_.
    409. **^** Lori Montgomery; Paul Kane (October 1, 2013). "Shutdown begins: Stalemate forces first U.S. government closure in 17 years". _The Washington Post_.
    

Blake, Aaron (September 19, 2013). "McCain: Efforts to repeal and defund
Obamacare 'not rational'". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved September 24,
2013.

    
        410. **^** Beutler, Brian (September 19, 2013). "New test could expose GOP's pack of charlatans". Salon. Retrieved September 24, 2013.
    411. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (August 7, 2013). "Tea Party to Republicans: Shut Down the Government, or You're a Sellout". _The New Republic_.
    412. **^** Goddard, Teagan (May 17, 2013). "Blocking the Medicare Reform Board Won't Stop Reform". WonkWire.RollCall.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013.
    413. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (May 24, 2010). "Save Donald". _The New Republic_.
    

Cohn, Jonathan (July 6, 2010). "Meet The Don". _The New Republic_.

    
        414. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (July 19, 2011). "The New Nullification: GOP v. Obama Nominees". _The New Republic_.
    415. **^** Kaplan, Thomas; Pear, Robert (January 12, 2017). "Senate Takes Major Step Toward Repealing Health Care Law". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  January 12, 2017.
    416. **^** "GOP Senate to Move Forward on ObamaCare Repeal". _Fox News Politics_. January 11, 2017. Retrieved  January 12, 2017.
    417. **^** Lee, MJ; Barrett, Ted; LoBianco, Tom (January 12, 2017). "Senate Opens Obamacare Repeal Drive with Overnight Marathon". _CNN_. Retrieved  January 12, 2017.
    418. **^** Caldwell, Leigh Ann (January 12, 2017). "Senate Approves First Step Toward Repealing Obamacare in Late-Night Session". _NBC News_. Retrieved  January 12, 2017.
    419. **^** Golstein, Amy; DeBonis, Mike; Snell, Kelsey. "House Republicans release long-awaited plan to repeal and replace Obamacare". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  March 7, 2017.
    420. **^** Pear, Robert (March 24, 2017). "Push to Repeal Health Law Fails". New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
    421. **^** "House Republicans pass bill to repeal and replace Obamacare". CNN. May 4, 2017. Retrieved  May 4, 2017.
    422. **^** "Senate Republicans signal they plan to scrap bill the House just passed and write their own".
    423. **^** Kaplan, Thomas; Pear, Robert (June 15, 2017). "Secrecy Surrounding Senate Health Bill Raises Alarms in Both Parties". _New York Times_. Archived from the original on June 18, 2017.
    424. **^** Bump, Philip (June 13, 2017). "The remarkable steps Republicans are taking to obscure what's in their health-care bill". _Washington Post_. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017.
    425. **^** Sarlin, Benjy; Caldwell, Leigh Ann (June 15, 2017). "The Senate's Health Care Bill Remains Shrouded in Secrecy". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017.
    426. **^** "H.R. 1628, Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017, discussion draft ERN17282" (PDF). Senate Budget Committee. June 22, 2017.
    427. **^** CNN, Lauren Fox, MJ Lee, Phil Mattingly and Ted Barrett. "McCain returns as Senate advances health bill". _CNN_. Archived from the original on July 25, 2017.
    428. **^** Klein, Ezra (July 28, 2017), _The GOP's massive health care failures, explained_, Vox , retrieved August 3, 2017
    429. **^** NYT-Steven Rattner-2017: The Year in Charts-December 29, 2017
    430. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "American Healthcare Act Cost Estimate" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. March 13, 2017.
    431. **^** NYT-Edsall-Killing Obamacare Softly-July 27, 2017
    432. **^** The Coverage Gap: Uninsured Poor Adults in States that Do Not Expand Medicaid-October 19, 2016
    433. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Vox-Sarah Kliff-CBO: Trump is making Obamacare premiums more expensive-September 14, 2017
    434. **^** NYT-Robert Pear-Marco Rubio Quietly Undermines Affordable Care Act-December 9, 2015
    435. **^** Politico-Trump Still Enforcing Obamacare Mandate-May 2017
    436. **^** VOX-Sarah Kliff-Trump is slashing Obamacare's advertising budget by 90%-August 31, 2017
    437. **^** NYT-Editorial-Obamacare vs. the Saboteurs-November 4, 2017
    438. **^** Healthinsurance.org Ten Ways the GOP sabotaged Obamacare-May 17, 2017
    439. **^** Kodjak, Alison (October 13, 2017). "Halt In Subsidies For Health Insurers Expected To Drive Up Costs For Middle Class". NPR. Retrieved October 18, 2017.
    440. **^** Mulvihill, Geoff; Kennedy, Kelli (October 13, 2017). "Many states, consumers alarmed by Trump's health care order". _Winston-Salem Journal_. Associated Press. Retrieved  October 18, 2017.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
    441. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Scott, Dylan (October 18, 2017). "Obamacare premiums were stabilizing. Then Trump happened". Vox.
    442. **^** "Sabotage Watch: Tracking Efforts to Undermine the ACA". Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Updated October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2017.
    443. **^** Pear, Robert; Haberman, Maggie; Abelsonoct, Reed (October 12, 2017). "Trump to Scrap Critical Health Care Subsidies, Hitting Obamacare Again". _The New York Times_.
    444. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Kliff, Sarah (October 18, 2017). "Sarah Kliff-Trump's stance on insurance 'bailouts' is completely incoherent" Vox..
    445. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65: 2017 to 2027". Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. September 14, 2017.
    446. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Effects of Terminating Payments for Cost-Sharing Reductions". Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. August 15, 2017.
    447. **^** "A Town Hall, and a Health Care Model, in Green Bay". The White House Blog. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved  November 9, 2013.
    448. **^** Jacobson, Louis. "Barack Obama says that what he'd said was you could keep your plan 'if it hasn't changed since the law passed'". PolitiFact. Retrieved November 9, 2013.
    449. **^** "After the big Obamacare apology: where things stand". CNN. November 8, 2013. Retrieved  November 9, 2013.
    450. **^** "Obama apologizes for insurance cancellations due to Obamacare". CNN. Retrieved  July 29, 2014.
    451. **^** Obama blames 'bad apple' insurers for canceled coverage, Reuters.com, October 30, 2013.
    452. **^** Sealover, Ed (November 8, 2013). "Health insurers say they're canceling plans because of federal law". _Denver Business Journal_. Retrieved  November 9, 2013.
    453. **^** "Lie of the Year: "If you like your health care plan, you can keep it". Politifact. December 12, 2014. Retrieved  April 5, 2018.
    454. **^** Weigel, David (November 8, 2013). "The White House's Website Still Says If You Like Your Plan You Can Keep It". Slate. Retrieved November 9, 2013.
    455. **^** "Obamacare: The debacle". _The Economist_. November 2, 2013. Retrieved  November 8, 2013.
    456. **^** "Obama apologizes to Americans who lost health plans". Fox News. November 8, 2013. Retrieved  November 9, 2013.
    457. **^** Schoof, Renee (November 8, 2013). "Congress weighing laws to let people keep health insurance". McClatchyDC. Retrieved November 14, 2013.
    458. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "History of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)". October 22, 2014.
    459. **^** Enzi, Michael B. (August 2, 2011). "Health Care Reforrm Law's Impact on Child-Only Health Insurance Policies" (PDF). _United States Senate_. Retrieved  August 10, 2016.
    460. **^** Liptak, Adam (September 30, 2012). "Supreme Court justices face important rulings in upcoming term September". _The New York Times_. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved  September 30, 2012.
    461. **^** "Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision". Kaiser Family Foundation. Retrieved  August 12, 2016.
    462. **^** Walton, Alice G. "How To Explain The Obamacare Ruling To A Five-Year-Old". _Forbes_. Retrieved  May 5, 2017.
    463. **^** "A Cruel Blow to American Families". _The New York Times_. February 2, 2013.
    464. **^** Cohn, Jonathan (February 5, 2013). "Not-So-Universal Health Care". _The New Republic_.
    465. **^** Mazur, Mark. "Continuing to Implement the ACA in a Careful, Thoughtful Manner". United States Department of the Treasury. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
    466. **^** Madara, Matthew R. (February 11, 2014). "ACA Employer Shared Responsibility Delay Included in Final Regs". _Tax Notes Today_. 2014 TNT 28–1.
    467. **^** Kennedy, Kelly (December 1, 2013). "White House claims success on HealthCare.gov repairs". _USA Today_. Retrieved  December 1, 2013.
    468. **^** Cohen, Tom (October 23, 2013). "Rough Obamacare rollout: 4 reasons why". CNN. Retrieved November 5, 2013.
    469. **^** Holland, Steve; Rampton, Roberta (November 6, 2013). "Senate Democrats frustrated with botched rollout of Obamacare". The Christian Science Monitor. Reuters. Retrieved November 19, 2013.
    470. **^** Alonso-Zaldivar, Ricardo (July 31, 2014). "Probe exposes flaws behind HealthCare.gov rollout". AP News. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014.
    471. **^** _Burwell v. Hobby Lobby_ , 573 U.S. (United States Supreme Court 2014). 
    472. **^** Tracer, Zachary. "Obamacare Sign-Ups Decline to 10.2 Million as Some Don't Pay". _Bloomberg.com_. Retrieved  August 21, 2016.
    473. **^** "December 31, 2015 Effectuated Enrollment Snapshot". _cms.gov_. March 11, 2016.
    474. **^** COOK, NANCY (December 16, 2015). "How the White House lost on the Cadillac Tax". Politico. Retrieved August 21, 2016.
    475. **^** "Supplemental Survey Report: Empire State Manufacturing Survey/Business Leaders Survey Firms Assess Effects of Affordable Care Act" (PDF). Federal Reserve Bank of New York. August 2016.
    476. **^** Mathews, Anna Wilde (August 16, 2016). "Aetna to Drop Some Affordable Care Act Markets". _Wall Street Journal_. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved  August 16, 2016.
    477. **^** Ip, Greg (August 17, 2016). "The Unstable Economics in Obama's Health Law". _Wall Street Journal_. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved  August 23, 2016.
    478. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Affordable Care Act signups dip amid uncertainty and Trump attacks". _NYT_. February 3, 2017.
    479. **^** Morton, Victor (February 14, 2017). "IRS weakens enforcement of Obamacare individual mandate: Report". _The Washington Times_. Retrieved  February 16, 2017.
    480. **^** "House Passes Bill to Repeal Obamacare: Live Updates". _WSJ_. Retrieved  May 5, 2017.
    481. **^** Epstein, Reid J. (May 5, 2017). "Analyst Sees Danger for House Republicans After Health Bill Vote". _WSJ_. Retrieved  May 5, 2017.
    482. **^** O'Brien, Elizabeth (December 2, 2017). "The Senate's Tax Bill Eliminates the Individual Mandate for Health Insurance. Here's What You Need to Know". _Money_.
    483. **^** "Where the states stand on Medicaid expansion". _Advisory.com_. February 6, 2019.
    484. **^** Thomas Kaplan and Robert Pear. "2 Senators Strike Deal on Health Subsidies That Trump Cut Off".CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
    485. **^** "CBO says Trump's Obamacare sabotage would cost $194 billion, drive up premiums 20%". _Vox_. Retrieved  October 17, 2017.
    

## Further reading

    
        * Barr, Donald A. (2011). _Introduction to U.S. Health Policy: The Organization, Financing, and Delivery of Health Care in America_. JHU Press. ISBN 9781421402185.
    * CCH (2010). _Law, Explanation and Analysis of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: Including Reconciliation Act Impact_. CCH Incorporated. ISBN 9780808022879. 1183pp
    * Feldman, Arthur M. (2011). _Understanding Health Care Reform: Bridging the Gap Between Myth and Reality_. CRC Press. ISBN 9781439879481.
    * Jacobs, Lawrence R.; Skocpol, Theda (2010). _Health Care Reform and American Politics_. Oxford U.P. ISBN 9780199781423.
    * McDonough, John E. (August 2, 2011). _Inside National Health Reform_. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520270190.
    * Brill, Steven (January 5, 2015). _America's Bitter Pill: Money, Politics, Back-Room Deals, and the Fight to Fix Our Broken Healthcare System_. Random House. ISBN 978-0812996951.
    * Heavey, Susan (February 18, 2011). "Repealing healthcare law would cost $210 bln: CBO". _Reuters_. Retrieved  August 14, 2016.
    * "Letter to the Honorable John Boehner providing an estimate for H.R. 6079, the Repeal of Obamacare Act". Congressional Budget Office. July 24, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2012.
    * "An Analysis of Health Insurance Premiums Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act". Cbo.gov. November 30, 2009. Retrieved June 29, 2012.
    * "Analysis Of A Permanent Prohibition On Implementing The Major Health Care Legislation Enacted In March 2010". Congressional Budget Office. May 26, 2011. Retrieved April 1, 2012.
    * Glied, Sherry (December 2013). "How States Stand to Gain or Lose Federal Funds by Opting In or Out of the Medicaid Expansion" (PDF). Commonwealth Fund. Retrieved February 20, 2016.
    * "Paternalism 2.0". _The Economist_. August 23, 2014. Retrieved  January 19, 2015.
    * Trish Riley; Jane Hyatt Thorpe. "Multi-State Plans Under the Affordable Care Act" (PDF). George Washington University Medical Center, Department of Health Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2013.
    * "Beyond the pledges: Where the states stand on Medicaid". The Advisory Board Company. July 26, 2013. Retrieved August 27, 2013.
    * Sarah Kliff (May 5, 2013). "Florida rejects Medicaid expansion, leaves 1 million uninsured". _The Washington Post_ (WP5513). Retrieved  May 24, 2013.
    * Timm, Jane C. (October 23, 2018). "Fact check: Trump claims GOP is protecting people with pre-existing conditions. Evidence says otherwise". NBC News. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
    

### Preliminary CBO documents

    
        * Patient Protection And Affordable Care Act, Incorporating The Manager's Amendment, December 19, 2009 
      * Effects Of The Patient Protection And Affordable Care Act On The Federal Budget And The Balance In The Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (December 23, 2009)
      * Estimated Effect Of The Patient Protection And Affordable Care Act (Incorporating The Manager's Amendment) On The Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (December 23, 2009)
    * Base Analysis – H.R. 3590, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, November 18, 2009.
    

(The additional and/or related CBO reporting that follows can be accessed from
the above link)

    
          * Estimated Distribution Of Individual Mandate Penalties (November 20, 2009)
      * Estimated Effects On Medicare Advantage Enrollment And Benefits Not Covered By Medicare (November 21, 2009)
      * Estimated Effects On The Status Of The Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (November 21, 2009)
      * Estimated Average Premiums Under Current Law (December 5, 2009)
      * Additional Information About Employment-Based Coverage (December 7, 2009)
      * Budgetary Treatment Of Proposals To Regulate Medical Loss Ratios (December 13, 2009)
    

### CMS Estimates of the impact of P.L. 111-148

    
        * Estimated Financial Effects of the "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act", as Amended. April 22, 2010.
    * Estimated Effects of the "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act", as Amended, on the Year of Exhaustion for the Part A Trust Fund, Part B Premiums, and Part A and Part B Coinsurance Amounts. April 22, 2010.
    

### CMS Estimates of the impact of H.R. 3590

    
        * Estimated Financial Effects of the "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009", as Proposed by the Senate Majority Leader on November 18, 2009. December 10, 2009.
    * Estimated Effects of the "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" on the Year of Exhaustion for the Part A Trust Fund, Part B Premiums, and Part A and Part B Coinsurance Amounts. December 10, 2009.
    

### Senate Finance Committee meetings

    
        * Senate Finance Committee Hearings for the 111th Congress recorded by C-SPAN; also available from Finance.Senate.Gov (accessed April 1, 2012).
    

## External links

**Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act** at Wikipedia's sister projects

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/27px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News from Wikinews
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
    

### PPACA text

    
        * Codification in U.S. Code is generally at 42 U.S.C. 18001 _et sqq._ To read it, start at GPO FDsys by selecting, in the Year menu, the most recent year that lists Title 42. In Title 42, seek section 18001 and subsequent sections.
    * Public Law 111–148 after consolidating the amendments made by PPACA Title X and by HCERA.
    * Full text, summary, background, provisions and more, via Democratic Policy Committee (Senate.gov)
    * Public Law 111–148 U.S. Government Printing Office
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Affordable Care Act

* * *

Key articles|

    
        * Affordable Care Act (Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010)
    * Provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
    * Health insurance marketplace
    * Contraceptives mandate
    * Executive Order 13535
    

Provisions|

    
        * Essential health benefits
    * Physician Payments Sunshine Act
    * Authority for Mandate Delay Act (H.R. 2667; 113th Congress)
    * Contraceptive mandate (United States)
    * Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute
    

Constitutional challenges|

    
        * Constitutional challenges to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
    * National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius
    * Coons v. Geithner
    

Health insurance marketplaces|

    
        * HealthCare.gov, an option for all states
    * AR (Arkansas Health Connector)
    * CA (Covered California)
    * CO (Connect for Health Colorado)
    * CT (Access Health CT)
    * DC (DC Health Link)
    * HI (Hawaii Health Connector)
    * ID (Your Health Idaho)
    * IL (Illinois Health Benefits Exchange)
    * KY (Kynect)
    * MD (Maryland Health Connection)
    * MA (Health Insurance Connector)
    * MN (MNsure)
    * NV (Nevada Health Link)
    * NM (New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange)
    * NY (NY State of Health)
    * OR (Cover Oregon)
    * RI (HealthSource RI)
    * VT (Vermont Health Connect)
    * WA (Washington Healthplanfinder)
    

Federal insurance exchange|

HealthCare.gov

Other reform proposals  
from the 111th Congress|

    
        * Affordable Health Care for America Act
    * America's Affordable Health Choices Act of 2009
    * America's Healthy Future Act
    * Healthy Americans Act
    * United States National Health Care Act
    

See also|

    
        * Health care reform in the United States
    * Medicaid
    * Medicare
    * SCHIP
    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

    
        * BNF: cb167251274 (data)
    * GND: 1044012161
    * LCCN: no2010066448
    * VIAF: 176500123
    * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 176500123
    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patient_Protection_and_Affordable_Care_Act&oldid=901315085"

Categories:

    
        * Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
    * 111th United States Congress
    * 2009 in American politics
    * 2009 in American law
    * 2010 in American politics
    * 2010 in American law
    * Controversies in the United States
    * Excises
    * Healthcare reform legislation in the United States
    * Internal Revenue Code
    * Internal Revenue Service
    * Presidency of Barack Obama
    * United States federal health legislation
    * Omnibus legislation
    * Acts of the 111th United States Congress
    * March 2010 events in the United States
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Pages with login required references or sources
    * All articles with dead external links
    * Articles with dead external links from November 2017
    * Articles with permanently dead external links
    * Articles with dead external links from March 2018
    * CS1: long volume value
    * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
    * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    * Use mdy dates from September 2013
    * Use American English from July 2012
    * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017
    * Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2017
    * All articles with style issues
    * All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed
    * Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from July 2017
    * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016
    * All articles lacking reliable references
    * Articles lacking reliable references from October 2013
    * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013
    * All articles containing potentially dated statements
    * All articles with failed verification
    * Articles with failed verification from May 2016
    * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * View source
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    * Wikinews
    * Wikisource
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * العربية
    * Català
    * Čeština
    * Dansk
    * Deutsch
    * Español
    * فارسی
    * Français
    * 한국어
    * Bahasa Indonesia
    * עברית
    * Nederlands
    * 日本語
    * Norsk
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Русский
    * Simple English
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * தமிழ்
    * ไทย
    * Українська
    * Tiếng Việt
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 11 June 2019, at 02:51 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

