

Toggle navigation __ Search for: TruthFinder-Infomania

    
        * Relationships
      * Dating
      * Family
      * Reunions
    * Culture
      * Lifestyle
      * Celebrity
      * Psychology
    * Security
      * Safety
      * Crime
      * Dark Web
    * TruthFinder News
    
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Google+
    * YouTube
    * RSS
    * Pinterest
    * __ Search for:
    

Search TruthFinder Now

All States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut
Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky
Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri
Montana Nebraska New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina
North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina
South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington Washington D.C.
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Search

# How To Spot (And Defeat) A Stubborn Internet Troll

__February 07, 2018

![ How To Spot \(And Defeat\) A Stubborn Internet

Troll](https://www.truthfinder.com/infomania/img/posts/February2018/SiZrlmbcO9Exo6kuAs3G.jpg?w=211&h=122&q=40&blur=10&s=0745cfabffd83e8fa893daaa8846b9f5)

![Melanie Fourie](//storage.googleapis.com/tcg-

content/infomania/users/December2017/nlw9DnmgIjCBloPjorB2.jpg)

By Melanie Fourie

View more articles

Many of us have been there. You're engaged in an interesting conversation on a
forum, when suddenly, the rudest, most abrasive, off-the-topic person appears
out of nowhere.

These obnoxious types are known as trolls, and they seem determined to create
discord and goad everyone into a hissy fit. They also aim to throw everyone
off with their comments, GIFs, images, or video content.

Sometimes, the information they spread can truly rattle you, and you just wish
you can prove they're not for real. If that's you, look no further, because
TruthFinder's Deep Web search will help you ascertain whether their identity
is legitimate or not. Here's the A-Z on trolls.

## How To Spot A Troll

Internet trolls do what they do for varying reasons. There's the self-centered
spammer troll, whose primary reason for trolling is to promote their website,
eBooks, links, or other promotional material.

Then you get the cussing troll, who does nothing but use expletives in capital
letters. As abrasive as these may seem, boredom is usually the reasoning
behind this, although you should never takes threats lightly.

The egotistic troll loves to share their opinion, even though they may not
have the slightest interest in the topic at hand. These are basically the
types who love to show off and appear intelligent. You'll spot them with their
lengthy know-it-all explanations.

![Glasses on computer

keyboard](data:image/gif;base64,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)

Have you ever been online and experienced a barrage of hateful remarks and
insults? If so, you've been attacked by the hater troll, whose primary goal is
to insult everyone who crosses their path.

Excessive debates and the need to be right could also indicate that you have a
troll in your midst.

### Outsmart A Troll

According to _Forbes_ _,_ creating a policy for user comments is ideal, as it
lays down the law as to what types of comments are allowed. The Huffington
Post is one such platform, where a concrete commentary policy is in place.

You may also assign moderators to your website that have the authority to
delete troll-like comments and ban users who don't adhere to your rules.

Having a webmaster worth their salt also comes in handy here, as they could
block IP addresses linked to troll attacks and use blacklists and white lists
to separate the trolls from your legitimate audience. You could also warn
trolls that you are going to report their IP address, as they hate being
exposed.

![Anonymous mask internet

troll](data:image/gif;base64,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)

Trolls thrive on attention, and their primary objective is to get everyone
emotionally charged. If you ignore or avoid arguing with them, they would
simply run out of steam.

You may also ask them for supporting data, such as domain names or email
addresses, which could be very easily confirmed. If they provide these to back
up their claims and you cannot verify them, you could simply oust them on the
public forum.

Use the information a troll has given you on TruthFinder's Deep Web search.
You'll quickly determine if their identity is real or not. You may then decide
if you want to ignore, ban, or report them.

#### Comments

DISCLAIMER: It is PROHIBITED by law to use our service or the information it
provides to make decisions about consumer credit, employment, insurance,
tenant screening, or for any other purpose subject to the Fair Credit
Reporting Act, 15 USC 1681 et seq. TruthFinder does not provide consumer
reports and is not a consumer reporting agency. The information available on
our website may not be 100% accurate, complete, or up to date, so do not use
this information as a substitute for your own due dilligence, especially if
you have concerns about a person’s criminal history. TruthFinder does not make
any representation or warranty about the accuracy of the information available
through our website or about the character or integrity of the person about
whom you inquire. For more information, please review TruthFinder Terms of
Use.

![Melanie Fourie](//storage.googleapis.com/tcg-

content/infomania/users/December2017/nlw9DnmgIjCBloPjorB2.jpg)

By Melanie Fourie

what's hot

    
        * 01
    

How To Do Your Own Advanced Background Check Online _0_

    
        * 02
    

Want To Know More About TruthFinder? Here 's An Inside Look _0_

    
        * 03
    

Subtle Signs Of Cheating In Your Long Distance Relationship _0_

Search Public Records Online

Search TruthFinder Now

All States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut
Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky
Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri
Montana Nebraska New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina
North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina
South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington Washington D.C.
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Search

    
        * 04
    

4 Reasons Why You Shouldn't Date A Married Man _0_

    
        * 05
    

With This Tool, You Could Track Down Your Dad Today _0_

    
        * 06
    

The Ultimate Guide To Background Check Information _0_

    
        * 07
    

How To Find Long Lost Family Members You Never Met _0_

    
        * 08
    

How To Catch A Cheater? 10 Ingenious Ways To Find The Truth! _0_

    
        * 09
    

New Research Reveals The Surprising Warning Signs Of Cheating _0_

    
        * 10
    

13 Infamous Celebrity Sex Offender Scandals — Prepare To Be Shocked! _0_

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Share on Twitter
    * Share on Google+
    * Share on Pinterest
    * Share on LinkedIn
    * Share by email
    

Navigate

    
        * TruthFinder Reviews
    * TruthFinder Help
    * Sitemap
    

__Try theTruthFinder App on Android.

Find Real Criminal Records

Try searching your girlfriend or boyfriend

Search

Uncover Hidden Social Profiles

Try searching someone you know

Search

Online Background Checks

Try searching yourself

Search

Copyright (C) 2019 All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

