

Annonceinfo ![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=16956;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20064;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20065;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20066;cre=img)

![Home](/sites/all/themes/sciencenordic/logo.png)

Search:

    
        * About ScienceNordic
    * 中文
    
    * Health
    * Society & Culture
    * Environment
    * Technology
    * Agriculture & Fisheries
    * Natural Sciences
    * Blogs
    
    * Research & Study
    

# Genetic defect makes some nearly immune to morphine

August 17, 2016 - 06:00

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/24x24/ntnu.JPG)Article
from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and Technology

### When one patient received 60 times the normal dose of morphine, and still

didn’t notice anything, the doctor called the scientists at NTNU.

Keywords: pain management

SendPDFPrint

By: Anne Sliper Midling, gemini.no

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/620x/morfin.jpg)

Around 50,000 Norwegians have a genetic variation that means they need a
significantly higher dose of painkillers than the average person. Hundreds of
people in Norway are completely unresponsive to opioids, such as morphine.
(Illustrative photo: Colourbox)

For the first time, researchers have documented that about one in every
hundred Norwegians needs a double dose of pain medication to get the same
effect as other people.

About 50,000 people need a significantly higher dose than normal. And about a
hundred people in Norway are completely resistant to opioids such as morphine.

##### Significant for cancer patients

The findings are of great importance for patients when they are operated on,
or for individuals who are in severe pain - such as cancer patients.

A few years ago, Pal Klepstad, a professor at NTNU and an anaesthesiologist at
St. Olav's Hospital in Trondheim, received a call from a physician colleague
in western Norway. What started out as a routine operation subsequently turned
out to solve a riddle among doctors and researchers:

Why do some patients require much higher doses of pain medication than others?

##### Doctor kept increasing the dose - with no effect

The patient, who was to be operated on for a hernia, had received the standard
dose of a powerful painkiller, remifentanil, but it had no effect. So the
doctor increased the dose. And increased it again. And again. Eventually, the
patient had received 60 times the usual dose. But still he felt no effect. The
doctor was amazed and called Klepstad in Trondheim.

Klepstad contacted fellow professor Frank Skorpen at NTNU's Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health. Together they decided to
investigate. They obtained permission from the patient to examine his genes
via a blood test. Skorpen first tested for the most common genetic variants
that might be suspected of influencing how pain medications work, but found no
clues as to why the drug had no effect.

##### Special gene mutations

Enter NTNU PhD candidate Anne Heidi Skogholt, who was researching the gene
that determines how opioids bind to the brain. When the researchers then
analysed the patient's blood sample more extensively, they understood why the
patient didn't react to 60 times the normal dose of morphine.

The patient had a special gene mutation, which had been described in the
literature only once before - in a person in the United States.

What does it mean to have a gene defect like this?

We all have 46 chromosomes, arranged in 23 pairs. We inherit one chromosome
set from each of our parents. Two of these chromosomes, X and Y, determine our
sex. The patient who was resistant to morphine had the same mutation on both
chromosomes in the same pair. The error causes the body's normal response to
opioid pain killers, such as remifentanil, morphine, methadone and fentanyl,
not to work. The opioids bind normally in the brain, but the signal isn't sent
on to stop the pain.

This triggered Skorpen's curiosity: how many people in the Norwegian
population might have this genetic error?

##### Could be suspected of using drugs

Skorpen obtained permission to check 600 healthy blood donors at St. Olav's
Hospital, whose data Professor Ola Dale had collected as part of a related
research project. Skorpen was able to document that approximately one person
out of a hundred had this genetic defect on one chromosome in one pair.

This means that these people would probably need a double dose of opioid pain
medication to achieve the same effect as people without this error. Skorpen
and Klepstad further examined over 2,000 cancer patients, and calculated that
one person in 40,000 will have this hereditary syndrome on both chromosomes in
the same pair. These are the individuals who are completely insensitive to
opioids.

"Many of the patients who need a double dose could easily be misunderstood by
doctors. They might try to alter their prescriptions to get the effect they
need, and be suspected of wanting to get high. It's important to emphasize
that some patients actually need more painkillers to get the help they need,"
says Klepstad.

##### Totally different treatment

For patients who are resistant to opioids, doctors need to adjust the
treatment, whether the patient is undergoing surgery or has intense pain due
to cancer. One solution may be an epidural pump or anaesthesia.

"It's a simple matter to test whether someone has this genetic defect that
leads to reduced efficacy or insensitivity to opioids," says Skorpen.

"But this is new information, and this test isn't routinely run in hospitals,"
Klepstad adds.

##### The body's natural pain relief

Thirty per cent of people in Norway report that they live with chronic pain.
Skorpen and Klepstad now want to investigate whether there may be more people
with this genetic defect among those who suffer from chronic pain. The gene
error may also mean that the body's natural system for pain relief is not up
to snuff, either. Skorpen and Klepstad will start their investigation with
data from Norway's longitudinal HUNT study.

For the record: The patient who received 60 times the normal dose of
remifentanil was not harmed by it. When the body does not respond to the drug,
nothing happens, and the body excretes this medication relatively quickly.

Country Norway

#### Related content

Adolescents treat everyday aches and pains with Paracetamol Few regular users
of strong painkillers

Tweet

View the discussion thread.

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/46x46/ntnu.JPG)

Partner profile

Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and Technology

NTNU is the second largest of the eight universities in Norway, and has the
main national responsibility for higher education in engineering and
technology. Read more

### Latest news

Jun. 10

### Cancer drug doesn’t work for chronic fatigue

Jun. 7

### Why do schizophrenia patients die earlier than other people?

Jun. 5

### Therapy can help men stop domestic violence

Jun. 4

### What the Swedes learned from the terrorist attack in Stockholm

Jun. 1

### The EU raises the standard of Norwegian gender equality policies

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=16957;cre=img)

### Health - partner news

    
        * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/1_314.jpg)
    

### Higher weight increases risk of psoriasis

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

    
        * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/1_308.jpg)
    

### Common cell type found in autoimmune diseases

News from University of Oslo

    
        * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/video01_0.jpg)
    

### Video works best when it is adapted

News from Norwegian centre for E-health research

    
        * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/ungkan-loping1_0.jpg)
    

### Youth are inactive for too long

News from The Norwegian School of Sport Sciences

    
        * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/fot_0.jpg)
    

### New Hope for the Captain`s Gouty Big Toe

News from University of Oslo

### Inside news

    
        * May. 29
    

### Women in the armed forces – changes over time

    
        * Sep. 17
    

### Join in on the Norwegian National Science Week, 17–28 September

    
        * Jul. 8
    

### Research pays off for companies and society

    
        * Jul. 4
    

### New minimum basic funding requirements in Norway

    
        * Jul. 2
    

### Visiting Oslo? Guided campus tours

All inside news

    
        * Denmark
    * Sweden
    * Norway
    * Finland
    * Iceland
    

### Follow ScienceNordic on

Facebook Twitter News feed

## Today's selected stories

### Cancer drug doesn’t work for chronic fatigue

June 10, 2019 in Health

Cancer drug rituximab has no effect on chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS),
according to a Norwegian study.

Read more

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/300x225/1323994805_0.jpg)

### Latest news

Jun. 10

### Cancer drug doesn’t work for chronic fatigue

Jun. 7

### Why do schizophrenia patients die earlier than other people?

Jun. 5

### Therapy can help men stop domestic violence

Jun. 4

### What the Swedes learned from the terrorist attack in Stockholm

Jun. 1

### The EU raises the standard of Norwegian gender equality policies

May. 31

### Why do Norway and Greece have radically different traffic mortality rates?

May. 29

### Men are stricter than women when it comes to sick leave

May. 28

### From lethal spider toxins to eco-friendly pesticides

(C) ScienceNordic.com Email: editor@sciencenordic.com

**ScienceNordic offices:**  
Copenhagen: c/o Videnskab.dk, Trekronergade 26, 2500 Valby, Denmark. Phone +45
70 70 17 88  
Oslo: c/o Forskning.no, Postbox 5 Torshov, 0412 Oslo, Norway. Phone +47 22 80
98 90

**ScienceNordic.com - Independent news on research in the Nordic countries**

Denmark Norway Sweden Finland Iceland

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

