

![Central Kentucky Right to Life](http://www.ckrtl.org/wp/wp-

content/uploads/2012/11/rtlckylogo_new-300x81.png)

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    

2417 Regency Rd, Suite C, Lexington, KY 40503 (859) 272-3920

    
        * Home
    * About __
      * Contact
      * Donate Now
      * Mission
      * Sponsors
      * Sitemap
    * Education Resources __
      * Chastitiy, Abstinence, & STD Education __
        * Chastity and Abstinence Information
        * Information for Parents – Talking With Your Children About Abstinence
      * Pregnancy, Adoption, Parenting, and Post Abortive Support
      * Pro Life Resources
      * Sidewalk Counseling
    * Events Calendar
    * Legislation __
      * Find Your Legislator __
        * How to Talk to Your Legislator
      * Kentucky Abortion Law
      * Register to Vote
      * Voter Education Resources __
        * Guidelines for Candidate Endorsements
    * Life Issues __
      * Abortion __
        * Abortion Methods
        * Contraceptives and the Morning After Pill
        * Healing After an Abortion
        * Men and Abortion
        * Rape and Incest
        * Roe v Wade Information
        * Abortion in the Black Community
        * Abortion and Breast Cancer
      * Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
      * Human Development __
        * Human Development – Life in the Womb
        * Fetal Pain
        * Prenatal Development Facts
      * Human Trafficking
      * Infanticide
      * Stem Cell Research
    * News __
      * Current Issues and Press Releases __
        * HHS Mandate and Obamacare
      * Kermit Gosnell
      * Newsletters
      * Planned Parenthood __
        * History of Planned Parenthood
        * Planned Parenthood in the News
    

# Human Development - Life in the Womb

# Life in the Womb

## **The First Week of Life**

**Fertilization**

Biologically speaking, fertilization (or conception) is the beginning of human
development. Fertilization normally occurs within several hours of ovulation
(some authors report up to 24 hours) when a man’s sperm combines with a
woman’s egg inside a woman’s uterine tube.

Fertilization begins with the spermatozoon contacting the cells surrounding
the oocyte [egg] and ends with the mixing of the 23 male and 23 female
chromosomes. The result is a single-cell embryo called a zygote, meaning
"yoked or joined together," and it is the first cell of the human body.

The zygote, like the oocyte, is encased by its protective covering, the zona
pellucida _and contains 46 unique chromosomes with the entire genetic
blueprint of a new individual._ Chromosomes contain tightly packed, tightly
coiled molecules called DNA. **_Amazingly, DNA contains all the instructions
needed for this single-cell embryo to develop into an adult._**

## **The Second Week of Life

**

**The primary event of the second week is _implantation._**

Implantation is the process whereby the early embryo embeds into the inner
wall of the mother’s uterus. Implantation begins about 6 days after
fertilization and is complete by about 12 days.

Implantation represents a significant obstacle to the developing embryo. It is
estimated that up to one-half of all embryos fail to successfully implant and
die - often without the mother realizing she is pregnant. Many of these
embryos are thought to have severe genetic abnormalities incompatible with
survival.

By the end of the first week, the embryo has traveled extensively, multiplied
from 1 cell to several hundred, dramatically changed its shape and complexity,
and begun the process of finding permanent housing.

The attachment phase of implantation is briefly discussed in Unit 1. Once
superficial implantation occurs, the embryo begins receiving nourishment
directly from the cells lining the mother’s uterus.1

**HCG - The Pregnancy Hormone**

Approximately 8 days after fertilization, cells from the growing embryo begin
producing a hormone called human chorionic gonadotropin (human (ko-re-on’ik)
(go’nad-o-tro’pin)) or hCG. This hormone is present in a pregnant woman’s
blood and urine almost immediately and is the substance detected by most
pregnancy tests. HCG acts directly to maintain the corpus luteum and enhance
the corpus luteum’s production of estrogen and progesterone. Simply stated,
HCG interrupts the normal menstrual cycle allowing pregnancy to continue.

**Placenta Formation**

Once implantation is complete, the embryo continues to grow inside the wall of
the uterus **_. It’s hard to believe, but development progresses so quickly
that just 10 days after implantation is complete, the embryo’s heart begins to
beat_**

**The Placenta and Umbilical Cord – The All-Purpose Supply Line**

Even before a woman is noticeably pregnant, her intake of food and beverage
passes through the developing placenta and umbilical cord to nourish (or harm)
the growing embryo. The use of harmful substances during pregnancy is doubly
damaging because both the woman and embryo / fetus may suffer significant
harm.

Following implantation, maternal and embryonic tissues combine and begin to
form the placenta (pla-sen’ta).6

Once the placental circulation is in place; nutrients, oxygen, vitamins, and
water in the mother’s blood stream pass through the placenta and umbilical
cord to the embryo (and later the fetus); while carbon dioxide and other waste
flows back to the mother. The best intensive care units found in modern
hospitals hardly rival the placenta’s life-support capabilities.

The yolk sac is another structure vitally important during early development.
This highly vascular structure is surrounded by nutrient-rich fluid and
absorbs these nutrients and delivers them for use by the embryo. This method
of nutrition continues until the placenta becomes more fully developed and
begins functioning. The yolk sac is also the site where the first blood cells
form and where reproductive cells, or germ cells, originate. Additionally, a
portion of the yolk sac is drawn into the embryo forming the lining of the
digestive tract.

## **Week 3-4 of Life**

**Vital Systems – The Beating Heart**

Only 3 weeks and 1 day after fertilization - the heart begins to beat. By 4
weeks, the heart typically beats between 105 and 121 times per minute.

The 4-week embryo is less than 1/100th of an inch long.

## **Week 4-5 of Life

**

The brain continues growing at an incredible rate. Between 4 and 5 weeks, the
3 primary vesicles divide into 5 secondary vesicles. During this time, the
head makes up about one-third of the embryo’s entire size. An early form of
the cerebellum appears by 4 to 4½ weeks; this area of the brain will later
control muscle control and coordination.

The respiratory system is progressing as 2 primary lung buds form the
beginning of the right and left lungs. By 4½ weeks, the right and left
mainstem bronchi, the major airways to the right and left lungs respectively,
are well established. They begin dividing into the lobar pattern seen in the
adult – 3 lobes on the right and 2 on the left.

By 5 weeks, the embryo’s liver is producing blood cells.

Development of the stomach, esophagus, pancreas, and the small and large
intestines is all underway.

The permanent kidneys appear by 5 weeks.

Next to the kidneys, the gonads, or reproductive organs, are developing. These
will eventually become ovaries in the female and testes in the male.

The embryo’s endocrine system is also developing. This system of glands
regulates the release of hormones throughout a person’s life. The pituitary
(pi-tu’i-tar-e) gland forms at the base of the brain during week 5 and begins
secreting growth hormone and the hormone ACTH which stimulates further growth
of the adrenal glands.

The limb buds continue to grow and by five weeks the embryo develops hand
plates.

## **Week 5-6 of Life

**

Cartilage formation begins by 5½ weeks.

By 6 weeks a portion of the brain called the cerebral cortex appears. Nerve
cells, or neurons, in the spinal cord now begin to develop specialized
connections. These connections, where neurons meet and communicate with one
another, are called synapses.

Though a pregnant woman does not feel movement for at least another 8 to 10
weeks, the embryo begins to move between 5 and 6 weeks. The embryo’s first
movements are both spontaneous and reflexive. A light touch to the mouth area
causes the embryo to reflexively withdraw its head, while the embryo’s trunk
will twist spontaneously. Movements are essential for the normal development
of bones and joints.

By 5½ weeks, nipples appear near the embryo’s underarm. We will see their
location change as they reach their final position on the chest wall.

The diaphragm (di’a-fram), the primary muscle used in breathing, is largely
formed by 6 weeks.

## **Week 6-7 of Life

**

The 6-week embryo measures less than ¼ of an inch long from head to rump.

The embryo has brainwaves by 6 weeks, 2 days!

From 6 to 6½ weeks, the cerebral vesicles will double in size. Individualized
brainwaves recorded via electroencephalogram, or EEG, have been reported as
early as 6 weeks, 2 days.

Also by 7 weeks, cell groupings resembling taste buds appear on the tongue and
hiccups begin. Nasal plugs are prominent at this time and will persist for
another 6 weeks or so.

By 7 weeks, the heart has 4 chambers.

By 6½ weeks, the elbows are distinct and the embryo begins moving both hands.
The fingers are also starting to separate.

The foot plate and ankle also emerge while toes and metatarsal (met’a-tar’sal)
bones begin to form in the feet. Joint development is underway and the onset
of primary muscle fiber formation indicates the embryo’s muscles are growing.

Babies continue to fascinate themselves and us by moving their hands – an
ability they have been practicing long before birth.

The hands and feet change dramatically between 6 and 7 weeks as separate
fingers and toes begin to emerge. At 6 weeks the hand plates develop a subtle
flattening between the digital rays. By 6 weeks, 2 days the hand takes on a
polygon shape; prominent notches appear between the digital rays by 7 weeks
and individual fingers are fully separated by 7½ weeks.

Also, by 7 weeks, the embryo moves the legs and exhibits a startle response.

The immune system is maturing, as evidenced by the presence of B-lymphocytes
in the liver. After birth and relocation away from the protection of the womb,
these lymphocytes will produce proteins called antibodies to fight infection.

By 7 weeks, the ovaries appear in the female embryo. In the male embryo, a
gene on the Y-chromosome produces a substance causing the testes to begin to
differentiate.

_Did you know the oldest bones in your body are your collar bone and jaw?
These bones begin to develop in the womb by 7 weeks after fertilization._

## **Week 7-8 of Life

**

From 7 to 7½ weeks, tendons attach leg muscles to bones, and knee joints
appear. Also by 7½ weeks, the hands can be brought together, as can the feet.
The embryo also kicks, and will jump if startled.

Also by 7 to 7½ weeks, nephrons, the basic filtration units in the kidneys,
begin to form.

By 8 weeks the brain is highly developed and makes up approximately 43 percent
of the embryo’s total weight. Growth continues at an extraordinary rate. One
of the major control centers for the body - the hypothalamus - begins to take
form. The hypothalamus eventually controls body temperature, heart rate, blood
pressure, fluid balance, and the secretion of vitally important hormones by
the pituitary gland.

Our body’s temperature is regulated by the hypothalamus – an important
structure which begins developing within the 8-week embryo’s brain.

Slowly or rapidly, singularly or repetitively, spontaneously or reflexively,
the embryo continues to practice the movements begun earlier and to move in
new ways. Frequently, hands will touch the face and the head will turn. The
many muscles of the face are now largely well developed in preparation for the
complex facial expressions to follow. Touching the embryo can produce
squinting, jaw movement, grasping motions, and toe pointing.

The earliest sign of right- or left-handedness begins around eight weeks, with
75 percent of embryos already exhibiting right arm dominance. Left hand
dominance and no preference comprise the other 25 percent.

The diaphragm muscle is completely formed by eight weeks and intermittent
breathing motions begin.

**_8 weeks marks the end of the embryonic period. During this time, the human
embryo has grown from a single cell into nearly 1 billion cells forming over
4000 distinct anatomic structures. The embryo now possesses more than 90
percent of the structures found in the adult._**

## **__ Week 8-9 of Life

**

By 8 weeks the developing human measures about a ½ inch from head to rump.

By the beginning of the fetal period, synapses, or connections between nerve
cells, are found within the cerebral cortex. The fetal period continues until
birth.

By 9 weeks thumb sucking begins and the fetus may swallow amniotic fluid. The
fetus can also grasp an object, move the head forward and back, open and close
the jaw, move the tongue, sigh, and stretch.

By 9 weeks the fetus will grasp an object, an action we continue to see in
newborns and small children exploring the world about them.

By 9 weeks, the nerve receptors in the face, palms of the hands, and soles of
the feet can sense and respond to light touch. Following a light touch on the
sole of the foot, the fetus will bend the hip and knee and may curl the toes.

Similar to a child having his foot tickled, the 9-week fetus will withdraw if
the sole of the foot is lightly touched.

**_Long before birth, the female fetus is already developing reproductive
cells which may one day help form yet another generation._**

The eyelids fuse completely shut by 9 weeks.

The peristalsis previously restricted to the large intestine begins in the
small intestine.

In female fetuses the uterus is identifiable by 9 weeks Outside the body, the
genitalia begin to differentiate as either male or female.

## **Week 9-10 of Life

**

The fetus experiences a huge burst of growth between 9 and 10 weeks as weight
increases approximately 77%.

The corpus callosum, which connects the left and right sides of the brain,
begins to develop at this time.

Upon stimulation of the upper eyelid, the eyes roll downward. This marks the
first sign of eye movement. Vocal cords are developing. The fetus yawns and
often opens and closes the jaw as early as 9½ weeks. Most fetuses suck their
thumbs (usually preferring the right thumb).

At the ends of the fingers and toes, nails begin to emerge, as do
fingerprints. These patterns can be used for identification throughout life.

## **Week 10-11 of Life

**

By 11 weeks, the nose and lips are completely formed. The fetus can now
produce complex facial expressions and, according to one group of researchers,
is capable of smiling. As with every other body part, facial appearance will
change at each stage of the life cycle

Though gender is determined at fertilization, genitalia now distinguish male
from female.

## **Week 11-12 of Life

**

Between 11 and 12 weeks, a second huge burst of growth occurs as weight
increases by roughly 58%. 12 weeks also marks the end of the first trimester
of pregnancy.

The taste bud cells that appeared by 7 weeks have matured into discrete taste
buds, but are still scattered throughout the mouth. By birth, the taste buds
will be confined to the tongue and palate or roof of the mouth.

By 12 weeks, the arms have grown to approximate their final proportion
relative to body size. As usual, leg development is slower than arm
development and the legs still have not achieved their final proportion.

The whole body surface, except the top of the head and the back, responds to
light touch.

## **Months 3-4 of Life

**

The 14-week fetus weighs about 2 ounces and measures slightly less than 5
inches from head to heel.

A division between the oral and nasal cavities forms this week as the opening
in the roof of the mouth fuses shut. Fetuses often touch their mouths,
sometimes up to 50 times per hour. The jaw opens reflexively in response to
pressure at the base of the thumb.

Gender dependent developmental differences appear for the first time starting
at 14 weeks. For instance, female fetuses exhibit mouth movement more
frequently than males and this difference increases with advancing age. In
contrast to the withdrawal response seen earlier, stimulation near the mouth
now evokes a turn toward the stimulus while the fetus opens the mouth. This
reflex mimics the rooting reflex which persists after birth to help the
newborn find his or her mother’s nipple during breastfeeding.

Although movement begins in the six week embryo, a pregnant woman first senses
fetal movement between 14 and 18 weeks. Traditionally, this event has been
called quickening.

A fetus can feel pain! By 16 weeks, the fetus produces many of the same
hormones found in adults. Painful procedures trigger a hormonal stress
response. As in newborns and adults, pain is followed by the release of
cortisol (kor’ti’sol), ß-endorphins (ba’ta en’dor-finz), and norepinephrine
(nor’ep’i-nef’rin) into the blood stream.

By 15 weeks stem cells arrive and multiply in the bone marrow. Most blood cell
formation will eventually occur here. In the respiratory system, the bronchial
tree is now nearly complete. All airways contain smooth muscle and nerve
bundles.

## **Month 4-5 of Life

**

The 16-week fetus weighs about 4 ounces and measures slightly less than 7
inches from head to heel.

By 19 weeks, more than 20 million heartbeats have occurred.

The 18-week fetus weighs around 6 ounces and measures about 8 inches from head
to heel.

The 20-week fetus weighs about 9 ounces and measures about 10 inches from head
to heel.

In the eye, the retina now has discrete layers. The vast majority of neuron
multiplication in the brain is complete by 16 weeks. In the teeth, enamel
begins to develop between 16 and 20 weeks. Beginning at 18 weeks, ultrasound
scans show a distinct type of motion in the fetal voice box, or larynx
(lar’ingks), similar to movements made during speaking.

From 18 to 20 weeks, fetal movement, breathing activity, and heart rate begin
to follow daily cycles called circadian (ser-ka’de-an) rhythms; the same
rhythms that characterize various biological activities throughout life.

A protective white substance, called vernix caseosa (ver’niks caseo’sa), now
encases the fetus, protecting the skin from exposure to amniotic fluid.

By about 19 weeks, the number of oogonia within the ovaries of a female fetus
peaks at approximately 7 million. From this point, not only does oogonia
production end forever, but their numbers decrease to about 2 million by
birth. These oogonia give rise to several thousand primary oocytes.

The inner ear, fully formed by 20 weeks, contributes to the body’s ability to
maintain balance.

The cochlea is the frequency analyzer of the ear and converts sound waves of
varying frequencies into electrical impulses which are then communicated to
the brain. By 20 weeks it reaches adult size within the fully developed inner
ear.

From now on, the fetus will respond to a growing medley of sounds.

## **Month 5-6 of Life

**

With specialized medical care some fetuses can survive outside the womb by 22
weeks with survival rates reported as high as 40% in some medical centers.

The 22-week fetus weighs slightly less than 1 pound and measures about 11
inches from head to heel.

In the growing fetus, the 2 sides of the brain begin to differentiate
asymmetrically as early as 20 weeks.

The structure of the fetal gastrointestinal tract has developed to approximate
that of the newborn although full function is still weeks away.

Rapid eye movement, or REM, a term describing the distinct pattern of eye
motions seen during the stage of sleep where dreaming occurs,3 begins between
18 and 21 weeks.

By 24 weeks, the eyelids reopen and the fetus exhibits a blink-startle
response. This reaction to sudden, loud noises typically develops earlier in
the female fetus. This response is very much like what adults and children
exhibit in the same situation.

When exposed to a loud noise, the fetal heart rate increases, as does the rate
of movement. Excessive fetal swallowing following exposure to loud noise may
lead to a loss of amniotic fluid. Possible long-term consequences for fetuses
are the same as consequences for children and adults: hearing loss and
deafness.1

The fetus also responds to pressure, movement, pain, hot and cold, taste, and
light.

## **Month 6-7 of Life

**

The 24-week fetus weighs about 1¼ pounds and measures about 12 inches from
head to heel.

By 24 weeks more than 30 million heartbeats have occurred.

24-week fetuses have impressive lung development as primitive gas exchange now
becomes possible in the event of premature birth. Terminal sacs now appear
which will eventually become alveoli. Alveoli become the site for the
oxygen/carbon dioxide exchange and are essential for survival outside of the
womb.

By 24 weeks the lung cells begin to produce a substance called surfactant, a
substance absolutely necessary for successful gas exchange. The absence of
this substance is often a limiting factor in the viability of premature
newborns, as its absence precludes successful breathing. Neonatologists, or
doctors specializing in the care of newborns, can introduce a drug form of
surfactant to the lungs of premature babies, stretching viability, or the age
at which survival outside the womb becomes possible, even farther back in
pregnancy.

By 25 weeks, breathing motions may occur up to 44 times per minute.

By 26 weeks sudden, loud noises may trigger a blink-startle response, which
may increase movement, heart rate, and swallowing.

The 26-week fetus weighs almost 2 pounds and measures about 14 inches from
head to heel.

At this point, the brain takes off on a growth spurt of its own. This brain
growth consumes more than 50 percent of the energy used by the fetus and
results in a brain weight increase between 400 and 500 percent.

The fetus has developed a relatively plump, less wrinkled appearance due to
increased deposits of body fat underneath the skin.

Increasingly sensitive to different sound frequencies, the fetus is now able
to hear many new noises with greater accuracy.

A sweet substance placed in the amniotic fluid increases the rate of fetal
swallowing. In contrast, decreased fetal swallowing follows the introduction
of a bitter substance.11 Altered facial expressions often follow. A pregnant
woman’s dietary intake can reach the fetus rather quickly. For instance,
amniotic fluid assumes the odor of garlic within 45 minutes of ingestion by
pregnant women.

## **Month 7-8 of Life

**

By 27 weeks the thigh bones and the foot bones are each about two inches long
(about 5 cm).

By 28 weeks the sense of smell is functioning and eyes produce tears.

The 28-week fetus weighs more than 2½ pounds and measures about 15 inches from
head to heel.

Each day, the adrenal glands produce large amounts of steroid products. The
adrenal glands have doubled in size since week 20, and will double again
before the end of pregnancy.

Breathing movements become more common, occurring 30 – 40% of the time in an
average fetus.

The 30-week fetus weighs about 3¼ pounds and measures about 16 inches from
head to heel.

By 31 weeks more than 40 million heartbeats have occurred. Wrinkles in the
skin are disappearing as more and more fat deposits are formed.

The 32-week fetus weighs about 4 pounds and measures about 17 inches from head
to heel.

Starting at 32 weeks, true alveoli (al-ve’o-li), or air “pocket” cells, begin
forming from alveolar ducts. Development of alveoli continues through birth
and until about 8 years of age.

Studies suggest that towards the end of prenatal development, the fetus has
been developing preferences and tastes based on prenatal experience. For
instance, fetuses whose mothers consumed anise, the substance which gives
licorice candy its flavor, showed a preference for anise after birth. Newborns
without this fetal exposure disliked anise.

_Are you a black jelly bean fan? If you like the licorice-flavored sweets,
chances are your mother probably ate some kind of anise during pregnancy._

## **Month 8-9 of Life

**

The 34-week fetus weighs about 5 pounds and measures about 18 inches from head
to heel.

The fetus hears numerous sounds before birth, with the mother’s voice and
heartbeat dominating other sounds. Studies show that after months of listening
to the mother’s voice, the newborn prefers her voice to any other. The newborn
also prefers female voices to male voices and familiar lullabies heard before
birth to new lullabies after birth. Newborns can distinguish prose passages
heard during the last 6 weeks of pregnancy from new passages, providing
additional evidence of in utero memory formation and learning.

The digestive system further develops as the lower esophageal (e-sof’a-je-al)
sphincter (sfingk’ter), a valve leading to the stomach, begins functioning by
32 weeks.

Blood-filtering groups of capillaries called glomeruli (glo-mar’yu-li) have
completed their formation in the kidneys.

At 35 weeks, the fetus has a firm hand grasp.

## **Month 9 – Delivery**

During the last 11 weeks of pregnancy, the fetus typically doubles in overall
weight, while brain weight doubles in the last 9 weeks of pregnancy.

At term, the umbilical cord is typically 20 to 24 inches long.

At full-term birth, newborn babies typically weigh between 6 and 9 pounds and
measure between 18 and 21 inches from head to heel.

The eye of the full-term fetus or newborn has achieved roughly 75% of its
adult size and about two-thirds its adult weight.

Labor is initiated by the fetus, ideally around 40 weeks, leading to
childbirth. Powerful contractions of the uterus result in childbirth and the
expulsion of the placenta, which now weighs about 1/6th as much as the
newborn. At birth, the oxygen received through the placenta is suddenly
replaced by the onset of air breathing

**_From fertilization to birth and beyond, human development is dynamic,
continuous, and complex. New discoveries about this fascinating process
increasingly show the vital impact of fetal development on lifelong health. As
our understanding of early human development advances, so too will our ability
to enhance health – both before and after birth._**

Information obtained from The Endowment for Human Development :
http://www.ehd.org/index.php

### Donate Now

Donate Now

### Need Help?

Get information here if you're pregnant, confused about your choices, having
relationship problems, hurting from a past abortion, or need help providing
for your child.

### The Genesis 1:27 Project

Click here for more info and to sign up for The Genesis 1:27 Project - a
project dedicated to praying to end abortion

### Upcoming Events

There are no upcoming events.

View Calendar __

__ Add

    
        * __Add to Timely Calendar
    * __Add to Google
    * __Add to Outlook
    * __Add to Apple Calendar
    * __Add to other calendar
    * __Export to XML
    

### Helpful Pregnancy Links

    
        * Assurance Care Center
    * Baby Center
    * Birthright International
    * Knowledge is Empowering
    * Lifecall - Crisis Pregnancy Centers
    

(c) 2019 Central Kentucky Right to Life

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

