

Thrillist ![Thrillist](/images/thrillist/logos/tl_logo_paper.png)

    
        * Watch
    * Food & Drink 
    * Travel 
    * Entertainment 
    * Cities
    

Thrillist

    
        * Watch
    
    * Food & Drink 
    * Travel 
    * Entertainment 
    * Cities
    
    * search
    

view search area view search area

### Popular Searches

    
          * New Orleans 
      * Las Vegas 
      * San Francisco 
      * Chicago
    

### Top Results

Thrillist

    
        * view navigation area
    * view search area view search area view search area
    

search Thrillist

Travel

# 14 Weird and Crazy Facts About Mexico

By Meagan Drillinger Published On 02/11/2015

@drillinjourneys

By Meagan Drillinger @drillinjourneys Published On 02/11/2015

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Tweet this article
    * Pin it 
    * Email
    

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1410100/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile.jpg)

Shutterstock (edited)

There's a decent chance you've been to Mexico before, because it’s like...
right there. So you don't need anyone to list reasons why it’s awesome (Tacos!
Beaches! Tequila!). But just in case you were actually curious about what's
going on beneath that spicy, sunny, oh-my-god-take-me-there-now surface,
here's a smattering of strange and true facts about America's southern
neighbor.

Recommended Video

Eat

##### This Service Ships You Food From ANYWHERE in the Country in Just 24

Hours!

#### related

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1397306/size/tmg-inline_related_item.jpg)

##### The 6 Best Mexican Islands That Aren't Cozumel

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1409948/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile;jpeg_quality=20.jpg)

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it
    

Wikimedia Commons

## 1. The Caesar salad was invented here

Julius Caesar did not invent the Caesar salad. And it wasn't Caesar Augustus,
either, for that matter. No, it was the brainchild of Caesar Cardini, an
Italian-American restaurateur and chef who dreamt up the dish at his Tijuana
restaurant. Or so legend has it. The origin has been disputed, as Livio
Santini, who worked in Caesar's restaurant, claimed to have brought the salad
to the world from his mother's recipe. All that's for sure: that's a damn good
salad.

## 2. There's a 3ft tamale that weighs 150 pounds

Sure, you've probably had tamales. And if you live in Chicago, you've probably
even seen the Tamale Guy. But you haven't dominated _el zacahuil_. This
tamale, typical of the state of San Luis Potosi, is a 3ft monstrosity of
chile, spices, and hunks of pork or turkey, typically served on grilled banana
leaves with pickled jalapeños. If you have tackled one of these, well, you
probably won't make it to the end of this list, either from a food coma or
heart attack. But good work.

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1409950/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile;jpeg_quality=20.jpg)

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it
    

Flickr/Francisco Soto

## 3. Mexico has the world’s smallest volcano

Hawaii has Mauna Loa, the world’s largest volcano. Well, Hawaii can keep it,
because in Mexico, it's about the motion in the magma, not size of the
stratovolcano. The Cuexcomate volcano outside the city of Puebla is just 43ft-
tall. To put it into perspective: that's not even half as tall as the Statue
of Liberty, or equal to about 6.45 LeBron James stacked on top of one another.
But why would you have six LeBrons, let alone 0.45 of him? Let's move on...

    1. Perform the anthem correctly, or else... The Mexican National Anthem (Himno Nacional Mexicano) is nothing to joke about. There are actually nine or 10 articles in a chapter of the law that go into detail about how to properly honor and perform the national anthem. If you play it incorrectly, you will be fined, and in some cases, will need to issue an apology to the country. Probably shouldn’t even make a joke about it here, in case someone in Mexico is reading.

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1409949/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile;jpeg_quality=20.jpg)

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it
    

Drew Swantak

## 5. Hot chocolate is literally the drink of the Gods

When Hernán Cortés landed on the shores of Mexico, the Aztecs thought he was a
white god, and welcomed him with what they thought was a heavenly beverage:
hot chocolate. How did Cortes repay them? Rape, pillage, and burning their
homes to the ground. It wasn't on account of the hot chocolate being bad. He
just was not a pleasant guy.

    1. Mayans fought with hornets Swords and spears are all fine and good, but if you ask the Mayans, a tad simple. A more effective method of scaring the sh*t out of enemies: harnessing a nest of hornets and throwing them into an oncoming attack. It's like Wu Tang Clan's dream fights, all rolled into one. OK, they were killa bees, but you get the point.

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1409952/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile;jpeg_quality=20.jpg)

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it
    

ITU Pitctures

## 7. The (sometimes) world’s richest man lives there

Okay, to be fair, Bill Gates is currently the richest man in the world. But he
keeps duking it out for that no. 1 slot with Carlos Slim, the Mexican business
magnate, who's currently valued at $72 billion. To put it into perspective,
he's worth 7% of Mexico's entire GDP. For Bill Gates to be worth that much in
the US, he'd need to have more than $900 billion, and own "Alcoa, Phillip
Morris, Sears, Best Buy, TGIFriday’s, Dunkin’ Donuts, Marriott, Citibank, and
JetBlue."

    1. Cinco de Mayo is actually NBD Every May 5, Americans drink margaritas and wear sombreros, eat guacamole, and just assume that their neighbors to the south are doing the same. Reality check: they aren’t, and they think you look stupid. Not at all Mexico's Independence Day, Cinco de Mayo is a very, very minor celebration to highlight the Mexican army’s underdog victory over French troops at the Battle of Puebla. It'd be like Canadians going crazy over Patriot's Day. Actually, Canadians don't get crazy. Bad analogy.

    2. Meteorites are illegal Essentially, anyway. In 2014, the government passed a law requiring federal protection against space threats, most specifically, meteorites. This all came after the Chelyabinsk meteor scared the living crap out of the Ural region of Russia in 2013. Hopefully, Bruce Willis and Ben Affleck learn to speak Spanish before the next Armageddon approaches.

## 10. Mexican hipsters are called Cholombians

Look. At. Those. Haircuts. Asymmetrical, emo-style coifs are all the rage in
parts of Mexico, and the wacky youths who sport them are known as Cholombians.
The _muy_ sexy style involves short spiky hair on top, with long bangs and a
rat tail. HOT.

    1. Mexican kids don’t get presents on Christmas You know how when you’re a kid you wonder how Santa can hit all the houses on Christmas Eve? Well, it's a whole lot easier if he can skip an entire country. Mexican children do not receive presents on Christmas Day. In Mexico, Three Kings Day (El Dia de Reyes), on Jan. 6 is a far bigger deal. So Santa takes like two weeks off, then gets back on the reindeer.

#### related

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/2821895/size/tmg-inline_related_item.jpg)

##### The 31 Best Mexican Restaurants in America

#### related

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1397392/size/tmg-inline_related_item.jpg)

##### Watch Mexico’s Fire Volcano Erupt in a Terrifying Time-Lapse Video

![](//assets3.thrillist.com/v1/image/1409983/size/tmg-

article_default_mobile;jpeg_quality=20.jpg)

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it
    

ChameleonsEye / Shutterstock.com

## 12. Mexico City is bigger than New York City

If you're ever on "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire," and a question comes up
about the largest city in North America, New York City is wrong. Don't blurt
out "NEW YORK. FINAL ANSWER." In fact, the _Distrito Federal_ has about
450,000 more people, or if you added another Staten Island full of people on
to the Big Apple. Just imagine that. An entire second Staten Island filled
with people. **Shudder**

    1. It's also sinking Venice isn’t the only city with a weight limit. Mexico City was built thousands of years ago on what used to be a lake. As a result, the city sinks nearly 10 inches per year. Very much like your grandma, who seems to shrink 10 inches per year and was also built a thousand years ago.

    2. Some Mexicans actually speak Italian Speaking of Venice... there's a pocket of Mexico where people speak the Italian dialect. In the 1800s, a group of Venetians settled in the state of Puebla and founded the city of Chipilo, bringing with them their dairy farming business and language. This Venetian variety is also spoken in parts of Veracruz and Queretaro, so it's not a one-off. In total, Mexicans speak about 60 other languages, too, including a ton of indigenous ones. So don't just assume everyone speaks Spanish. It's just not true.

_**Meagan Drillinger** is a freelance writer for Thrillist. She enjoys a fine
Malbec paired with a McDonald’s #2 meal. Follow her on Twitter, Facebook and
Instagram at @drillinjourneys._

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Tweet this article
    * Pin it 
    * Email
    

Read the Comments

Thrillist ____

LIVE LIFE TO THE THRILLIST

    
        * Advertise With Us 
    * Careers 
    * Press 
    * Cookie Policy 
    * Terms + Conditions 
    * Privacy
    
    * Facebook __
    * YouTube __
    * SnapChat __
    * Instagram __
    * Twitter __
    

subscribe with your email

Group Nine Media __

(C) 2019 Group Nine Media Inc.  
All Rights Reserved.

    
        *     * Food & Drink 
    * Travel 
    * Entertainment 
    * Cities
    
      * Atlanta
      * Atlantic City
      * Austin
      * Boston
      * Charleston
      * Charlotte
      * Chicago
      * Cleveland
      * Dallas
      * Denver
      * Detroit
      * Hamptons
      * Honolulu
      * Houston
      * Indianapolis
      * Las Vegas
      * Los Angeles
      * Louisville
      * Memphis
      * Miami
      * Milwaukee
      * Minneapolis
      * Nashville
      * New Orleans
      * New York
      * Philadelphia
      * Phoenix
      * Pittsburgh
      * Portland
      * San Antonio
      * San Diego
      * San Francisco
      * Seattle
      * Washington DC
      * Amsterdam
      * Berlin
      * London
      * Montreal
      * Paris
      * Toronto
    
    * Want More?
    

Like Us

    
        * Share on Facebook
    * Pin it 
    * Tweet this article
    * Share on Google+
    * Email
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

