

# USCIS processing times

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b4/Ambox_important.svg/40px-

Ambox_important.svg.png)

|

An automated process has detected links on this page on the **local or global
blacklist.** If the links are appropriate you may request whitelisting by
following these instructions; otherwise consider removing or replacing them
with more appropriate links. _(To hide this tag, set the "invisible" field to
"true")_

List of blacklisted links:

    
        * http://www.eb5investors.com/blog/Expediting-an-EB-5-Application
    
    _Triggered by`\beb5investors\\.com\b` on the local blacklist_
    * http://www.eb5investors.com/qa/premium-processing-alternative-available-through-uscis-for-eb5
    
    _Triggered by`\beb5investors\\.com\b` on the local blacklist_
    

---|--- 

The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services is a subdivision of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security that adjudicates petitions and processes
forms related to citizenship, residency, and various kinds of authorization to
live and work in the United States. Many of the forms it processes are
prerequisites for people outside the United States who are not United States
citizens or permanent residents to obtaining visas to enter the United States
in the specified status. Many of the USCIS immigration forms have long
processing times. The USCIS offers some guidance regarding expected processing
times through its website and through reports.[1] This page describes the
USCIS policies, the guidance they offer, and the courses of action in case of
higher processing times.

Note that these processing times do not include the processing times for U.S.
Department of Labor forms (such as Labor Condition Application and labor
certification) that are prerequisites for some USCIS petitions and forms, nor
do they include the National Visa Center wait times for immigrant visa
numbers, the wait time for getting visas from a U.S. consulate abroad, or
border wait times.

## Contents

    
        * 1 Various kinds of USCIS processing
    * 2 The USCIS processing queue
      * 2.1 Processing time goals and backlogs
      * 2.2 Courses of action for delayed processing
    * 3 Reporting of processing times
    * 4 Additional statistics
    * 5 Premium Processing Service
    * 6 See also
    * 7 References
    

## Various kinds of USCIS processing[edit]

The USCIS offers processing time information for many different kinds of
processing:[1][2]

    
        * Processing forms (applications and petitions) at its Service Centers: There are four service centers: California Service Center, Nebraska Service Center, Vermont Service Center, and Texas Service Center. All USCIS immigration forms (but not the naturalization forms) go through Service Centers.[1]
    * Field Office processing: This is the final stage of processing for some forms that also require in-person interviews. These include Form I-485, Form N-400 and Form N-600. Note that when Form I-485 is filed concurrently with Form I-130, then the Form I-130 is first processed at the Service Center and then the Form I-485 is processed at the field office. The total wait time is the sum of the wait times for both forms.[1]
    * National Benefits Center processing: Some USCIS immigration forms go through the NBC. These are Forms I-102, I-131, I-600, I-601A, I-765, I-817, I-824, and I-90.[1]
    * Immigrant Investor Program Office processing: This Office processes Form I-526 petitions whose approval allows one to obtain an EB-5 visa).[1]
    * International Operations Offices processing: International Operations offices are used for Direct Consular Filing for some forms, notably I-130 (most international offices), Form I-360, and Form I-730 (available only in some offices).[1]
    * Administrative Appeals Office processing: This includes processing for appeals to USCIS decisions for most USCIS forms, with the exception of Form I-130 and Form I-360.[3]
    

## The USCIS processing queue[edit]

Each form or petition the USCIS receives is put in a queue for processing once
it is received by the part of the USCIS (typically a service center or field
office) that will process it. The queue that a form is put in depends on two
aspects:[1]

    
        * The service center or field office where the form is being processed.
    * The type of form (note that the form number alone does not determine the queue, because there may be many categories that use the same form number; for instance, Form I-129 is used for many different kinds of temporary work authorization, and each of them has a separate queue). Note that after initial review, if the form is awaiting a response from the applicant (to a Request For Evidence, Notice of Intent to Deny, or request for clarification), the application is placed in "active suspense" and is not part of the queue.
    

The queue operates in a standard first in, first out fashion: a form that is
put in the queue at a later date will start being reviewed or adjudicated at a
later date (there is an exception for those who use the Premium Processing
Service discussed later, that can be used for Form I-129 and Form I-140).

The time between the date of receipt of the form by the service center or
field office and the date it is reviewed is called the "processing time" of
the form. Due to the way the queue operates, the processing times for forms
processed close by in time will be similar. Therefore, to estimate processing
times for forms that are currently being reviewed, it suffices to know the
date of receipt.

### Processing time goals and backlogs[edit]

For each form, USCIS has a processing time goal.[1] These processing time
goals are set by the USCIS Office of Performance and Quality (OPQ)[4] that was
established in January 2010.

If the processing time at a given time for a particular service center and
form is significantly higher than the processing time goal, USCIS may either
increase allocation of resources within the Service Center to process that
form, or (in some extreme cases) reallocate some of the caseload to a
different service center.

Typical reasons for increased backlog include significant additional demands
on USCIS resources due to the introduction of new categories of forms or an
increase in usage of existing forms. For instance, in the aftermath of Barack
Obama's executive action on Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals in June
2012, the USCIS faced increased workloads, and this was one of the factors in
significantly increased wait times for Form I-130 petitions.[5]

### Courses of action for delayed processing[edit]

For Form I-765 applications for an employment authorization document, there is
a promised 90-day processing time. If a Form I-765 application is close to or
beyond the 90-day processing timeframe, the applicant may take the following
actions:[4]

    
        * Contact the USCIS National Customer Service Center
    * Submit a case inquiry using DHS Form 7001 to the Ombudsman's Office
    

For Forms I-129 and I-140, the petitioner may use the Premium Processing
Service to get an initial review within 15 calendar days. The petitioner can
obtain the Premium Processing Service for an already submitted application and
can in fact obtain it electronically. The 15 calendar day clock begins from
the time the petitioner's Premium Processing Service application is received
by the USCIS.

In general, if a petition or application has not received a response even
though the USCIS is showing a later date of applications currently being
processed, the petitioner or applicant can raise the issue with the USCIS
National Customer Service Center.

## Reporting of processing times[edit]

On the 15th of every month, the USCIS publishes information, for each of its
processing queues (i.e., for every combination of service center/field
office/other subdivision and form type) the processing time as observed 45
days ago. For instance, on January 15, 2016, the USCIS published this
information for forms being processed as of November 30, 2015. The 45-day gap
is to allow the USCIS to verify the data for quality.[1][2][4] Due to the
45-day delay in reporting, the information published by USCIS may not be very
helpful to applicants for some forms whose processing times fluctuate
wildly.[4]

The USCIS reports processing times in two formats. For the categories where
the USCIS is meeting its processing time goal, it simply reports the
processing time goal in months. For other forms, the USCIS reports the average
date of receipt for the forms being processed on the date the processing times
were observed. For instance, in the data released on January 15, the USCIS
reported the dates of forms being processed (for each combination of service
center/field office/other subdivision and form category) as of November
30.[1][5]

A few other caveats need to be noted when interpreting reported processing
times:

    
        * **Initial review only; excludes active suspense** : While all forms being processed for initial review are processed in the order in which they were received, forms that are re-processed after receiving a response to a Request For Evidence, Notice of Intent to Deny, or a request for clarification from the applicant may not bear a relationship with the date of receipt of the original form. Forms that are awaiting a response from the applicant are said to be in "active suspense". When reporting processing times, the USCIS removes data on forms in active suspense. This is part of the quality control done by the USCIS and is one of the reasons for the 45-day delay in reporting.[4]
    * **Data skewed by Premium Processing** : The USCIS does not separate out data for petitions that have requested the Premium Processing Service, i.e., its estimate of processing time includes both petitions that have requested Premium Processing and those that have not. While this does not affect form categories ineligible for Premium Processing, it does skew the reported processing times for the forms eligible for Premium Processing. For instance, a Form I-129 petition that did _not_ have a Premium Processing Service request will likely take _more_ time to process than the processing time reported by the USCIS.[4]
    * **Guidelines for processing times for petitions after they receive a response to a RFE or NOID** : There are no general processing times reported for petitions after they receive a response to a RFE or NOID, since it varies from case to case, and it is best to communicate directly with the Service Center.
    

## Additional statistics[edit]

The USCIS also publishes quarterly reports (i.e., once every three months) for
each form giving detailed statistics (by field office/service center location)
of the number of applications received, accepted, denied, and pending.[6]

## Premium Processing Service[edit]

Further information: Premium Processing Service

The USCIS offers a Premium Processing Service at an additional fee of $1225
for Form I-129 (non-immigrant worker) and Form I-140 (immigrant worker)
petitions. The Premium Processing Service has a fee of $1225 and promises an
initial review from the USCIS within 15 calendar days of receipt of the form,
after which time it may approve, deny, or issue a Request For Evidence or
Notice of Intent to Deny.[7] For the special case of cap-subject H-1B visas
where the applications are concentrated in the beginning of April, the start
date for the 15-day countdown is generally delayed due to the huge influx of
applications.[7]

The Premium Processing Service was introduced in 2001 for Form I-129[8] and
extended to Form I-140 in 2006.[9]

The USCIS has been asked to extend the Premium Processing Service to Form
I-526 (for EB-5 investors) and has also formulated proposals to do so, but as
of January 2016, still uses the Premium Processing Service only for Forms
I-129 and I-140.[10][11]

## See also[edit]

    
        * USCIS immigration forms
    * Premium Processing Service
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ "USCIS Processing Time Information". United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Retrieved  January 22, 2015.
    2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Processing Time Reports". American Immigration Lawyers Association. Retrieved  January 24, 2015.
    3. **^** "AAO Processing Times". United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Retrieved  January 24, 2015.
    4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ "Telecon Recap: Application Processing Times: A Conversation with USCIS Office of Performance and Quality". United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Retrieved  January 24, 2015.
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chodorow, Gary (May 3, 2014). "USCIS Processing Times for Immediate Relative I-130s Improving". Law and Border. Retrieved January 17, 2016.
    6. **^** "Immigration and Citizenship Data". United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Retrieved  January 24, 2015.
    7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "How Do I Use the Premium Processing Service?". United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Retrieved  April 4, 2015.
    8. **^** Endelman, Gary (June 12, 2001). "Be Careful of What You Wish For: The Hidden Meaning of Premium Processing Fees". Immigration Daily. Retrieved April 5, 2015.
    9. **^** "New Premium Processing Rules are in Effect" (PDF). May 23, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 14, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2015.
    10. **^** Kalmykov, Kate (August 28, 2012). "Expediting an EB-5 Application". Greenberg Traurig LLC. Retrieved April 5, 2015.
    11. **^** "Is there a premium processing alternative available through the USCIS for EB5 regional center applications?". Retrieved  April 5, 2015.
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=USCIS_processing_times&oldid=883385903"

Categories:

    
        * Immigration to the United States
    * United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
    * Performance management
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Tagged pages containing blacklisted links
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

Add links

    
        * This page was last edited on 15 February 2019, at 03:06 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

