
    
        * Home
    * MIGHTY TRENDING
    * MIGHTY SHOP
    * MIGHTY TACTICAL
    * MIGHTY CULTURE
    * MIGHTY GAMING
    * MIGHTY FIT
    * MIGHTY MONEY
    * MIGHTY HISTORY
    * MIGHTY SPORTS
    * MIGHTY MOVIES
    * MIGHTY MEMES
    * PRESS
    * The MIGHTY FIT Plan
    

__

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/17498437/2000x.png)
![](https://assets.rbl.ms/17498437/2000x.png)![](https://assets.rbl.ms/17495479/2000x.png)

![](https://www.rallypoint.com/watm_pixel.png)

# Follow Us

EXPLORE

MIGHTY TRENDING MIGHTY SHOP MIGHTY TACTICAL MIGHTY CULTURE MIGHTY GAMING
MIGHTY FIT MIGHTY MONEY MIGHTY HISTORY MIGHTY SPORTS MIGHTY MOVIES MIGHTY
MEMES PRESS The MIGHTY FIT Plan

ABOUT

Privacy PolicyTerms of UseRSS FeedWrite for Us

(C) Mighty Networks,  
2019 All Rights Reserved

Articles

Blake Stilwell

Nov. 14, 2016 11:17AM EST

# 8 of the most terrifying Vietnam War booby traps

Contrary to popular belief, neither the North Vietnamese Army nor Viet Cong
guerrillas could match the U.S. forces toe-to-toe during the Vietnam War —
either in skill or of firepower.

* * *

### Related: 17 wild facts about the Vietnam War >

What they could do is hamper the Americans' ability to pursue them in a
retreat.

One of the ways they did that was by using creative methods to rig booby traps
to injure or kill U.S. troops.

U.S. Troops nicknamed "tunnel rats" cleared VC and NVA tunnels for enemy
soldiers and booby traps.

They were often marked by the Viet Cong using broken bushes, palm leaves, or
certain alignments of sticks, such as a rectangle or tripod. The retreating
Vietnamese would fashion traps from crude spikes, grenades, wires, and even
memorabilia.

### 1. Punji Sticks

These are traps made with sharpened bamboo stakes, often smeared with urine,
feces, or another substance that would cause infection in the victim. The VC
would dig a hole and put the sticks in the bottom, then cover it with a thin
frame. The victim would put his foot through the cover and fall on the spikes
below.

A more insidious trap featured spears pointed downward so victims would be
injured only when they tried to pull out of the trap.

### 2. Snake Pits

Yes, this is exactly what it sounds like. Viet Cong guerrillas would often
carried Bamboo Pit Vipers in their packs to (hopefully) kill anyone who
searches through them. They would also tie the deadly snakes to bamboo and
hide them throughout their tunnel complexes. When the Bamboo was released, so
was the snake – right onto the enemy.

Sweet dreams.

The snakes were nicknamed "three-step snakes," because three steps was all you
could make before the venom kills you. U.S. "tunnel rats" had to be specially
trained to navigate and disarm these traps.

### 3. Grenade-In-A-Can

Two cans were mounted on trees along either side of a path. The safety pins on
the grenades are removed and the explosives are put into cans, which hold down
the striker levers. The tripwire was then tied to each grenade. When the wire
was tripped, the grenades were pulled out of the cans to detonate instantly.
This could also be done with one can and a stake.

### 4. Flag Bombs

The NVA and VC loved to fly flags and they knew U.S. troops loved to capture
enemy flags. So when they were forced to leave a base or location, they often
rigged the flags with an explosive of some kind, so when US troops started to
take down the flag, it would set off the charge.

### See Also: 13 photos of US troops with enemy flags >

In fact, any attempt to move the pole or flag set off the booby trap. This is
similar to a "keepsake, lose hand" trap, where the NVA would intentionally rig
anything a U.S. troop would consider a war trophy with an explosive.

### 5. Cartridge Trap

This trap was an awful one because it was very difficult to detect. A
cartridge – a round of ammunition – would be set into a piece of bamboo and
lowered into a shallow hole in the ground. At the bottom of the bamboo was a
board and a nail.

The regular weight of someone walking on the cartridge would drive the nail
into the primer, turning the nail into a firing pin and firing the bullet
upward through the unsuspecting victim's foot.

### 6. Bamboo Whip

Another sharpened bamboo trap, the whip consisted of spikes over a long bamboo
pole. The pole was pulled back into an arc using a catch attached to a
tripwire. When the wire is tripped, the catch gives out and sent foot-long
spikes into a trooper's chest at a hundred miles an hour.

### 7. The Mace

Another tripwire trap, the Mace may have been the worst of all Vietnam War
booby traps. Once the wire was triggered, a 24-inch metal or wooden ball with
spikes welded onto it, weighing 40 pounds or more, would swing down from a
tree, sending anyone in its path straight to Valhalla.

### 8. Tiger Traps

A tiger trap was similar to the mace, in that a tripwire would undo the catch
on a rope. Only instead of a swinging ball, the death from above took the form
of an man-sized plank weighted with bricks and full of barbed metal spikes
quickly falling to earth on someone's forehead.

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

