
    
        * Shows
    
    * This Day In History
    
    * Schedule
    
    * Topics
    
    * Stories
    
    *  _Ad Choices_
    *  _Advertise_
    *  _Closed Captioning_
    *  _Copyright Policy_
    *  _Corporate Information_
    *  _Employment Opportunities_
    *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
    *  _Privacy Notice_
    *  _Terms of Use_
    *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
    *  _RSS Feeds_
    *  _Privacy Settings_
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    

# ![History

Stories](https://www.history.com/.image/MTU3OTM1OTczODA2NjQ3MjQ2/section_header_art_small_stories2.svg)

![The Brutal History of Anti-Latino Discrimination in

America](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_768/MTU3OTIzNjU1ODQyOTMyMzcw/the-

brutal-history-of-anti-latino-discrimination-in-americas-featured-photo.jpg)

Publish date:

    
        Sep 27, 2017
    

Updated on

    
        Aug 29, 2018
    

# The Brutal History of Anti-Latino Discrimination in America

School segregation, lynchings and mass deportations of Spanish-speaking U.S.
citizens are just some of the injustices Latinos have faced.

Author:

    
        Erin Blakemore
    

School segregation, lynchings and mass deportations of Spanish-speaking U.S.
citizens are just some of the injustices Latinos have faced.

    
        *     *     *     * Olvera Street is a Los Angeles icon--a thriving Mexican market filled with colorful souvenirs, restaurants and remnants of the oldest buildings in Los Angeles. But though the bright tourist destination teems with visitors, few realize it was once the site of a terrifying raid.
    

In 1931, police officers grabbed Mexican-Americans in the area, many of them
U.S. citizens, and shoved them into waiting vans. Immigration agents blocked
exits and arrested around 400 people, who were then deported to Mexico,
regardless of their citizenship or immigration status.

The raid was just one incident in a long history of discrimination against
Latino people in the United States. Since the 1840s, anti-Latino prejudice has
led to illegal deportations, school segregation and even lynching--often-
forgotten events that echo the civil-rights violations of African-Americans in
the Jim Crow-era South.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

The story of Latino-American discrimination largely begins in 1848, when the
United States won the Mexican-American War. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
which marked the war's end, granted 55 percent of Mexican territory to the
United States. With that land came new citizens. The Mexicans who decided to
stay in what was now U.S. territory were granted citizenship and the country
gained a considerable Mexican-American population.

As the 19th century wore on, political events in Mexico made emigration to the
United States popular. This was welcome news to American employers like the
Southern Pacific Railroad, which desperately needed cheap labor to help build
new tracks. The railroad and other companies flouted existing immigration laws
that banned importing contracted labor and sent recruiters into Mexico to
convince Mexicans to emigrate.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

Anti-Latino sentiment grew along with immigration. Latinos were barred entry
into Anglo establishments and segregated into urban barrios in poor areas.
Though Latinos were critical to the U.S. economy and often were American
citizens, everything from their language to the color of their skin to their
countries of origin could be used as a pretext for discrimination. Anglo-
Americans treated them as a foreign underclass and perpetuated stereotypes
that those who spoke Spanish were lazy, stupid and undeserving. In some cases,
that prejudice turned fatal.

According to historians William D. Carrigan and Clive Webb, mob violence
against Spanish-speaking people was common in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. They estimate that the number of Latinos killed by mobs reach well
into the thousands, though definitive documentation only exists for 547 cases.

The violence began during California's Gold Rush just after California became
part of the United States. At the time, white miners begrudged former Mexicans
a share of the wealth yielded by Californian mines--and sometimes enacted
vigilante justice. In 1851, for example, a mob of vigilantes accused Josefa
Segovia of murdering a white man. After a fake trial, they marched her through
the streets and lynched her. Over 2,000 men gathered to watch, shouting racial
slurs. Others were attacked on suspicion of fraternizing with white women or
insulting white people.

Even children became the victims of this violence. In 1911, a mob of over 100
people hanged a 14-year-old boy, Antonio Gomez, after he was arrested for
murder. Rather than let him serve time in jail, townspeople lynched him and
dragged his body through the streets of Thorndale, Texas.

These and other horrific acts of cruelty lasted until the 1920s, when the
Mexican government began pressuring the United States to stop the violence.
But though mob brutality eventually quelled, hatred of Spanish-speaking
Americans did not.

In the late 1920s, anti-Mexican sentiment spiked as the Great Depression
began. As the stock market tanked and unemployment grew, Anglo-Americans
accused Mexicans and other foreigners of stealing American jobs. Mexican-
Americans were discouraged and even forbidden from accepting charitable aid.

As fears about jobs and the economy spread, the United States forcibly removed
up to 2 million people of Mexican descent from the country--up to 60 percent
of whom were American citizens.

Euphemistically referred to as "repatriations," the removals were anything but
voluntary. Sometimes, private employers drove their employees to the border
and kicked them out. In other cases, local governments cut off relief, raided
gathering places or offered free train fare to Mexico. Colorado even ordered
all of its "Mexicans"--in reality, anyone who spoke Spanish or seemed to be of
Latin descent--to leave the state in 1936 and blockaded its southern border to
keep people from leaving. Though no formal decree was ever issued by
immigration authorities, INS officials deported about 82,000 people during the
period.

The impact on Spanish-speaking communities was devastating. Some light-skinned
Mexican-Americans attempted to pass themselves off as Spanish, not Mexican, in
an attempt to evade enforcement. People with disabilities and active illnesses
were removed from hospitals and dumped at the border. As one victim of
"repatriation" told Raymond Rodriguez, who wrote a history of the period,
_Decade of Betrayal_ , "They might as well have sent us to Mars."

Others, like Rodriguez's father, did not wait for raids or enforcement and
returned to Mexico independently to escape discrimination and the fear of
removal. His wife refused to accompany him and the family never saw him again.

When deportations finally ended around 1936, up to 2 million Mexican-Americans
had been "repatriated." (Because many of the repatriation attempts were
informal or conducted by private companies, it is nearly impossible to
quantify the exact number of people who were deported.) Around one third of
Los Angeles' Mexican population left the country, as did a third of Texas'
Mexican-born population. Though both the state of California and the city of
Los Angeles apologized for repatriation in the early 2000s, the deportations
have largely faded from public memory.

Another little-remembered facet of anti-Latino discrimination in the United
States is school segregation. Unlike the South, which had explicit laws
barring African-American children from white schools, segregation was not
enshrined in the laws of the southwestern United States. Nevertheless, Latino
people were excluded from restaurants, movie theaters and schools.

Latino students were expected to attend separate "Mexican schools" throughout
the southwest beginning in the 1870s. At first, the schools were set up to
serve the children of Spanish-speaking laborers at rural ranches. Soon, they
spread into cities, too.

By the 1940s, as many as 80 percent of Latino children in places like Orange
County, California attended separate schools. Among them was Sylvia Mendez, a
young girl who was turned away from an all-white school in the county. Instead
of going to the pristine, well-appointed 17th Street Elementary, she was told
to attend Hoover Elementary--a dilapidated, two-room shack.

![U.S. President Barack Obama presenting the 2010 Medal of Freedom to Sylvia

Mendez, a civil-rights activist of Mexican and Puerto Rican descent. At age 8,

Mendez played a pivotal role in a 1946 landmark court case that desegregated

California schools.  \(Credit: Tim Sloan/AFP/Getty

Images\)](https://www.history.com/.image/t_share/MTU3ODc4Njc2ODAxOTIyNzgz/image-

placeholder-title.jpg)

U.S. President Barack Obama presenting the 2010 Medal of Freedom to Sylvia
Mendez, a civil-rights activist of Mexican and Puerto Rican descent. At age 8,
Mendez played a pivotal role in a 1946 landmark court case that desegregated
California schools. (Credit: Tim Sloan/AFP/Getty Images)

The bare-bones facilities offered to students like Mendez lacked basic
supplies and sufficient teachers. Many only provided vocational classes or did
not offer a full 12 years of instruction. Children were arbitrarily forced to
attend based on factors like their complexion and last name.

Then Mendez's parents fought back. In 1945, along with four other families,
they filed a class action lawsuit against four Orange County school districts.
Their goal: Ensure that all children could attend California schools
regardless of race.

The case culminated in a two-week-long trial. In court, school officials
claimed that Latino students were dirty and infected with diseases that put
white students at risk. Besides, they argued, Mexican-American students didn't
speak English and were thus not entitled to attend English-speaking schools.
(When asked, officials conceded that they never gave students proficiency
tests.) "Mexicans are inferior in personal hygiene, ability and in their
economic outlook," said one official.

Mendez's attorney countered with testimony from experts in social science. He
argued that the policy trampled on Latino children's Constitutional rights.
When Carol Torres, a 14-year-old Latino girl, took the stand, she immediately
proved that Mexican-American students in the district could and did speak
English.  
It took seven months for Judge Paul J. McCormick to render a decision. On
February 18, 1946, he ruled that the school districts discriminated against
Mexican-American students and violated their Constitutional rights. Though the
school districts challenged the ruling, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
agreed with McCormick. Thanks to Mendez v. Westminster School District,
California officially ended all segregation in its schools.

Mendez, who was eight when the lawsuits began, later told reporters that she
thought her parents were fighting for her right to attend a school with a nice
playground. But the case accomplished much more than that. Soon, parents in
Texas and Arizona successfully challenged school segregation. In 1954, a
decade after Mendez was turned away from the whites-only elementary school,
the United States Supreme Court ruled that all school segregation based on
race was unconstitutional in Brown v. Board of Education.

Though the case was a victory for the Mendez family, Sylvia was harassed and
heckled by her fellow students when she attended the white school.
Nonetheless, she pushed to succeed and became a nurse and civil-rights
activist. She was awarded a Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2010--and now,
two Los Angeles-area schools are named after her parents.

Today, an estimated 54 million Latinos live in the U.S. and around 43 million
people speak Spanish. But though Latinos are the country's largest minority,
anti-Latino prejudice is still common. In 2016, 52 percent of Latinos surveyed
by Pew said they had experienced discrimination. Lynchings, "repatriation"
programs and school segregation may be in the past, but anti-Latino
discrimination in the U.S. is far from over.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

The Brutal History of Anti-Latino Discrimination in America

### Author

Erin Blakemore

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/news/the-brutal-history-of-anti-latino-discrimination-
in-america

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

August 29, 2018

### Original Published Date

September 27, 2017

Tags

terms:

    
        Hispanic heritageMexicolynching
    

By

Erin Blakemore

    
        *     *     *     * #
    

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

# SIGN UP FOR MORE HISTORY!

Twice a week we compile our most fascinating features and deliver them
straight to you.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTQzNTc0Mjg4MTQ4NDMw/section_header_art_medium_b2.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![mexican-illegal-immigrants-arrested-1950s-photo-by-keystone-francegamma-

keystone-via-getty-

images-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NTk4NjgyNjE3MTYx/mexican-

illegal-immigrants-arrested-1950s-photo-by-keystone-francegamma-keystone-via-

getty-images-2.jpg)

## The Largest Mass Deportation in American History

![Chen Jinyu, then 80 years old in this 2005 photograph, was raped everyday at

16 years old while living as a comfort woman for the Japanese

military.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3OTIzNTc2NjUxOTgyNzk4/the-

brutal-history-of-japans-comfort-womens-featured-photo.jpg)

## The Brutal History of Japan’s ‘Comfort Women’

![gettyimages-184260855-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAwMjk0NDA5OTUx/gettyimages-184260855-2.jpg)

## The Grisly Story of America’s Largest Lynching

![gettyimages-107871581](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAzNTQwODAxMjQ3/gettyimages-107871581.jpg)

## The Violent History of the U.S.-Mexico Border

![gettyimages-517322800-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4Njc2Nzk4MDU2MTU5/gettyimages-517322800-2.jpg)

## The Story Behind the Famous Little Rock Nine ‘Scream Image’

![gettyimages-517350944-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAxOTEwMzk2MjMz/gettyimages-517350944-2.jpg)

## How Dolls Helped Win Brown v. Board of Education

    
        * Ad Choices
    * Advertise
    * Closed Captioning
    * Copyright Policy
    * Corporate Information
    * Employment Opportunities
    * FAQ/Contact Us
    * Privacy Notice
    * Terms of Use
    * TV Parental Guidelines
    * RSS Feeds
    

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

