

![](https://www.incimages.com/inc-logo-black.png)

100 Inspiring Quotes That Will Increase Your Confidence

#### Lead

# 100 Inspiring Quotes That Will Increase Your Confidence

## You can if you think you can.

![](https://www.incimages.com/uploaded_files/image/100x100/Unknown_149866.png)By
Lolly DaskalPresident and CEO, Lead From Within@LollyDaskal

![](https://www.incimages.com/uploaded_files/image/970x450/getty_615524918_130727.jpg)

CREDIT: Getty Images

**Confidence.** We all know we need it, but it's not always easy to come by.
How do you build belief in yourself?

There's not an easy answer, but one thing is certainly true: it has to come
from inside. One way to instill the right mindset for building self-assurance
and confidence is to spend time with thoughts that motivate and inspire us.

Here are 100 inspiring quotes hand-picked for increasing your confidence.

**1.** "No one can make you feel inferior without your consent." _- Eleanor
Roosevelt_

**2.** "I can be changed by what happens to me. But I refuse to be reduced by
it." ­­ _-­ Maya Angelou_

**3.** "Because one believes in oneself, one doesn't try to convince. Because
one is content with oneself, one doesn't need others' approval. Because one
accepts oneself, the whole world accepts him or her." _- Laozi_

**4.** "With realization of one's own potential and self-confidence in one's
ability, one can build a better world." _- The Dalai Lama_

**5.** "If you have no confidence in self, you are twice defeated in the race
of life. With confidence, you have won even before you have started." _-
Cicero_

**6.** "Do not let what you cannot do interfere with what you can do." _- John
Wooden_

**7.** "People are like stained-glass windows. They sparkle and shine when the
sun is out, but when the darkness sets in their true beauty is revealed only
if there is light from within." - _Elisabeth Kubler-Ross_

**8.** "We gain strength, and courage, and confidence by each experience in
which we really stop to look fear in the face ... we must do that which we
think we cannot." _- Eleanor Roosevelt_

**9. "** Life is not easy for any of us. But what of that? We must have
perseverance and above all confidence in ourselves. We must believe that we
are gifted for something and that this thing must be attained." ­ _- Marie
Curie_

**10.** "You're never as good as everyone tells you when you win, and you're
never as bad as they say when you lose." _- Lou Holtz_

**11.** "Don't wait until everything is just right. It will never be perfect.
There will always be challenges, obstacles and less than perfect conditions.
So what? Get started now. With each step you take, you will grow stronger and
stronger, more and more skilled, more and more self-confident, and more and
more successful." ­ _- Mark Victor Hansen_

**12.** "Be courteous to all, but intimate with few, and let those few be well
tried before you give them your confidence." _­- George Washington_

**13.** "If you hear a voice within you say 'you cannot paint,' then by all
means paint, and that voice will be silenced." _- Vincent Van Gogh_

**14.** "Courage is resistance to fear, mastery of fear, not absence of fear."
_- Mark Twain_

**15.** "Be who you are and say what you feel, because those who mind don't
matter and those who matter don't mind." ­­ _- Bernard Baruch_

**16.** "It is best to act with confidence, no matter how little right you
have to it." ­­ _-Lillian Hellman_

**17.** "Sooner or later, those who win are those who think they can." ­ _-
Paul Tournier_

**18.** "Remember that wherever your heart is, there you will find your
treasure." - _Paulo Coelho_

**19.** "Man often becomes what he believes himself to be. If I keep on saying
to myself that I cannot do a certain thing, it is possible that I may end by
really becoming incapable of doing it. On the contrary, if I have the belief
that I can do it, I shall surely acquire the capacity to do it even if I may
not have it at the beginning." _- Mahatama Gandhi_

**20.** "Trust yourself--you know more than you think you do." _- Benjamin
Spock_

**21.** "Make the most of yourself, for that is all there is of you." _- Ralph
Waldo Emerson_

**22.** "Accept who you are; and revel in it." _- Mitch Albom_

**23.** "You wouldn't worry so much about what others think of you if you
realized how seldom they do." _- Eleanor Roosevelt_

**24.** "Never bend your head. Always hold it high. Look the world straight in
the eye." _- Helen Keller_

**25.** "I am not afraid of storms for I am learning how to sail my ship." _-
Louise May Alcott_

**26.** "Optimism is the faith that leads to achievement. Nothing can be done
without hope and confidence." _- Helen Keller_

**27.** "Don't be distracted by criticism. Remember--the only taste of success
some people have is when they take a bite out of you." _- Zig Ziglar_

**28**. "Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble
but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or
happy." _- Norman Vincent Peale_

**29.** "Inaction breeds doubt and fear. Action breeds confidence and courage.
If you want to conquer fear, do not sit home and think about it. Go out and
get busy." _- Dale Carnegie_

**30.** "A successful man is one who can lay a firm foundation with the bricks
others have thrown at him." _- David Brinkley_

**31.** "We don't see things as they are, we see them as we are." _- Anais
Nin_

**32.** "You've got to take the initiative and play your game. In a decisive
set, confidence is the difference." - _Chris Evert_

**33.** "Always be yourself--express yourself, have faith in yourself. Do not
go out and look for a successful personality and duplicate it." _- Bruce Lee_

**34.** "Don't be satisfied with stories, how things have gone with others.
Unfold your own myth." _- Rumi_

**35.** "Self-confidence can be learned, practiced, and mastered--just like
any other skill. Once you master it, everything in your life will change for
the better." _-Barrie Davenport_

**36.** "Success is most often achieved by those who don't know that failure
is inevitable." _-Coco Chanel_

**37.** "One important key to success is self-confidence. An important key to
self-confidence is preparation." _-Arthur Ashe_

**38.** "Don't waste your energy trying to change opinions ... Do your thing,
and don't care if they like it." _-Tina Fey_

**39.** "Successful people have fear, successful people have doubts, and
successful people have worries. They just don't let these feelings stop them."
_-T. Harv Eker_

**40**. "You can have anything you want if you are willing to give up the
belief that you can't have it." ­ _-Robert Anthony_

**41.** "Always remember you are braver than you believe, stronger than you
seem, and smarter than you think." _­-Christopher Robin_

**42.** "It took me a long time not to judge myself through someone else's
eyes." - _Sally Field_

**43.** "The confidence which we have in ourselves give birth to much of that
which we have in others." _-Francois de la Rochefoucauld_

**44.** "Confidence doesn't come out of nowhere. It's a result of something
... hours and days and weeks and years of constant work and dedication."
_-Roger Staubach_

**45.** "If we all did the things we are capable of doing, we would literally
astound ourselves." _-Thomas Edison_

**46.** "I was always looking outside myself for strength and confidence but
it comes from within. It is there all the time." _-Anne Freud_

**47.** "You have no control over other people's taste, so focus on staying
true to your own." ­ _-Tim Gunn_

**48.** "With confidence, you have won before you have started." _-Marcus
Garvey_

**49.** "When you have confidence, you can have a lot of fun. And when you
have fun, you can do amazing things." _-Joe Namath_

**50.** "I think that the power is the principle. The principle of moving
forward, as though you have the confidence to move forward, eventually gives
you confidence when you look back and see what you've done." _-Robert Downey
Jr._

**51.** "Your success will be determined by your own confidence and
fortitude." _-Michelle Obama_

**52.** "Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things you
didn't do than by the ones you did do. So throw off the bowlines. Sail away
from the safe harbour. Catch the trade winds in your sail. Explore. Dream.
Discover." _-Mark Twain_

**53.** "To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance." _-Oscar
Wilde_

**54.** "You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your
love and affection." _-Buddha_

**55.** "Action is a great restorer and builder of confidence. Inaction is not
only the result, but the cause, of fear. Perhaps the action you take will be
successful; perhaps different action or adjustments will have to follow. But
any action is better than no action at all." _-Norman Vincent Peale_

**56.** "To be yourself in a world that is constantly trying to make you
something else is the greatest accomplishment." _-Ralph Waldo Emerson_

**57.** "When you're different, sometimes you don't see the millions of people
who accept you for what you are. All you notice is the person who doesn't."
_-Jodi Picoult_

**58.** "As soon as you trust yourself, you will know how to live." _-Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe_

**59.** "Once we believe in ourselves, we can risk curiosity, wonder,
spontaneous delight, or any experience that reveals the human spirit." _--e.
e. cummings_

**60.** "You have brains in your head. You have feet in your shoes. You can
steer yourself in any direction you choose. You're on your own. And you know
what you know. You are the guy who'll decide where to go." _-Dr. Seuss_

**61.** "I laugh at myself. I don't take myself completely seriously. I think
that's another quality that people have to hold on to ... you have to laugh,
especially at yourself." _―Madonna_

**62.** "Regardless of how you feel inside, always try to look like a winner.
Even if you are behind, a sustained look of control and confidence can give
you a mental edge that results in victory." _-Diane Arbus_

**63.** "Learning too soon our limitations, we never learn our powers."
_-Mignon McLaughlin_

**64.** "People who ask confidently get more than those who are hesitant and
uncertain. When you've figured out what you want to ask for, do it with
certainty, boldness and confidence." _-Jack Canfield_

**65.** __ "It is not so much our friends' help that helps us, as the
confidence of their help." _-Epicurus_

**66.** "Skill and confidence are an unconquered army." _-George Herbert_

**67.** "Argue for your limitations, and sure enough they're yours." _-Richard
Bach_

**68.** "Of all our infirmities, the most savage is to despise our being.
_-Michel de Montaigne_

**69.** "If I have lost confidence in myself, I have the universe against me."
_-Ralph Waldo_ Emerson

**70.** "Nothing splendid has ever been achieved except by those who dared
believe that something inside of them was superior to circumstance." _-Bruce
Barton_

**71**. "Once you become self-conscious, there is no end to it; once you start
to doubt, there is no room for anything else." _-Mignon McLaughlin_

**72.** "Anyone who ever gave you confidence, you owe them a lot." _-Truman
Capote_

**73.** "Kindness in words creates confidence." _-Laozi_

**74.** "Self-confidence is the first requisite to great undertakings."
_-Samuel Johnson_

**75.** "As is our confidence, so is our capacity." _-William Hazlitt_

**76.** "Never dull your shine for somebody else." _-Tyra Banks_

**77.** "Control your own destiny or someone else will." _-Jack Welch_

**78.** "Confidence is that feeling by which the mind embarks in great and
honorable courses with a sure hope and trust in itself. ." _-Cicero_

**79.** "Confidence is the most important single factor in this game, and no
matter how great your natural talent, there is only one way to obtain and
sustain it: work." _-Jack Nicklaus_

**80.** "If once you forfeit the confidence of your fellow citizens, you can
never regain their respect and esteem." _-Abraham Lincoln_

**81.** "Confidence is contagious. So is lack of confidence." _-Vince
Lombardi_

**82.** "The greatest mistake you can make in life is continually fearing that
you'll make one." _-Elbert Hubbard_

**83.** "I quit being afraid when my first venture failed and the sky didn't
fall down." _-Al Neuharth_

**84.** "It generally happens that assurance keeps an even pace with ability."
_-Samuel Johnson_

**85.** "Only the person who has faith in himself is able to be faithful to
others." _-Erich Fromm_

**86.** "One's self-image is very important because if that's in good shape,
then you can do anything, or practically anything." _-John Gielgud_

**87.** "Humor comes from self-confidence." _-Rita Mae Brown_

**88.** "The more validation I need, the less discernment I have." _-Kurt
Hanks_

**89.** "We all have our limitations, but when we listen to our critics, we
also have theirs." _-Robert Breault_

**90.** "It is not the mountain we conquer but ourselves." _-Edmund Hillary_

**91**."The way to develop self-confidence is to do the thing you fear and get
a record of successful experiences behind you." _-William Jennings Bryan_

**92**. "Nurture your mind with great thoughts, for you will never go any
higher than you think." _-Benjamin Disraeli_

**93.** "Love yourself first and everything else falls into line. You really
have to love yourself to get anything done in this world." _-Lucille Ball_

**94.** "Confidence is directness and courage in meeting the facts of life."
_-John Dewey_

**95.** "If you don't ask, the answer is always no." _-Nora Roberts_

**96.** "First thing every morning before you arise say out loud, I believe."
_-Norman Vincent Peale_

**97.** "Until you value yourself, you won't value your time. Until you value
your time, you will not do anything with it. " _- M. Scott Peck_

**98.** "Never be bullied into silence. Never allow yourself to be made a
victim. Accept no one's definition of your life, but define yourself." _-
Harvey Fierstein_  
_- Harvey Fierstein_

**99.** "The greatest thing in the world is to know how to belong to oneself."
_― Michel de Montaigne_

**100.** "The most terrifying thing is to accept oneself completely." _― C.G.
Jung_

Published on: Feb 6, 2017

Like this column? Sign up to subscribe to email alerts and you'll never miss a
post.

The opinions expressed here by Inc.com columnists are their own, not those of
Inc.com.

More from Inc.

Sponsored Business
Content![Dianomi](//www.dianomi.com/img/uploads/WGP9Y4waycyxN5KEBJ69CQAAABM.png)

![](https://grunerandjahr.112.2o7.net/b/ss/gjinccomprod/1/H.24.1--NS/0)
![](https://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6916907&c4=https://www.inc.com/)

![](https://www.incimages.com/logos/inc_logo_footer_223x76_e0e0e0.png)

CHANNELS

STARTUP

GROW

LEAD

INNOVATE

TECHNOLOGY

MONEY

INC. 5000

VIDEO

MORE INC.

EVENTS

NEWSLETTERS

MAGAZINE

INC. RADIO

BRANDVIEW

PODCASTS

SUBSCRIBE

* * *

SUBSCRIBE

![](https://www.inc.com/images/currentcover.jpg?1560306188025)

MAGAZINE

DIGITAL EDITION

FOLLOW INC.

© 2018 Manuseto Ventures

Help Center

Advertise

Privacy

Sitemap

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

