

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/default/files/cis-logo-flat-header.png)

Center for Immigration Studies

Low-immigration, Pro-immigrant

Center for Immigration Studies Twitter Account

Center for Immigration Studies Facebook Page

Toggle navigation

    
        * Home
    * Topics 
      * RAISE Act (S.354)
      * Chain Migration
      * Current Numbers
      * Immigration Costs
      * Population and Environment
      * Illegal Immigration
      * Legal Immigration
      * National Security
      * Migrant Caravans
      * Refugees
      * Sanctuary Cities
      * Welfare Use
    * Publications 
      * Authors
      * Press Releases
      * Reports
      * Books
      * Fact Sheets
      * Litigation
      * Maps
      * Op-eds
      * Transcripts
      * Testimony
      * Videos
    * Blog 
      * Full Author List
      * Andrew R. Arthur
      * Todd Bensman
      * Dan Cadman
      * Jerry Kammer
      * Mark Krikorian
      * David North
      * Nayla Rush
      * Matthew Sussis
      * Jessica M. Vaughan
    * Data Portal
    * E-mail Updates 
      * E-Mail Update Descriptions
      * E-mail Update Sign Up
      * Immigration Events
    * About 
      * Staff List
      * Katz Award
      * Internship
      * Careers
    * Contact
    * Donate
    

Search

Search

Enter the terms you wish to search for.

    
        1. Home
    2. Report
    3. An Examination of U.S. Immigration Policy and Serious Crime
    

# An Examination of U.S. Immigration Policy and Serious Crime

By Carl F. Horowitz on May 1, 2001

Read also: Immigration and Crime Assessing a Conflicted Issue

# Table of Contents

Introduction  
Immigrant Crime as an Exaggerated Fear: The Evidence  
Immigrant Crime as an Underestimated Problem: Evidence and Practical
Considerations  
Federal Immigration Law Enforcement: Procedures and Complaints  
Controlling Immigrant Crime: The Challenge Ahead  
Bibliography

* * *

# Introduction

In recent years it has become difficult to avoid perceiving immigrants, legal
or not, as overwhelming this country with serious crime. The case of Rafael
Resendez-Ramirez, an illegal Mexican drifter, seems to have crystallized
public fears. Ramirez, wanted in an FBI manhunt in the brutal murders of at
least eight people near railroad tracks in Texas, Kentucky, and Illinois,
surrendered himself to Texas Rangers at a border crossing near El Paso in July
1999. What especially aroused public ire was not just the magnitude of
Ramirez's crimes, but that he previously had been in federal custody. A check
with the Immigration and Naturalization Service's Border Patrol computer
identification files showed he was a repeat offender who reentered the U.S.
after three deportations, and who voluntarily returned to Mexico at least nine
times following apprehensions. In fact, four of the murders took place in the
weeks following his release by the U.S. Border Patrol back to Mexico. Ramirez
eventually pled guilty in Texas state court on multiple murder charges, and at
his own request, received the death penalty. He currently is awaiting
execution.

Tracking down dangerous criminals often meets with far less success. A 1998
_Washington Post_ article revealed that District of Columbia police had been
unable to resolve two dozen homicide cases because the suspects had fled to
their native El Salvador to avoid prosecution. These cases represented nearly
two-thirds of the department's 37 outstanding warrants for slaying suspects. 1
A recent book by independent journalist Robert I. Friedman, meanwhile,
revealed a network of ruthless Russian immigrants, based mainly in Brooklyn,
N.Y., have built since the 1970s what amounts to a shadow world superpower.
They are deeply involved on a global basis in such activities as prostitution,
heroin smuggling, money-laundering, and stock fraud, and have committed dozens
of murders against those persons including fellow mobsters getting in their
way. Friedman had good reason to fear publishing his findings; numerous
investigative journalists also have been murdered.2

Anecdotes, though numerous and damning, can explain only so much. Supporters
of keeping U.S. immigration at high levels argue, with apparently convincing
evidence, that immigrants as a whole are no more crime-prone than the native-
born. Yet such an appraisal invites an age-old question: What's wrong with
this picture? How is that the foreign-born as a whole, according to several
studies, represent no statistical anomaly, yet so much other evidence
indicates they are responsible for a wave of individual and organized crime?
The explanation, this report argues, is that _much of the crime, a lot more
than structured studies would suggest, isn't being reported_. For one thing,
immigrants are victims of crimes committed by fellow immigrants (all the more
likely to be hidden from view if the assailant is a family member or close
relative), and are often too scared, bound by custom, or fearful of
deportation. This tendency may be heightened by the insularity of certain
immigrant cultures, especially where concentrated in low-income neighborhoods.
Many foreign-born criminals either hide within our nation's borders or operate
outside of them. And the FBI's crime figures reflect state and local crime
reports, which often omit any mention of an offender's national identity.

This report attempts to establish an understanding of the difficulties in
identifying and combating crimes committed by immigrants. The purpose is not
to create an "immigrant scare." Immigrants are crime victims as well as
criminals. There is a long, ignominious tradition in this nation (not to
mention others) of violence toward newcomers. In recent years more than ever
immigrants who enter America illegally are at the mercy of unscrupulous and
sadistic smugglers, and many die in boxcars or ships before arriving here.
Others, in order to "work off" their debt to their smugglers, become slaves
all but in name, and are subject to extortion, forced prostitution, and
sweatshop jobs, often tricked by their ethnic compatriots into doing so.

But this reality should not undercut concern over the crimes immigrants
commit. States with large immigrant populations, such as California and New
York, have had to devote an enormous portion of their law enforcement and
criminal justice budgets to investigating, apprehending, and incarcerating
immigrants to ensure safety for the law-abiding. The federal government since
the mid-1990s has stepped up funding of state and local efforts for this
purpose. That many of the immigrants committing crimes entered here illegally
(or overstayed their visas) adds fuel to the fire.3

Given that the flow of illegal immigration shows little or no sign of slowing,
further federalization of crime control, for better or worse, appears to be a
fixture on the long-term horizon. As such, proposals for reforming the
Immigration and Naturalization Service may be at best of limited benefit. In
the final analysis, the most effective way of controlling immigrant crime is
to better enforce entry and visa time limits, alter the main basis for legal
entry from family reunification to employment skills, and lower the overall
immigration ceiling.

# Immigrant Crime as an Exaggerated Fear: The Evidence

## Immigrant Crime as a Stereotype

Immigrant crime, and widespread fear of it, has had a long history in this
country. For well over a century newcomers have brought with them a criminal
element who, however unrepresentative of their nationalities, have turned
their communities into zones of lawlessness. Often, members of a particular
ethnic group have preyed upon other groups, whether or not of the same
nationality. Prior to the 1920s Jewish gangsters in New York frequently
terrorized strikers into returning to work, and picked pockets on crowded
streets. Italians operated extortion rings in San Francisco and prostitution
houses in Chicago. Small grocery owners combined the legitimate and
illegitimate by doubling as loan sharks, preying on the inability of immigrant
workers to obtain credit through normal channels.4 Groups such as the Mafia,
the Chinese Triads, and various Mexican and Central American drug cartels
established control over the sale and distribution of goods and services, both
legal and illegal.

Researchers and observers, aware that widespread concern over crime committed
by immigrants can boil over into hate crimes committed _against_ them, rarely
hesitate to note that the majority of immigrants are law-abiding. Often, they
go further, adding that immigrants commit fewer crimes than the native-born. A
1997 paper jointly sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
and the Urban Institute typifies this view: 5

> _Few stereotypes of immigrants are as enduring, or have been proven so
categorically false over literally decades of research, as the notion that
immigrants are disproportionately likely to engage in criminal activity(If
anything) immigrants are disproportionately unlikely to be criminal._

It might surprise many just how many decades back this view dates.6 In 1901 a
federal entity, known as the Industrial Commission, issued a "Special Report
on General Statistics of Immigration and the Foreign-Born," observing that
foreign-born whites were less oriented toward crime than native whites. A
decade later, in 1911, another federal panel, the Immigration Commission,
released its own study. "No satisfactory evidence," the report said, "has yet
been produced to show that immigration has resulted in an increase in crime
disproportionate to the increase in adult population. Such figures as are
presented indicate that immigration has not increased the volume of crime to a
distinguishable extent, if at all. In fact, the figures seem to show a
contrary result." During the Hoover years, yet another federal commission, the
National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement, collected data on crime
and arrest statistics in 52 cities. The results, the commission's 1931 report
concluded, "seem to disagree radically with the popular belief that a high
percentage [of crime] may be ascribed to the 'alien.' " Local data for Los
Angeles in the early decades of the 20th century also failed to show a pattern
of immigrants committing excessive amounts of crime.7

## Recent Research

In the 1980s and 1990s researchers have concluded, or at least have lent
support to the conclusion, that immigrants commit proportionately no more than
and possibly even fewer crimes than native-born citizens. The General
Accounting Office, analyzing FBI records, found that foreign-born individuals
accounted for about 19 percent of the total arrests in 1985 in six selected
major cities.8 The foreign-born represented 19.6 percent of the aggregate
population. While "foreign-born" can mean refer to citizens as well as
aliens,9 the study makes an implicit case that immigrant crime is in line with
the rest of the country.

Kristin Butcher of Boston College and Anne Morrison Piehl of Harvard's Kennedy
School of Government, using 1980 and 1990 Census Public Use Microdata Samples,
found that among men aged 18-40 immigrants were less likely to be in
correctional institutions than the native-born.10 If native-born men had the
institutionalization rates of immigrants with the same demographic traits, the
former's institutionalized population would be only two-thirds the current
size. The authors added that immigrants who had arrived at an earlier point in
time were more likely to be in prison than recent entrants. This stood in
contrast to the prevailing view of labor economists that earlier immigrants
were more successful, and hence less likely to see crime as a substitute for
gainful employment.

Butcher and Piehl conducted a separate study of several dozen U.S.
metropolitan areas.11 Using data from the FBI Uniform Crime Reports and the
Census Bureau's Current Population Survey, the authors found recent immigrants
had no significant effect either on crime rates or the change in rates over
time. In a secondary analysis of individual data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths born abroad were significantly less
likely than native-born youths to be criminally active.

John Hagan of the University of Toronto and Alberto Palloni of the University
of Wisconsin also found a weak link between immigration and crime.12 Examining
criminal justice data in two U.S. border cities, El Paso and San Diego, Hagan
and Palloni argued immigrants are disproportionately represented among prison
inmates because of biases in processes that lead from pre-trial detention to
sentencing. The criminal justice system views immigrants as potential "flight
risks," they noted, and thus detains many suspects who otherwise (as citizens)
would not be detained. The authors concluded that incarceration rates,
depending on the national origin of the criminal, exaggerate by anywhere from
three to seven times the crime rates of immigrants relative to citizens.

INS data, recently made available at the request of the House and Senate
Appropriations subcommittees that fund the agency's budget, show a lower
recidivism rate for immigrants. Of the 35,318 criminal aliens INS released
from custody (but not did not deport) during October 1994 and May 1999 there
were 11,605 who went on to commit new crimes. This recidivism (repeat
offender) rate of 37 percent was well below the 66 percent figure for the U.S.
criminal population for the comparable period.13 This discrepancy did not
dissuade Rep. Hal Rogers, R-Ky., and Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., the respective
subcommittee chairmen, from pointing to the data as evidence of INS's
incompetence and disregard for public safety; Rogers' response was
particularly harsh. Yet neither refuted the existence of the gap in
recidivism.

# Immigrant Crime as an Underestimated Problem: Evidence and Practical

Considerations

## The Meta-Issue: The Veil of Secrecy

Immigration enthusiasts might be prone to use such research as evidence that
widespread fear of immigrant crime is an irrational, if understandable,
response to sensationalized anecdotes.14 But such a view may be hasty in its
own right. Many immigrant crimes are not reported, and possibly in greater
proportion than the crimes that the U.S.-born commit. Many victims of
immigrant criminals fear reporting crimes to the police because their
victimizers are of the same nationality, and thus are more likely to retaliate
in ways that would dissuade the victim from calling police.

This is especially true with immigrant crime rings. As illegal economic
activity, organized crime requires an unusually high level of trust to
maintain a veil of secrecy from police and mob rivals alike. A common language
and experience, apart from the larger American one, can link such people.
"Criminals," writes immigration critic Peter Brimelow, "prefer to deal with
co-conspirators they understand and trust in economist-speak, it reduces their
transaction costs. And such tightly-knit groups, operating in a foreign and
sometimes obscure language, are notoriously difficult for the police to
penetrate."15 This is why for many decades newcomer ethnic groups from all
parts of the world, in varying types and locations, each have set up their own
versions of the Mafia. These organizations could be seen, at least initially,
as ethnic protection societies, providing members with jobs, housing, and
other necessities. But their dominance in exerting informal social and
economic control over immigrants enabled leaders to successfully coerce
business rivals and community members.

A special report released in 1990, based on the Justice Department's National
Crime Victimization Survey, which annually samples about 100,000 persons aged
12 and over in roughly 50,000 U.S. households, suggests underreporting among
Hispanics, the nation's largest ethnic grouping, occurs often and more so than
among non-Hispanics. While it is true "Hispanics" is a far from perfect proxy
for "immigrants," not the least of the reasons being that many Hispanics are
native-born, the data show significant differences. During the period 1979-86
Hispanics failed to report crimes of all types at a rate nearly twice the rate
that they did report; even for violent crimes alone the unreported offenses
outnumbered the reported ones. The violent crime victimization rate for
Hispanics also exceeded that for non-Hispanics, 39.6 versus 35.3 offenses per
1,000 households, with household crime (burglary, larceny, vehicle theft)
showing the greatest discrepancy, 265.6 versus 204.5 crimes per 1,000
households.16

Police confirm the tendency to underreport. In Memphis, Police Sgt. L. A.
Currin estimates that because Hispanic immigrants are reluctant to come
forward, hundreds of robberies each year go unreported. "They don't think they
have certain rights," said Currin. "We are not Immigration [and Naturalization
Service]. Our concern is whether a crime was committed."17 Often, robbers,
believing immigrants are in the U.S. illegally, assume they don't have bank
accounts and thus carry around a lot of cash. Thus, it is not simply group
cultural norms, but also fear of government reprisal, that drives
underreporting. Though an increasing number of urban police departments,
including Memphis's, have begun outreach services to Hispanic, Asian, and
other immigrant communities and have hired more bilingual officers, this fear
remains alive and well.

## "A Family Matter"

An especially ominous reason for underreporting is that what most Americans
would call crime many immigrants consider to be tradition, or if a crime, a
"family matter" not requiring outside interference. In this view, police are
not supposed to supplant patriarchal authority in resolving disputes, however
evident that the "conflict" in question is a case of prey needing protection
from predator. Sometimes this can have tragic consequences. In Washington,
D.C., for example, a Vietnamese family failed to report to authorities the
repeated sexual molestation of their child by another adult member of their
community. The family only complained after the predator murdered the child.
When police, through an interpreter, asked the parents why they did not report
the sexual abuse, they replied it is customary in their culture not to call
upon strangers to settle delicate family problems.18 A young woman from
Singapore recalled at a 1999 conference on domestic violence in Boston that
back in her native country no one not family members or neighbors ever
questioned her parents' and uncle's use of beatings and rape as a way to
discipline her, an aunt, and a grandfather: "We rallied not for the victim but
for the batterer. We'd say, Yeah, hit her because she was disobedient." That
comment came in the context of a report by the Massachusetts Governor's
Commission on Domestic Violence that found the state's outreach efforts on
domestic violence hadn't reached refugees and immigrants, who have a greater
incidence of family violence.19

In a bitterly ironic note, a Nigerian woman who investigated child abuse
complaints for the City of New York was arrested in 1999 along with her
husband and charged with forcing a Nigerian girl into servitude for nine
years. Federal investigators also noted the couple and several relatives had
forced two other Nigerian girls into servitude. In the first instance, the
couple had lured a 14-year-old girl into coming to the U.S. to attend trade
school and become a seamstress. Shortly thereafter, they terrorized her into
working as a maid and a babysitter in their house. The couple seized the
girl's passport, forbade her to speak to anyone outside the family, barred her
from using the phone, threatened to deport her and harm her family, and beat
her when she disobeyed orders. At age 22, while being beaten for requesting
her freedom, neighbors overheard her screams and called the police; an
anonymous tip led the FBI into the picture later on. The couple at their
arraignment in federal court denied mistreating the girl.20

Cases such as these are far more common than imagined. Each year, according to
a 1999 report by the Central Intelligence Agency, between 45,000 and 50,000
women and children are trafficked as slaves into the United States from Asia,
Europe, Latin America, India, and Africa.21 One might ask: Why don't immigrant
victims report these crimes? How could they tolerate serving as slaves all but
in name? Aside from the extensively diagnosed general tendency of victims to
blame themselves for violence inflicted upon them,22 immigrants in particular
often have a difficult time shaking the perception that local police are
connected to immigration authorities. A young Mexican woman named Maria, for
example, moved to the Dallas area in 1992 and the next year met the man who
would become her husband. He routinely abused her, but she was reluctant to
call police because she feared deportation; the husband was a legal U.S.
resident, and Maria was not. The final straw was when her husband used
electrical cables to shock her, then locked her and their daughter in his
workshop. She broke through the back door, took her daughter and fled to a
women's shelter.23 Another Mexican woman in El Paso, whose first name was
Laura, was beaten repeatedly for four years by her husband until her arms and
legs were black and blue. At one point, her husband pointed a gun at her and
told her if she ever left him, he'd keep their young twins, and have her
deported. Finally, she came to a shelter. As with the case of Maria, Laura did
not have permanent legal resident status, but her husband did.24 "Many of
these women had poor experiences with the police in their own countries,"
noted a Dallas police sergeant with the domestic crimes unit. "They equate us
with the INS. That I don't like. We're not Immigration, and their
[immigration] status is of no relevance to whether we will help them."25 The
fear women in situations like these feel is made worse given their lack of
money when they leave (more accurately, flee) their husbands; without money,
an attorney may be the furthest thing from their minds.

## Safe Harbors Outside the U.S.

If immigrant crime victims are reluctant to come forward to police, immigrant
criminals often know how to make themselves scarce, and not necessarily by
remaining or even operating within the U.S. A large portion of ethnic crime in
this country can be linked to international networks. "Hundreds of thousands
of people are being moved globally by highly organized criminal enterprises
operating on all continents," noted Robert Perito, director of the State
Department's Office of International Criminal Justice a few years ago. "Their
primary target is the United States."26

It would seem many of these criminals are hitting the mark. That slavery has
been illegal in this country for almost a century and a half has not deterred
certain immigrant groups from reintroducing it. A few years ago a Mexican
immigrant couple was arrested for enslaving a large number of their deaf
countrymen in a ring with operations in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles,
Dallas, Arizona, North Carolina, and South Carolina.27 The Chinese operate
what observers are calling a "new slave trade" in the U.S.28 Among certain
nationalities fraud is woven into the economic culture. Telephone fraud has
run rampant among some immigrant groups; one estimate several years ago put
the cost of long-distance scams to U.S. phone companies and customers nearly
$2 billion a year.29 One Secret Service agent characterized the problem of
credit-card fraud among Nigerians as "absolutely epidemic." U.S. officials
started keeping records in this area by ethnic group in 1989; by a half-decade
later, they had arrested more than 1,000 Nigerians.30

A new kind of credit card scam, involving hand-held "skimmers," is an up-and-
coming practice among immigrant theft rings. The crook, often a restaurant
waiter, swipes a credit card through the skimmer, usually disguised as a pager
or worn inside a jacket, and stores data embedded inside the magnetic security
stripe. It is possible to transmit hundreds of stolen card numbers via e-mail
to card cloning mills run by Latin American, Asian, Russian, and Nigerian
crime syndicates. Consumers have to go through an involved process to get
unauthorized charges removed, while card issuers pass along the costs anyway
in the form of higher interest rates and fees. "It's not unusual," noted
Gregory Regan, head of the Secret Service's financial-crimes division, "to see
a card compromised in New York City or Washington and the numbers used
overseas, in Taiwan, Japan or Europe, within 24 to 48 hours."31

To an extent, crime rings are based somewhere else and expand here rather than
vice versa. Criminal gangs operating out of Poland and the Czech Republic
recently have developed close ties to mobsters in Chicago and New York.32 Much
of the Russian mob's activity is run directly from Moscow, with the Russian
government all but a rubber stamp for gangsters. Russian-based gangsters, and
their local chieftains in more than a dozen American cities, have infiltrated
Wall Street brokerages, the Bank of New York, the Medicare program, and even
the National Hockey League to commit massive scams. Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa,
chairman of the House Banking Committee, has estimated that billions of
dollars have been laundered out of Russia through U.S.-based Russian mobsters
since 1995, and that dozens of Western banks have been used as conduits for
the money. Russian mobsters also have set up shell companies in the Brighton
Beach area of Brooklyn, N.Y., to sponsor U.S. visas for fellow criminals or
hire sophisticated money managers and lawyers in Los Angeles and Denver to
invest in import-export companies.33 Asian crime lords in the 1990s
aggressively recruited immigrants to the U.S. to serve as their foot
soldiers.34 Even where organized immigrant crime consists of local gangs, it
can be a potent force. In 1992 INS formed a 120-member Violent Gang Task
Force; within a few years task force agents were arresting some 2,000 legal
and illegal immigrants annually.35

## Other Factors

### The Mexican Commute

Yet another reason for underreporting lies in the fact that criminals from
other countries, almost inevitably Mexico, cross over the border to commit
crime and then return home to escape prosecution. Police officials in the San
Diego area have complained that organized groups from Mexico cross over from
Tijuana and commit robberies in middle-income neighborhoods. Indeed, criminal
activity along the U.S.-Mexican border in San Diego County led local officials
in the 1980s to conduct a study of arrest rates according to legal status. In
the City of San Diego 26 percent of all burglary arrests and 12 percent of all
felony arrests involved illegal aliens, who are estimated to comprise less
than 4 percent of the total city population.36

### Incomplete Record-Keeping

Immigrant crime also may be underestimated because local law enforcement
officials do not keep records on the national origin of the perpetrator. In
Dana Point, an affluent Orange County, Calif., coastal community experiencing
a wave of immigrant-related crime, a sheriff's officer noted that in a recent
year that suburb had three murders, three rapes, 232 vehicle burglaries, 181
residential burglaries, and 108 commercial burglaries. Asked whether he had an
ethnic breakdown on these numbers, he replied, "We won't touch that."37 That
kind of local policy, especially in larger cities, explains why data based on
the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports can explain only so much. While UCR Index is
consistent across U.S. cities, and takes account of the most serious offenses,
it doesn't measure drug dealing, simple assaults, fraud, vandalism, and
weapons violations, among other crimes. Nor given the reluctance of localities
to break down crimes by race and ethnicity, does it collect data on that basis
either. Butcher and Piehl admit, "Using the UCR may cause us to overlook some
important types of crime."38

### Neighborhood Ecology

Some researchers believe underreporting is due in part to the tendency of low-
income immigrants to settle in low-income neighborhoods that is, the kinds of
neighborhoods more likely than others to be beset with crime. University of
Chicago sociologist Robert J. Sampson and colleagues explained high rates of
crime in certain Chicago neighborhoods as attributable to a lack of
"collective efficacy" on the part of residents. That is, neighbors lacked the
social cohesion to intervene on behalf of one another in an emergency. The
ethnic and linguistic heterogeneity in neighborhoods with a high concentration
of immigrants impedes this mutual trust.39 There is also a reinforcing process
at work; that is, the reputation of a neighborhood as rampant with crime may
inhibit collective efficacy. The area becomes a less attractive place to live,
and thus invites a criminal element which otherwise might suspect their
behavior is more closely monitored.40

## The Second Generation

Even if immigrants are no more prone to commit crimes than are citizens, this
tendency may not necessarily hold true for their offspring, who are American-
born or at least residents of the U.S. from early childhood. Criminologists in
this country long have theorized that the _second_ , more than the first,
generation of an immigrant population is likely to drift into crime. The first
generation, having braved all kinds of hardship to enter the U.S., found it
necessary to defer gratification in the interest of long-term success. But the
second generation, though often as poor as their parents upon arrival, has
less perspective on the Old World from which their parents came, and often in
response develops an attachment to deviant subcultures, such as gangs, as a
wayward continuation of the "old-fashioned" European peasant societies of
their parents.41 Joining delinquent subcultures can be a way for the second
generation to resist acculturation into the mainstream of the new country. The
aforementioned federal commission reports of 1901, 1911, and 1931 _each_
observed that the children of immigrants are more predisposed toward crime
than their parents. 42

The phenomenon of crime among the second generation of the post-1965
immigration liberalization law is recent, and as such has not produced a large
body of research. But local law enforcement officials around the nation are
all too aware of Hispanic, Asian, and other youth gangs whose members largely
were born in the U.S. or were brought here as very young children. In suburban
Northern Virginia outside Washington, D.C., police estimate that about 20 to
30 ethnic gangs, with a combined total of more than 2,000 members, have been
responsible for dozens of recent attacks involving the use of machetes and
baseball bats. Some 600 youths in Fairfax County alone have ties to Mara
Salvatrucha, a notorious Los Angeles-based gang (founded in the 1980s by El
Salvadoran nationals) responsible for what likely have been hundreds of
slayings nationwide over the past decade.43

California State University, Chico, sociologist Tony Waters recently did a
full-scale analysis of second-generation immigrant crime, comparing data on
selected recent ethnic groups of today with data on certain groups of the
early 20th century. The results suggest that the problems brought by high
immigration levels can have a substantial echo effect.44 Waters found that
second-generation immigrant crime differs widely across nationalities. The key
element is the presence or absence of a large proportion of young males.
Ethnic groups with high proportions of young males, all things held equal,
have a bigger crime problem, although neighborhood ethnic heterogeneity,
poverty rates, and other factors do exert influence as well. In the case of
Laotians the time lag between migration to the emergence of youth crime was
only about five to 10 years, significantly shorter than, for example, Molokan
(Russian) immigrants of the 1920s. Table 1 shows the divergence in serious
crime rates Waters found among Asian second-generation youth in California in
the early 1990s.

![Table: Comparison of Serious Crime Rates Across Asian Ethnic

Youth](http://www.cis.org/sites/cis.org/files/articles/2001/crime/undere1.gif)

Waters is pessimistic that police can do much, beyond traditional means of law
enforcement, to stem second-generation youth crime, as it is rooted primarily
in the parent-child relationships that prevail within a given national
culture. So long as youthful crime is foremost a product of a high-birthrate
community, policies to acculturate such a community, will make only modest
inroads into reducing crime. "The only way to 'control' youthful crime in
immigrant groups," Waters notes, "is to adopt policies that are inconsistent
with a modern economy or to control/segregate immigrants in a fashion
inconsistent with the basic principles of civil rights. This could include
limiting the immigration of spouses. I must reluctantly conclude that little
can be done to prevent outbreaks of youthful crime among immigrant
populations."45

Some recent European studies also indicate a second-generation crime problem.
Dresden University criminologist Hans-Jorg Albrecht found that while first-
generation immigrant guest workers had crime rates comparable to those of
Germans, second and third generations had substantially higher rates.
Foreigners accounted for 25 percent of the prison population in 1994, while in
youth correctional facilities the figure stood at 50 percent; in pretrial
detention the share of foreigners in many regions reached as high as two-
thirds.46

# Federal Immigration Law Enforcement: Procedures and Complaints

## An Overview of the INS

Law enforcement and criminal justice, as they apply to the foreign-born as
well as the native-born, are mainly the provinces of state and local
government. But the federal role, led by the Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), part of the Justice Department, has been growing over time.
This country since 1917 has had some kind of framework for removing criminal
aliens; in 1925 Congress established the U.S. Border Patrol to provide a means
of arresting aliens who attempt to enter illegally. The current state of the
art in dealing with the problem consists of provisions inserted into various
crime and immigration legislation over the last few decades. Under current law
the INS is authorized to deport aliens convicted of "aggravated felonies"
violent, property, or drug crimes that are punishable by prison sentence of at
least one year, whether or not such a sentence was imposed or served. The INS
enforcement process typically begins when the agency's investigators identify
potentially deportable aliens within the federal, state, or local justice
systems. Because of limited resources, INS tends to avoid pursuing aliens who
are released on probation or a suspended sentence; instead the agency focuses
on persons nearing the end of a prison sentence.

Once an alien has served his time as with citizens, most do so in state rather
than federal prison INS detains that person and begins proceedings through its
Institutional Hearing Program (IHP) to determine his or her deportation
status. If after a certain length of time INS determines either that the alien
is deportable or that further investigation is needed, the agency places a
"hold" on that person. If the INS determines the alien poses no threat to the
public, it releases that person. If, on the other hand, the INS issues a
deportation order, the criminal alien is entitled to contest the decision.47
At the hearing, the alien may present various grounds for immunity, including
political asylum and extreme family hardship. The potential deportee may
appeal an adverse ruling through the Department of Justice, the federal courts
and, finally, the Supreme Court. If an alien has been deported for a felony,
he may not reenter. If he is caught reentering, he is subject to a prison
sentence of up to 20 years.48 A conviction is usually assured unless the
defendant is in the country lawfully. The INS usually identifies returned
felons through a computerized database of thumbprints from well over 2 million
deportees.

Even where immigrants have not committed a crime, INS performs a key
gatekeeper role in the naturalization process. All immigrants applying for
citizenship must fill out an application requiring them to list any prior
arrests or convictions, and swear under oath that the information is true and
complete. They also must have their fingerprints taken. Until fairly recently,
it was common for INS to deny citizenship on the grounds that lying about
one's criminal record was a demonstration of poor moral character. Pressure
from mass-immigration groups, however, has all but eliminated this explanation
as a basis for rejection.

## More Deportations in the Face of More Crime

In the face of high rates of immigrant crime, at least in certain states and
cities, the logical impulse is to demand INS remove more criminals. But the
reality is that INS is deporting criminal aliens at a record pace. During
fiscal years 1993-2000 the number of INS removals (deportations plus
exclusions)49 more than quadrupled from 42,469 to 181,572, while removals
related to criminal offenses grew two and a half times from 27,827 to 69,093
(see Table 2). By contrast, in fiscal 1984 the agency removed only about a
thousand aliens on criminal grounds.50 In any given year for the 1993-98
period Mexicans accounted for far more than half of all removals (see Table
3).

![Table: Aliens Removed by Criminal

Status](http://www.cis.org/sites/cis.org/files/articles/2001/crime/law.ht2.gif)

![Table: Criminal Aliens Removed by Region or Country of

Origin](http://www.cis.org/sites/cis.org/files/articles/2001/crime/law.ht3.gif)

There are several reasons for the huge jump in removals. First, and most
obviously, the federal government has put a high priority on the removal of
aliens. INS Commissioner Doris Meissner in Senate testimony last March pointed
to "identify and remove criminal aliens and minimize recidivism" as the top
agenda item in her agency's Interior Enforcement Strategy.51 Toward this end,
INS in recent years has pressed Congress for more funding for state and local
detention bed spaces, juvenile bed spaces, air transportation for aliens to
detention space and removal from the U.S.

Second, and related to the first, state governments, as they must pay for
prosecuting and incarcerating criminal aliens, have secured large amounts of
federal support through the 1994 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement
Act. The act initially authorized $1.2 billion for specialized enforcement
provisions, including border control, criminal alien deportation, asylum
reform, and a criminal alien tracking center. The law also authorized another
nearly $500 million to reimburse states and localities for the cost of
incarcerating aliens. The availability of federal aid has induced many states,
especially along the Mexican border, to develop programs to reduce illegal
entry, deter the employment of illegal immigrants, and improve crime-fighting
abilities.52 This has fostered closer cooperation between states and INS on
deportation strategies. A criminal alien's first contact with INS usually
occurs while in state prison. Through an enhanced Institutional Hearing
Program, states work closely with INS to start deportation proceedings before
immigrants are released. The INS also has developed programs to screen the
populations of jails in major metropolitan areas to identify offenders who may
never be sentenced to prison, but who are subject to deportation.

Third, INS has developed and implemented early-release programs pursuant to
the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996. The
law authorizes INS to deport nonviolent offenders who were otherwise not
eligible for early release when such removal "is appropriate and in the best
interest" of the U.S. or the respective state of incarceration. Several
states, including Florida and New York, have special programs that single out
foreign-born inmates to receive clemency or early parole in exchange for
immediate deportation.53 These early-release programs augment state prison
programs for inmates generally, in which time served in prison is shorter than
the sentence reflected in court records.

Fourth, Congress over the years has broadened the range of deportable
offenses. Current removal statistics include any alien who has been convicted
of a crime in the United States, even if the deportation or exclusion order is
not based on the criminal conviction that resulted in the sentence. A
"criminal alien" now can be so classified on grounds that he entered without
proper inspection. The federal government's war on drugs, though not
intentionally directed at immigrants, since the 1980s has had the effect of
putting many in prison. Laws over the years have stiffened penalties for
violations involving controlled substances. Butcher and Piehl concluded that
immigrants were disproportionately incarcerated for drug-related crimes.54

Fifth, many aliens who are arrested for deportable offenses are hardly first-
timers in the criminal justice system. In fact, in a number of cases, they
already had been deported, reentered the U.S., and committed another crime.
The General Accounting Office in a mid-1980s analysis of 200 cases in the New
York City area found that among aliens arrested for such offenses, 77 percent
had been arrested at least once before, 45 percent at least twice, and 11
percent five or more times. Among aliens convicted after being identified as
potentially deportable, 44 percent had been convicted at least once, 23
percent more than once and 3 percent five or more times. Six percent of these
aliens had been deported as criminal aliens, returned to the United States and
were rearrested at least once after returning; 5 percent had been deported
twice and were rearrested at least once after their second return.55 In its
mid-1980s six-city study the GAO analyzed FBI criminal history records on 165
deported criminal aliens, and found 56 had reentered the U.S. at least once
and had come into contact with the criminal justice system. These 56 aliens
collectively accounted for 152 deportations, 122 reentries, and 260 arrests.56
A 1992 report to Congress indicated that INS agents encountered and arrested
461 previously deported criminal aliens who had re-entered the U.S. in fiscal
1991. Senate investigative staff, however, believed the re-entry figure was
far higher because many criminals travel back and forth across the
U.S.-Mexican border with impunity.57

## Obstacles to Deportation: Foreign Governments

It is a mark of the severity of the immigrant crime problem that it may have
gotten worse despite the sharp upswing since the mid-1980s in arrests,
convictions, and deportations. Common sense would dictate the focus should be
on removing obstacles to deportation. These hurdles have rightfully drawn much
attention, especially as they intertwine immigration with foreign policy.

One obstacle is that immigrant criminals continue their life of crime in their
native country. Foreign diplomats report that criminal activity among recent
deportees is "a major factor" or "the main reason" for sharply rising crime
rates throughout Central America and the Caribbean.58 Taylor and Aleinikoff
observe:

> _The growing presence of U.S. gangs in El Salvador (and to a lesser extent
throughout the region) is perhaps the most visible example. The Salvadoran
Civilian National Police force, which was rebuilt from scratch as part of the
1992 peace accord, simply does not have the training or equipment to stem the
tide of violent crime that is sweeping the country. As criminal alien
deportations increase, the sheer numbers can overwhelm the already
insufficient law enforcement capabilities of many receiving countries._

It's not hard to understand why the governments of El Salvador and elsewhere
are reluctant to take back their criminal aliens who come to the U.S. Indeed,
foreign governments have created measures of their own to impede INS removal
efforts. Some, such as Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam, flatly refuse to take back
their criminals, making the U.S. the government by default of effectively
stateless alien criminals. Israel is unusual in that it refuses to extradite
its citizens, a major problem since many top-echelon Russian-Jewish organized
crime figures in the U.S. and elsewhere have become Israeli citizens.59
Foreign non-cooperation explains why the 1980 boatlift from Cuba's Port of
Mariel had such a devastating long-run impact on this country. As many as
40,000 criminals, many dumped by the Castro government, entered the U.S. by
way of the South Florida coast.60 Immune to repatriation, these immigrants, a
large portion of them hardened criminals, settled in Florida or scattered
about the U.S. to ply their trade. In Elizabeth, N.J. some 600 of the several
thousand Mariel refugees who settled in the city later were arrested for
felonies. In nearby Union City, N.J., these aliens committed about one-third
of all felonies in the mid-1980s. And in Las Vegas, law enforcement officials
estimated about one-fourth of all Cuban refugees in the city were career
criminals.61

Most nations do not have an explicit policy of refusal to take back criminals.
But any number of them have devised ways to make the process more lengthy and
costly for the INS.62 First, these countries often stall in verifying the
identity of potential deportees. Second, they delay in securing travel
documents. Finally, they may link criminal alien deportations to ongoing
negotiations over extradition treaties. Each of these actions raises the cost
of detention until the final deportation order, and possibly frustrates INS
out of issuing the order in the first place.

## Obstacles to Deportation: Domestic Politics

However fitfully, INS has managed to stem a large amount of potential
immigrant crime. But as immigration, legal and illegal, reached record-high
levels during the 1990s, meeting its responsibilities has grown more
difficult. To be sure, it is a large agency, with an enormous range of
activities now costing more than $4 billion a year combined. By the end of
fiscal year 2000 there were some 32,000 INS employees, twice as many as when
Bill Clinton became president. Of that figure, 9,212 served as Border Patrol
agents, more than double the FY 1993 total of 3,965.63 Trying to identify,
apprehend, and remove some 6 million illegal immigrants, whose net numbers
increase annually by 275,000,64 is a daunting enough task. Yet despite
increases in money and manpower, federal, state, and local law enforcement
officials still argue that the INS and other federal law enforcement agencies
lack the sufficient tools.

That may well be true, at least under current immigration law. But INS in
particular has structural weaknesses that need reform regardless of its
funding levels. For one thing, like any number of federal agencies, INS can
fall prey to intense politicization. Rarely was this more pronounced than
during 1996, when enforcement in several district offices all but broke down.
Separate investigations by Congress, the General Accounting Office, and the
Justice Department, as summarized in a chapter of David Schippers recent book,
_Sellout: The Inside Story of President Clinton's Impeachment_ ,65 revealed
the Clinton White House had intimidated INS officials into speeding up the
naturalization process for hundreds of thousands of aliens, a sizeable portion
of whom were felons, in the months before the 1996 election.

## Exploding Workloads, Inadequate Resources

INS has encountered substantial criticism over the years to the effect that
the right hand doesn't know what the left hand is doing. Sen. William Roth,
R-Del., summarizing a subcommittee report in 1993, noted that in addition to
lacking sufficient resources to combat immigrant crime, the agency often made
ineffective use of the resources available to it. The computer system, he
said, seemed "totally inadequate to the task." Worse, he noted, was the
labyrinth of procedures INS had to follow in order to deport someone,
procedures so time-consuming and filled with loopholes that criminal aliens
could stay in the U.S. for years while they appeal their cases.66 The crime
act of 1994 and the immigration act two years later did address some of these
problems, but the reality remains that INS is a bureaucracy bound by
cumbersome rules.

Whether one sees INS's shortcomings as due to external influence or internal
inefficiency, the agency has often has fallen short of its mission of removing
alien criminals. Recent reports by the General Accounting Office indicate the
agency's efforts to identify and remove imprisoned aliens need improvement. In
a 1997 report, based on a sample of some 17,000 inmates, the GAO estimated INS
in fiscal 1995 released nearly 2,000 criminal aliens into U.S. communities
without a prior determination of risk they posed to public safety. INS, upon
GAO request, found that 23 percent of a sample of 635 criminal aliens had been
rearrested for crimes, including 183 felonies. The INS did not complete the
Institutional Hearing Program process for the majority of criminal aliens
released from federal and five state prisons in the second half of FY 1995.
The INS database in 1995 did not have records on about a third of foreign-born
released inmates. The report cited a shortage of qualified agents the
attrition rate for INS enforcement agents was about 30 percent, much higher
than the 11 percent for INS staff and resistance from certain states to
cooperate fully in the IHP process as major explanations for the problems.67

The GAO issued a follow-up report in 1998 analyzing data on more than 19,000
individuals in the custody of either four populous states or the U.S. Bureau
of Prisons, and identified as foreign-born and released from prisons during
January 1 through June 30, 1997. This report showed INS and the Executive
Office for Immigration Review did not have records on 7,144, or 36 percent, of
these persons. Of that portion, 1,903, or 27 percent, were potentially
deportable aliens and about 1,200 of that latter figure were aggravated
felons. Breaking the sample down further, 80 of these criminal aliens already
had been rearrested. On a more positive note, of the 12,495 potentially
deportable cases for which INS did have records, more than 90 percent were
removed from the U.S. within one month of prison release, something the GAO
also found two years earlier.68 Yet a large portion of criminal aliens
released to INS did not have final deportation orders at the time, something
contributing toward higher detention costs (see Table 4).

![Table: Criminal Aliens Released to INS from Prison Without Final Deportation

Orders

\(FY1997\)](http://www.cis.org/sites/cis.org/files/articles/2001/crime/law.ht4.gif)

The Immigration and Naturalization Service's main problem is its exploding
workload. That is why despite its successes, the immigrant crime problem
paradoxically seems every bit as intractable as it did two decades ago.
Despite having expanded authority and funding to track down, arrest, and
remove felons, INS is swimming upstream. The pressure to constantly do much
more with limited resources has taken a toll on Border Patrol agents; since
the mid-1990s the patrol's annual attrition rate has doubled from around 5
percent to 10 percent.69 The INS faces increasing pressures to loosen
admissions and citizenship standards, especially from ethnic and other
organizations that tend to be allied with the Democratic Party. What the
agency needs is a smaller workload, not simply more administrators and law-
enforcement agents. This, unfortunately, is something that requires the
political will to initiate major changes in laws governing admissions
eligibility.

# Controlling Immigrant Crime: The Challenge Ahead

## "Reform INS": A Familiar Refrain

In the last two decades some 15 million immigrants have entered our country to
live, with a current backlog of some two million awaiting naturalization. Most
resident aliens are not criminals, and most future immigrants will not turn
out to be criminals either. But many are, and it is the responsibility of the
federal government, working with states and localities, to deport those who
are criminals as quickly as possible, barring unusual circumstances.

Calls by members of Congress and other critics to "reform INS" are legion. But
there are realistic limits as to how much can be accomplished so long as basic
immigration policies remain intact. The INS is a bureaucracy bound by
statutory mandate. Whatever the agency can do to secure more funding and legal
authority, it can do no more than what Congress allows it to do. Reorganizing
INS to perform its functions more efficiently will have only limited effect,
in lieu of action on the part of Congress to reduce immigration. A number of
critics of INS have proposed splitting the agency into separate admissions and
enforcement components. Rep. Rogers of Kentucky remarked on the need for this
following the release of INS crime data by his subcommittee in March 2000.
While campaigning last June President George W. Bush recommended similar
action, calling for an associate attorney general to head each agency.70 But
beyond symbolism, it is uncertain how effective this reorganization would be.
It would leave the agency with a limited capacity to investigate, arrest, and
remove criminals. A split INS bureaucracy may result in inconsistencies in
data collection and other operations. Worse, the agency would have an
implicitly schizophrenic mission, with the service portion of the agency
placing out a welcome mat at the same time the enforcement section wields a
heavy stick.

## Controlling the "Uncontrollable"

The greatest challenge facing INS is what it _can't_ control namely, the
currently allowable levels of immigration, and by extension, the illegal entry
and visa overstays these levels invite. The current annual legal immigration
level of close to one million, not to mention hundreds of thousands of
"temporary" admissions, has placed a strain on the agency's capacity to
fulfill its basic mission. Statutory retroactive amnesty has made things
worse. The 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act granted general amnesty
(legal resident status) to illegal immigrants who could prove they were in the
U.S. on or before December 31, 1981, or to certain farm workers; more than 2.8
million aliens subsequently received amnesty over the following several years.
71 President Clinton, after threatening to veto the fiscal 2001 budget deal
unless more than a million extra immigrants were allowed a chance of becoming
legal residents, agreed last fall to an immigration package that will help
roughly half that many.72 But even a half-measure for blanket amnesty would
seem to invite crime. Unconditional amnesty rests on the premise that
immigrants, skilled or not, are an asset to the nation. The new provision
likely will further undermine INS's authority to enforce the law, and require
ever-rising levels of necessary federal intrusion into state and local law
enforcement functions.

The main challenge is to discourage entry and residence by criminals without
treating all immigrants as though they were criminals. Beyond more thorough
law enforcement, Congress needs to change the main basis of entry from family
reunification to education and job skills and reduce annual legal immigration
ceilings. Canada in 1994 did both; there is no reason why the U.S. cannot do
likewise.

## Employment Skills as a Brake on Crime

Admitting mainly skilled immigrants would to some extent act as a de facto
brake on immigrant crime. There is no mystery in this. The very process of
acquiring and building skills appeals to a person willing to forgo the short-
term gratification crime provides; someone who has taken years to become
educated and employable at a high level of responsibility is typically not the
sort of person who will see crime as a short-cut to riches. By contrast, a
career criminal, often having a short time horizon, will view education and
training as a diversion from "real" moneymaking ventures. From his standpoint,
it makes little sense to spend months, let alone years, gaining skills to
acquire the good things in life that can be acquired through force or
stealth.73 To require a college degree and requisite skills likely would
produce the unintended benefit of locking out many career criminals.

The criminal element can be seen as the paramount example of what economist
and cultural historian Thomas Sowell terms "negative human capital." Human
capital is a process by which people, whether acting as individuals,
communities, nations, or civilizations, transmit a complex set of cultural
values from one generation to the next. It is less economic assets than
knowledge that creates wealth; two ethnic groups in a similar geographic
setting can have vastly differing outcomes based on the accumulation of
knowledge and the values that enable knowledge to flourish.74 People who
commit crimes, or raise children who do the same, are in a sense robbing a
nation of its capital just as surely as those who engage in productive, legal
enterprise are building capital. Harvard labor economist George Borjas has
used this idea of human capital to advocate a shift in immigration policy that
favors newcomers who have tangible employment skills.75 Though ethnic groups
do differ in the types of skills they lend to a particular culture, a skills-
based immigration policy need not invoke ethnic exclusion. It rests on the
premise that admitting people with economic skills would serve this nation
better in the long run than admitting people without economic skills.

But let us understand that making employment skills the main basis for
immigration is not sufficient to deter crime. Many immigrants already come
here literate, gainfully employed and knee-deep in crime. "Many of today's
foremost Russian mobsters have Ph.D.s in mathematics, engineering, or physics,
helping them to acquire an expertise in advanced encryption and computer
technology," writes Robert Friedman.76 Some mobsters bluntly admit that their
purpose in coming here is to get rich by any means, legal or not.77 Written
testimony before Congress in 1987 on the impact of the Mariel boatlift
immigrants on South Florida described these people this way: "They generally
possess education and skill levels above the average for those remaining in
Cuba and about the same as those who arrived in the 1970s."78 To be sure, not
all or even most of the refugees were criminals, but the boatlift contained an
alarming number of people who were. Butcher and Piehl found that the most
recent foreign-born, though doing less well in the labor market, committed
fewer crimes relative to earlier immigrants compared to the native-born.79

## Restrict Immigration, Legal and Illegal

Congress must restrict the number of immigrants who may enter this nation
legally in a given year to make major headway in crime control. Such action
most likely would reduce immigrant crime in proportional as well as absolute
numbers. In other words, a smaller percentage of immigrants at any given time
would be involved in crime. This is because high levels of legal immigration
act as a spur for high levels of illegal immigration80 and it is members of
the latter category, by definition already lawbreakers, who have the least to
lose by committing felonies.

If lowering legal levels also triggers a drop in illegal entries, an
overworked INS may be better able to enforce immigration laws, especially as
it concerns the growing problem of illegal incursions from across the Mexican
border. Border Patrol officials have cracked down on such entries in the
mid-1990s, successfully, in the key urban entry points of San Diego and El
Paso.81 But the effect of restricting entry in key selected locations has
produced a "balloon effect," in which a large portion of illegal entries occur
elsewhere in sparsely populated areas. "Cut down the flow of illegals in El
Paso or San Diego," observes anthropologist Glynn Custred, "and it moves to
places like Douglas [Ariz.] and from there to ranch lands and even deeper into
the desert beyond."82 Indeed, as Custred noted, in the first six months of
2000 U.S. Border Patrol agents apprehended 176,655 illegal aliens in the
21-mile Douglas section of the border alone. Much of the incentive to enter is
encouraged by smugglers now charging $1,500 a head. To combat the problem the
Border Patrol is building up to 1,300 miles of road and installing fences,
surveillance cameras, and thousands of stadium-style lights along the border
in order to combat drug traffickers, thieves, and undocumented aliens from
entering.83

While such actions require support, there is no substitute in the long run for
action on the one thing that can drive down illegal immigration: Less legal
immigration. This means not only lowering annual ceilings, but resisting calls
for an expansion of general amnesty for the foreign-born, the latter of which
induces more illegal immigration. Until such action is taken, potential
illegal entrants (including visa overstays) will view expanded amnesty as a
case of "when" rather than "if."

## A Clear Message

That most immigrants live within the law is neither disputable nor
enlightening. Most native-born Americans aren't criminals either. But though
we cannot deport or keep out citizens, we can apply the principle of exclusion
to immigrants. It is a matter of public safety that immigrants with a history
of felony arrests and convictions in their native countries are kept out of
the U.S., and those who commit crimes here are removed and kept outside our
borders. It is a triumph of hope over experience to imagine that a career
criminal will exhibit a capacity for self-reform if coaxed to try harder. The
criminal does not view human relations through the same prism that non-
criminals do. The gangster who runs credit-card and cigarette tax scams, the
mob enforcer, the wife beater who invokes "tradition" and uses his spouse's
immigrant status to keep her in line for them, crime is a vehicle to exalt an
inflated sense of infallibility. They are predators, and most people
instinctively avoid challenging them because they do not want to be prey.
Predators do not change without intensive therapy, and even then the odds are
against it.84 The United States can ill afford to serve as the world's crime
control and rehabilitation center. It is a message we ought to be sending
other nations, as we keep doors open to the law-abiding only.

# End Notes

1Avis Thomas-Lester, "Salvadoran Fugitives Frustrate Police," _The Washington
Post_ , July 18, 1998.

2 Robert I. Friedman, _Red Mafiya: How the Russian Mob Has Invaded America_ ,
Boston: Little, Brown, 2000.

3 It should be noted that about 95 percent of all non-citizens admitted to
this country each year are not immigrants, but tourists, business persons,
students, and other persons who do not arrive with the intent of living here.
The term "immigrant" refers only to those persons who come to live here, but
who are not (or not yet) citizens. It does not include immigrants who are
naturalized citizens.

4 See John Bodnar, _The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in Urban
America_ , Bloomington, Ind.: University of Indiana Press, 1985, p. 132.

5 "Immigration and the Justice System," _Research Perspectives on Migration_ ,
July/August 1997, Vol. 1, No. 5, Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace and the Urban Institute, p. 2.

6 For a discussion of these early studies, see ibid., pp. 4-5; also Michael
Tonry, ed., _Ethnicity, Crime and Immigration: Comparative and Cross-National
Perspectives_ , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997, Introduction, pp.
20-21.

7 Cited in Thomas Muller, _Immigrants and the American City_ , New York: New
York University Press, 1993, p. 214.

8 U.S. General Accounting Office, _Criminal Aliens: INS Enforcement
Activities_ , GAO/GGD-88-3, November 10, 1987. The six cities in question were
Chicago, Denver, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami and New York.

9 The Census Bureau estimated at the time that aliens represented about 50
percent of foreign-born Americans. See "Criminal Aliens: INS Enforcement,"
statement of Lowell Dodge, GAO Director of Administration of Justice Issues,
before the House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration,
Refugees and International Law, Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting
Office, November 1, 1989, p. 4.

10 Kristin F. Butcher and Anne Morrison Piehl, "Recent Immigrants: Unexpected
Implications for Crime and Incarceration," Working Paper 6067, Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 1997. This study (same
title) also appears in Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, No. 4,
July 1998, pp. 654-79.

11 Kristin F. Butcher and Anne Morrison Piehl, "Cross-City Evidence on the
Relationship Between Immigration and Crime," _Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management_ , Vol. 17, No. 3, 1998, pp. 457-93.

12 John Hagan and Alberto Palloni, "Immigration and Crime in the United
States," in The Immigration Debate: Studies on the Economic, Demographic, and
Fiscal Effects of Immigration, James P. Smith and Barry Edmonston, eds.,
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1998, pp. 367-87. Significantly, as
border cities, El Paso and San Diego were less than representative of local
criminal justice systems elsewhere in the U.S. This point is made in
"Immigration and the Justice System," pp. 11-12.

13 The INS admitted that it was unable to perform estimates on the total
number of crimes because the records of one-third of those released were not
available through the FBI's criminal tracking system.

14For a good example of this syndrome, see various essays in Juan F. Perea,
ed., _Immigrants Out! The New Nativism and the Anti-Immigrant Impulse in the
United States_ , New York: New York University Press, 1997.

15 Peter Brimelow, _Alien Nation: Common Sense About America's Immigration
Disaster_ , New York: Random House, 1995, p. 185.

16 Lisa Bastian, _Hispanic Victims_ , Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report, January 1990.

17 Jasmine Kripalani, "Hispanics Unlikely to Report Crime, Police Say,"
_Memphis Commercial Appeal_ , August 7, 2000.

18 "Immigration and the Justice System," p. 8.

19 Doris Sue Wong, "Gaps Seen in Help for Abused Immigrants," _Boston Globe_ ,
June 23, 1999.

20 David Rohde, "Couple Charged with Holding Girl in Servitude," _The New York
Times_ , July 15, 1999.

21 Cited in Amy Klein, "Alleged Slavery in Detroit Area Reflects Disturbing
Global Trend," _Detroit Free Press_ , August 10, 2000.

22 For good summaries, see J.L. Barkas, Victims, New York: Scribners, 1978; M.
A. Douglas, "The Battered Woman Syndrome," in _Domestic Violence on Trial:
Psychological and Legal Dimensions of Family Violence_ , D.J. Sonkin, ed., New
York: Springer, 1987, pp. 39-54; and Jennifer Freyd, _Betrayal Trauma: The
Logic of Forgetting Child Abuse_ , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1996.

23 Thomas Huang, "Immigrant Women Can Face Added Barriers When Trying to
Escape from Abusive Spouses," _Dallas Morning News_ , August 20, 1998.

24 Michelle Koidin, "Lawyers Confront Immigration Dilemma," Associated Press,
July 2, 1999.

25 Huang, "Immigrant Women..."

26 Quoted in "Immigrants and Crime," Washington, D.C.: Federation for American
Immigration Reform, 1997.

27 "Mexican Immigrant Couple Arrested in Smuggling Ring," _The Washington
Post_ , August 16, 1997.

28 "The New Slave Trade," _Newsweek_ , June 21, 1993.

29 "Phone Card Fraud Flourishes Among Recent Immigrants," _Los Angeles Times_
, April 8, 1993.

30 "They Take Plastic," _Worth_ , March 1994. Nigerian immigrants have
presented an especially thorny crime problem in the U.S. In 1993 David Simcox,
writing in _Social Contract magazine_ , reported U.S. law enforcement
officials estimate about 75 percent of the 100,000 Nigerians by then in this
country were involved in "an impressive and innovative variety of fraud
schemes." This is a remarkable figure, but it may seem less so in the context
of that nation's indigenous political culture. A 1997 international survey
ranked Nigeria as the most corrupt country in the world. See Barbara Crosette,
"Survey Ranks Nigeria as Most Corrupt Nation," _The New York Times_ , August
3, 1997.

31 See Elaine Shannon, "A New Credit-Card Scam," _Time_ , June 5, 2000, p. 54.
Regan believes the real take in this scam is a good deal higher than an
industry estimate of $125 million for 1999.

32 Saskia Sassen, _Guests and Aliens_ , New York: The New Press, 1999, p. 115.

33 Friedman, _Red Mafiya_ , pp. 218-19.

34 "Death on the Spot," _Newsweek_ , December 13, 1993.

35 FAIR, "Immigrants and Crime."

36 Susan Pennell and Christine Curtis, "The Impact of Undocumented Aliens on
the Criminal Justice System," draft paper, San Diego Association of
Governments, October 1986.

37 Dale Maharidge, _The Coming White Minority: California's Eruptions and
America's Future_ , New York: Times Books, 1996. Interestingly, almost none of
the crimes occurred within the city's growing number of gated residential
communities. This suggests that a lot more immigrant crime would be occurring
if the opportunities were more available. Dana Point had been the focus of a
lot of countywide tension following the murder of a white teenager by Hispanic
gang members and the murder of an Asian gang member by several of his own
kind.

38 Butcher and Piehl, "Cross-City Evidence," p. 461.

39 Robert J. Sampson, Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls, "Neighborhoods
and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy," _Science_ ,
Vol. 277, August 15, 1997, pp. 918-24.

40 See Wesley G. Skogan, _Disorder and Decline: Crime and the Spiral of Decay
in American Neighborhoods_ , New York: Free Press, 1990; James Q. Wilson and
George Kelling, "Making Neighborhoods Safe," _The Atlantic Monthly_ , February
1989, pp. 46-52.

41 This is the classic view held by Clifford Shaw and Henry McKay, _Juvenile
Delinquency and Urban Areas,_ Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1942 (rev.
ed., 1969).

42 "Immigration and the Justice System," pp. 4-5; Michael Tonry, Introduction,
_Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration_ , pp. 20-21.

43 Josh White, "Attacks Raise Fears of Rise of Va. Gangs," _The Washington
Post_ , November 20, 2000.

44 Tony Waters, _Crime & Immigrant Youth_, Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage
Publications, 1999.

45Ibid., p. 202.

46 Hans-Jorg Albrecht, "Ethnic Minorities, Crime, and Criminal Justice in
Germany," in Tonry, Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration, pp. 31-99.

47 The 1994 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act authorized the use
of administrative removals, thus bypassing a required court hearing for aliens
not lawfully admitted for permanent residence who were convicted of an
aggravated felony, but were not eligible for relief from removal. There is no
doubt this has removed a lot of bottlenecks in the deportation process.

48 In practice, the average sentence for reentry is 60 months (five years),
according to the U.S. Attorney in Utah, David Schwendiman, who spearheaded a
successful crackdown in immigrant crime in that state. Brian Maffly,
"Increased Staffing Accounts for Leap in Prosecution of Illegally Returning
Felons," _Salt Lake Tribune_ , July 29, 1998.

49 Formally, most removals of illegal immigrants fall under what the INS
classifies as "voluntary removals with safeguards." Under this arrangement,
the alien admits to his illegal status and agrees to leave the country.
Virtually all these cases involve Mexican border jumpers. A deportation occurs
when the alien does not admit to illegal status or is not offered the option;
in such cases, INS places the alien under "docket control" and prepares a file
on that person for potential use in a hearing.

50 _Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service_ ,
annually, and other INS sources. See also Margaret H. Taylor and T. Alexander
Aleinikoff, _Deportation of Criminal Aliens: A Geopolitical Perspective_ ,
Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Dialogue, 1998, p. 1.

51 Testimony of Commissioner Doris Meissner, Immigration and Naturalization
Service, before the U.S. Senate, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on
Commerce, Justice, State, and the Judiciary concerning the President's FY 2001
Budget Request, March 7, 2000, p. 10.

52 See U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, "Crime &
Illegal Immigration: Emerging Local, State & Federal Partnerships," _National
Institute of Justice Journal_ , June 1997, p. 6.

53 These early-release programs are in addition to the standard time-credit
and good-behavior guidelines that states have for prisoners generally. This
explains why for immigrants, as well as citizens, actual time served is often
far less than the sentence indicated in court records. As a result of these
sentence-reduction mechanisms, state prison inmates on average serve 38
percent of their total sentence. See U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics Bulletin, NCJ-163391, _Felony Sentences in State Courts_ ,
1994, January 1997.

54 Kristin F. Butcher and Anne Morrison Piehl, "The Role of Deportation in the
Incarceration of Immigrants," in Issues in the Economics of Immigration,
George J. Borjas, ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp. 351-85.
Interestingly, the authors admitted (p. 354) that they excluded from the data
"lifers" those immigrants in for murder because they do not have determinate
sentences. It is precisely such criminals, however, that give most cause for
concern.

55 U.S. General Accounting Office, _Criminal Aliens: INS's Investigative
Efforts in the New York City Area_ , GAO/GGD-86-58BR, March 1986.

56 U.S. General Accounting Office, _Criminal Aliens: INS Enforcement
Activities_.

57 U.S. Senate, Committee on Governmental Affairs, Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations, _Hearing on Criminal Aliens in the United States_ , Staff
Statement, November 10, 1993, p. 25.

58 Taylor and Aleinikoff, p. 8.

59 Friedman, _Red Mafiya_ , p. 277-78. Israeli police officials estimate that
Russian-Jewish mobsters have poured more than $4 billion into Israel's
economy, though estimates range as high as $20 billion.

60 See Muller, _Immigrants and the American City_ , p. 214. Not all immigrants
from the boatlift were criminals. The boatlift was an outgrowth of a three-way
dispute between Cuba, the U.S., and Peru over the right of some 3,500
dissident Cubans to seek asylum in the Peruvian Embassy in Havana. The U.S.
agreed to accept the dissidents if they first went to Costa Rica. Castro
responded that anyone who wished to leave his country could, but had to go
directly to the United States. The initial wave of flotillas received
extensive media coverage, inducing Cuban exiles in the Miami area to charter
boats and (in violation of U.S. law) pick up family, relatives, and friends in
Cuba. In a relatively short time some 125,000 Cubans had arrived in Key West
and other South Florida points. The Carter administration was in a double
bind. On one hand it wanted to aid those escaping an enemy nation, but on the
other hand officials realized the result was chaos. About two weeks after the
exodus began there were reports that Castro was using the crisis to empty his
prisons and mental institutions. At that point popular support for the
boatlift cooled, and Carter officials imposed fines and seized vessels. See
Roger Daniels, _Coming to America: A History of Immigration and Ethnicity in
American Life_ , New York: HarperCollins, 1990 (paperback ed., 1991), p. 347.

61 "In retrospect," argues Muller, "the acceptance of these criminals ranks as
one of the most ill-conceived decisions of the Carter administration." (ibid.,
p. 215). For a detailed look at the impact of the Mariel boatlift on Dade
County and elsewhere in Florida, see U.S. Senate, Committee on Governmental
Affairs, _Illegal Alien Felons: A Federal Responsibility_ , Hearing Before the
Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting, One Hundredth
Congress, First Session, March 12, 1987, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1988.

62Taylor and Aleinikoff, "Deportation of Criminal Aliens," p. 9.

63 U.S. General Accounting Office, Border Patrol Hiring: Despite Recent
Initiatives, Fiscal Year 1999 Hiring Goal Was Not Met, GAO/GGD-00-39, December
1999, p. 7; James Pinkerton, "1,708 New Agents Help Beef Up Force for the U.S.
Border Patrol," _Houston Chronicle_ , November 17, 2000. The latest round of
hiring came from a pool of a record-high 91,000 applicants and employed $2,000
signing bonuses to lure applicants.

64 U.S. Department of Justice, _Crime & Illegal Immigration_, p. 3.

65 David P. Schippers with Alan P. Henry, _Sellout: The Inside Story of
President Clinton's Impeachment_ , Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 2000, see pp.
37-49. This information may also be found at , in the Center for Immigration
Studies' Backgrounder excerpted from the book. Schippers served as chief
counsel to the House Managers impeachment trial. The administration's
pressuring of INS to relax naturalization requirements in order to pad
Democrat voting strength would have become part of the articles of impeachment
were it not for the arrival of the referral from Independent Counsel Kenneth
Starr before Schippers could develop more evidence and interview witnesses.

66U.S. Senate, _Hearing on Criminal Aliens in the United States_ , pp. 2-3.

67 U.S. General Accounting Office, _Criminal Aliens: INS Efforts to Identify
and Remove Imprisoned Aliens Need to be Improved_ , Statement of Norman J.
Rabkin, Director, Administration of Justice Issues, General Government
Division, GAO/T-GGD-97-154, July 15, 1997.

68 U.S. General Accounting Office, _Criminal Aliens: INS Efforts to Remove
Imprisoned Aliens Continue to Need Improvement_ , GAO/GGD-99-3, October 1998;
See also statement on this report by Norman J. Rabkin, GAO/T-GGD-99-47,
February 25, 1999.

69 See U.S. General Accounting Office, _Border Patrol Hiring_ , p. 7.

70 Terry M. Neal, "Bush Proposes Splitting Duties of INS," Washington Post,
June 27, 2000. Significantly, Bush unveiled his proposal in a speech before
the national convention of the League of United Latin American Citizens, or
LULAC, in Washington. He made clear his intent to step up federal outreach
efforts to Hispanics. The speech focused less on the INS's basic function of
enforcing our borders than on finding ways to provide a more user-friendly way
of welcoming new arrivals.

71 The total figure as of the summer of 2000 was 2,829,655. But this figure
does not include immigrants who have benefitted from other forms of
Congressionally-granted amnesties. Taking these into account, the grand total
of amnesties was 4,055,805. See "The Amnesty Tote Board," _FAIR Immigration
Report_ , July/August 2000, p. 5.

72In the original administration proposal, immigrants from El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, and Honduras would enjoy the same amnesty provisions as
those now enjoyed by nationals from Nicaragua and Cuba.

73 See Stanton Samenow, _Inside the Criminal Mind_ , New York: Times Books,
1984, pp. 67-93; William Tucker, _Vigilante: The Backlash Against Crime in
America_ , Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.: Stein and Day, 1985, pp. 173-96.

74 Thomas Sowell, _Conquests and Cultures: An International History_ , New
York: Basic Books, 1998, pp. 334-41.

75 George J. Borjas, Heaven's Door: Immigration Policy and the American
Economy, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999.

76 Friedman, _Red Mafiya_ , p. xviii. The author on the same page quotes a
senior Treasury Department official: "Hell, it took them about a week to
figure out how to counterfeit the $100 Super Note," unveiled in 1997 as
"tamper-proof."

77A police detective in Brighton Beach (Brooklyn) puts it this way: "The
Russian gangsters have told me that they've come here to suck our country
dry." See Friedman, _ibid._ , p. 286.

78Written testimony by Janet Reno, Florida State Attorney General, in _Illegal
Alien Felons: A Federal Responsibility_ , p. 61.

79 Butcher and Piehl, "Recent Immigrants."

80 See Mark Krikorian, "Legal and Illegal Immigration," _The New York Post_ ,
February 26, 1997.

81 See Glynn Custred, _"Alien Crossings,"_ _The American Spectator_ , October
2000, pp. 38-43, especially pp. 39-40.

82Ibid., p. 40.

83 Dane Schiller, "Patrol Pushes Border Defense," _San Antonio Express-News_ ,
October 6, 2000.

84 Samenow, _Inside the Criminal Mind_ , pp. 95-137.

* * *

About the Author

Carl F. Horowitz is a Washington, D.C.-area policy consultant. Previously, he
had been Washington correspondent with _Investor's Business Daily_ , housing
and urban affairs policy analyst with The Heritage Foundation, and assistant
professor of urban and regional planning at Virginia Polytechnic Institute. He
has a Ph.D. in urban planning and policy development from Rutgers University.

Topics: Costs of Immigration, Politics, District of Columbia, Criminal Aliens

Report

## Media Interviews

![Jessica Vaughan Discusses Border

Crisis](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-06/jessica-

dobbs-060819-small.png?itok=7U0OVqOa)

Jessica Vaughan Discusses Border Crisis

![Andrew Arthur Discusses MS-13 Murder in

Maryland](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-05/art-

tucker-052319-small.png?itok=R1DrcngJ)

Andrew Arthur Discusses MS-13 Murder in Maryland

![Mark Krikorian Discusses Legislation and

Policy](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-02/krikorian-

wj-021219-small.png?itok=GYWgO8OW)

Mark Krikorian Discusses Legislation and Policy

## Popular Today

    
        * Maps: Sanctuary Cities, Counties, and States 
    * Notes on The Mexican Military's Mission to the Guatemala-Mexico Border
    * Somalia-Born Candidate for Congress Accused of Immigration/Marriage Fraud
    

## Related Articles

    
        * Administration's Border Funding Request Becomes Clear
    * President to Seek Additional Border Funding
    * It's Tax Day — And Another Year Without Migration-Related Tax Reform
    

## More from the Author

The Center for Immigration Studies is an independent, non-partisan, non-profit
research organization founded in 1985. It is the nation's only think tank
devoted exclusively to research and policy analysis of the economic, social,
demographic, fiscal, and other impacts of immigration on the United States.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

