

![logo](https://cdn.viahero.com/static/media/logo.fe3c0caa.svg)

    
        * How it works
    * Why ViaHero
    * Pricing
    * Sample guidebook
    

__

    
        * Find a Hero __
    
    * Other...
    
    * Login
    * How it works
    * Why ViaHero
    * Pricing
    * Sample guidebook
    * Become a Hero
    * Help Desk
    

![Is Mexico City Safe for Travel in

2019?](https://cdn.buttercms.com/M6lvGdARTneSgot6jR9T)

# Is Mexico City Safe for Travel in 2019?

ViaHero * Updated March 14, 2019

Although other areas of Mexico are under U.S. travel advisories and warnings,
Mexico City is not under any travel restrictions.

Like all other major cities, certain areas should be avoided and necessary
precautions taken to ensure your security. Visitors are highly encouraged to
remain aware of their surroundings to avoid potentially dangerous situations.

**Want to explore Mexico differently? Have a local plan your trip.**

Here are important tips for safe travel in Mexico City, including which
_colonias_ (neighborhoods) are most visitor-friendly, what areas should be
avoided, and other safety concerns. Any questions? Send us a message.

### Mexico City Neighborhoods

Mexico City is composed of 350 colonias (neighborhoods), which may initially
seem intimidating but in fact are easy to navigate once you get a feel for the
city.

Mexico City actually has an incredibly high police-to-civilian ratio at 1:100,
helped by 11,000 security cameras around the city itself.

![Cute neighborhood in Mexico

City](https://cdn.buttercms.com/J1oaOa9nS6iKbmiIhWwF)

Proximity to the more modern parts of Mexico City generally results in higher
levels of personal security. You don't have to sacrifice comfort or security
to find authentic things to do in Mexico City.

    
        * The neighborhoods of Roma, Juarez, Polanco, San Rafael, and Condesa are safe during the daytime and nighttime.
    

The safety of Mexico City's historic Centro area is widely debated. Most
sources advise staying away from Centro after dark, especially alleyways and
the neighborhoods of Merced and Tepito.

    
        * The neighborhoods of Centro and Bella Artes are very welcoming of visitors and are considered safe, but for peace of mind, should not be explored after dark.
    * Tourist attractions like Plaza de Las Tres Culturas and the canals of Xochimilco are safe during the day but should not be explored at night.
    * _**Pro tip:** _ to experience these highlights safely and authentically, take a locally-guided tour. You can have a local trip planner help you set it up or add it to your existing Mexico City itinerary.
    

A handful of neighborhoods should be avoided entirely, including Tepito,
Doctores, Ciudad Neza, and Iztapalapa.

    
        * Many locals don't go to these areas either--to experience Mexico City's culture, stick to the beaten path.
    

### Safety Concerns

#### Petty theft/scams

Like any city, Mexico City has its fair share of pickpockets and common scams
to look out for. Here are some easy ways to avoid them.

    
        * Scams tend to occur in crowded areas, like in the metro or outdoor markets. 
    * If a stranger asks for money, your phone, or documents, say no and continue on your way, or just ignore them.
    * Withdraw money from the airport or hotel ATMs, steering clear of random, unmarked ATMs. 
      * As a rule of thumb, pay with cash instead of a card to protect personal information. 
    * When traveling in Mexico City, always keep an eye on valuable items, which should be kept as close to your person as possible. 
      * Wear bags as cross-body, always keeping zippers and pockets in sight. 
      * Keep high-value jewelry, watches, and other accessories at home for more peace of mind.
    

![A lot of people wandering around Mexico

City](https://cdn.buttercms.com/Sipf5wR62IGHMNfxBrQw)

#### Kidnapping/mugging

As is the case in many Latin American countries, Mexico City sometimes
experiences kidnappings. While very rare, it's better to be safe than sorry.
Protect yourself with this information, and for even more safety, have a
Mexico City local help plan your trip (you could do everything yourself, but
why risk it?).

    
        * Kidnappings in Mexico City occur based on perceived vulnerability, but foreigners are rarely targeted.
    * In a popular scam, some visitors receive calls or emails saying that their travel companion has been kidnapped. Just hang up, and report the call to local police. 
      * Do not provide personal information (i.e., phone number, hotel location, email address) to anyone outside of your party, even to shopkeepers or public surveys. 
    * Express kidnappings are a form of mugging when a taxi driver temporarily abducts their passenger and forces them to withdraw all their money from an ATM. 
      * These unfortunate incidents can easily be avoided by ordering an Uber, which are very affordable in Mexico City.
    

#### Female and solo travelers

Solo travel is a rising trend worldwide, and exploring Mexico City on your own
can be a fantastic experience.

    
        * Research the area before you go--female travel bloggers who share their solo travel experiences are a great resource. 
    * For lone travelers of any gender, it is always necessary to keep your wits about you. By protecting your personal info and not accepting drinks or food from strangers, you've got a solid security basis.
    * It's always a good idea to get tips from Mexico City travel expert before you fly. Don't travel blindly--make sure a local's got your back.
    

![Solo female traveler in

Mexico](https://cdn.buttercms.com/iUDVghQWTVuUjiJhxvv3)

Some scams are geared specifically toward solo travelers.

    
        * Fake police officers may approach lone tourists and tell them to provide certain documents or to come to the station. Never provide any personal info, and immediately call Mexico's police number, #112 or #911.
    

Do research about specific cultural customs--blending in pays off in terms of
safety.

    
        * Dress modestly, opting for longer shorts and tops with short or elbow-length sleeves.
    

#### Drugs and illegal substances

For the most part, Mexico's war on drugs is occurring far away from Mexico
City.

    
        * Mexico City is cracking down on its cartels--many of Mexico City's high-ranking cartel members have been arrested as recently as 2018. 
    * Odds are that you will not be offered drugs or be caught in a drug deal, especially if you stay away from particular neighborhoods. (Scroll up to Mexico City Neighborhoods for more.)
    

#### Drinking water and food quality

Bottled water is generally more reliable and clean than Mexico City's tap
water or soft drinks.

    
        * Don't add ice to your drinks. 
    * Restaurants must meet water-health codes, so the tap water in well-known restaurants (not street vendors) is likely safe to drink.
    

Watch your drinks being made--if you don't feel drinking comfortable what went
into your cup, go somewhere else.

    
        * Don't accept drinks from anyone outside of your party. 
    * Should you feel ill after drinking alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages, go to one of the three Mexico City hospitals approved by the Joint Commission International.
    

Watch how your food is made, especially with street food vendors. Food
poisoning typically is not deliberate but can happen when ingredients aren't
stored properly.

    
        * Be open to trying new foods, but stay away from more risky meats like monkey, guinea pig, or bat. 
    * Although some markets sell exotic foods (like lion or crocodile), odds are that these foods are illegal and do not meet most or any health standards.
    

### Conclusion

Is Mexico City safe for travel in 2018? Absolutely! Just keep your wits about
you, stay aware, and have a fantastic time. For extra security, get some
insider info from a Mexican local for help planning your trip--they'll make
sure you don't venture anywhere you shouldn't, and provide 24/7 on-the-ground
support. For more info, check out these Mexico City travel FAQs.

### Everyone in your party should have a copy of this emergency contact info:

National Emergency Number: 411 or 911

Green Angels Tourist Assistance: 078

Public Ministry Agency: 5200-9000

U.S. Embassy in Mexico City:

_Calling from Mexico:_ (01-55) 5080-2000

_Calling from the U.S.:_ 011-52-55-5080-2000

_After hours emergencies:_ 01-52-55-5080-2000, press 0 for the duty officer

_With all these tips and tricks to assure safety in Mexico City, a trip there
is a must! But before your trip, make sure to check out:_

    
        * Connect With a Local to Plan Your Trip
    * Mexico City Travel 2019: The Complete Guide
    * The Best Places to Visit in Mexico City 2019
    * Flights to Mexico City
    * The 10 Best Neighborhoods in Mexico City
    * Best Things to Do in Mexico City
    * Contact Us
    

![undefined](https://cdn.buttercms.com/IiSTfS0vRq66bY9mCKZs)

#### Top articles for you

See more articles

![logo](https://cdn.viahero.com/assets/img/logo-white.svg)

Info

    
        * How it works
    * Why ViaHero
    * What you get
    * Sample guidebook
    * Travel Articles
    * Pricing
    * Press
    * Need help?
    

FAQ/Support

Destinations

Become a Hero

Sign up for the latest travel inspiration, secrets, and tips.

E-mail

&ZeroWidthSpace;

Submit

* * *

![logo](https://cdn.viahero.com/assets/img/app-

store.png)![logo](https://cdn.viahero.com/assets/img/play-store.svg)

(C) Copyright ViaHero, LLC 2019

![logo](/static/img/login.png)

__

Log in

Email

​

Password

​

Forgot password?

Login

Don’t have an account? Plan a trip  
and we will create one for you automatically!

__

Forgot Password

A temporary password will be sent to your email id.

​

Send Password

__

Traveling to a destination below?

We are currently expanding to the below countries. Enter your next destination
and email address and when we launch there you will be the first to know!

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil

Cambodia

Chile

China

Costa Rica

Ecuador

India

Indonesia

Laos

Malaysia

Mexico

Nepal

Nicaragua

Peru

Thailand

Uruguay

Vietnam

Email

&ZeroWidthSpace;

Submit

We will give you early access and a 10% discount code.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

