

![ATCO Blue Flame Kitchen](/SiteCollectionImages/Logo.gif)

Welcome to the ATCO Group of Companies
![ATCO](/SiteCollectionImages/atco_message_logo.png)

|

| | ![Search](/_layouts/images/gosearch15.png)|  
---|---|--- 

Home | Site Map | Careers | Contact Us

![ATCO Energy](/PublishingImages/atcoenergylogo.jpg)

    
        * Home
    * About Us
    

### Our History

### Calgary Learning Centre

### Edmonton Retail Store and Kitchen

### Answer Line Services

### In the Community

![The Original Home Service Department

](http://atcoblueflamekitchencomsp/MenuFeatures/nav-about.jpg)

### The Original Home Service Department

Established in 1930 to help homemakers get the best results when using the
"exciting new cooking fuel, natural gas." Learn more ...

    
        * Recipes
    

### Featured Recipes

### Glossary

### Menu Ideas

    
          * Weekday Meals
      * Weekend Meals
      * 7 Days of Meals
      * For Kids
      * Meals for Special Occasions
    

### Using Our Recipes

### Food Equivalents

### Food Substitutions

![Spinach Feta Dip ](http://atcoblueflamekitchencomsp/MenuFeatures/nav-

recipes.jpg)

### Spinach Feta Dip

This Spinach Feta Dip is perfect for parties, and can be made in a snap. Learn
more ...

    
        * How-To
    

### Cooking 101

### Grilling 101

### How-To Videos

### Entertaining How-To

### Preserving How-To

### Safety

### Seasonal Tips

### Laundry How-To

### Cleaning How-To

### Kids in the Kitchen

![We are Experienced](http://atcoblueflamekitchencomsp/MenuFeatures/nav-how-

to.jpg)

### We are Experienced

We’ve spent years developing tips and techniques to make cooking entertaining
and easy. Let us show you how. Learn more ...

    
        * Classes
    

### Edmonton Cooking Classes

    
          * Community Outreach Workshops
      * Evening & Weekend Classes
    

### Calgary Cooking Classes

    
          * Lunch 'N Learn Demonstration Classes
      * Weekend and Evening Classes
      * South Health Campus Wellness Kitchen
    

### Course Calendars

### Course Descriptions

### Participant Details

### Corporate Team Building and Private Cooking Events

### Kids Cooking Classes

    
          * Cooking Camps
      * Birthday Parties
    

### School Programs

    
          * Kids Can Cook Program
    

![Calgary Learning

Centre](http://atcoblueflamekitchencomsp/MenuFeatures/BluFlameKi_101118_interior.4.jpg)

### Calgary Learning Centre

Learn more...

    
        * Shop
    * News
    

### Articles in the Media

### What's Hot Newsletter Archive

### Press Releases

![Blue Flame Kitchen News](http://atcoblueflamekitchencomsp/MenuFeatures/nav-

news.JPG)

### Blue Flame Kitchen News

For an archive of ATCO Blue Flame Kitchen newspaper articles, visit our In the
Media section...

    
        * PDF Guides
    * Blog
    * Contact Us
    * Cafe
    

* * *
    
        * Cooking 101
    * Grilling 101
    * How-To Videos
    * Entertaining How-To
    * Preserving How-To
    * Safety
    * Seasonal Tips
    * Laundry How-To
    * Cleaning How-To
    * Choosing Appliances How-To
    

| | | Home ![](/SiteCollectionImages/breadcrumb_arrow.png) How-To
![](/SiteCollectionImages/breadcrumb_arrow.png) Cooking 101
![](/SiteCollectionImages/breadcrumb_arrow.png) How do I keep foods with
strong flavours and smells from tainting other food in my fridge?

* * *

|

Page Title

​How do I keep foods with strong flavours and smells from tainting other food
in my fridge?

* * *

Page Content

![](/How-To/Cooking-101/PublishingImages/0917-EJ-onion-container-500x335.jpg)

If you’ve ever left a cling-wrapped half onion on top of a pound of butter in
your fridge, or a wrapped bowl of diced onions near a jug of milk overnight,
you know what can happen. If the flavour is strong enough, it can potentially
contaminate other ingredients in your fridge. All it takes is one morning bowl
of cereal served with onion-tainted milk to drive home the point that smells
and flavours can intermingle between foods in the fridge.

Onions and garlic are often the culprits, as they have a very strong smell and
taste that is as hard to contain as it is noticeable in foods that have been
contaminated. If you have to store onion in the fridge – either a leftover
half onion or chopped pieces of onion pre-prepared to save time later when
cooking an evening meal – thin plastic isn’t enough to keep the flavour from
transferring to other things. Consider storing pungent foods in a glass bowl
with a sturdy lid, or a thick-walled food storage container. You should also
keep strongly flavoured foods from touching anything else in the fridge, even
if they’re stored in plastic. Keep anything that absorbs other flavours easily
– butter, milk and eggs, especially, but also breads, cakes, etc. – away from
strongly flavoured foods. Also keep any meat in a strong marinade well sealed,
especially if garlic is involved.

To keep some fridge odours at bay, baking soda works like a charm. But that
doesn’t mean you can just crack open a box of baking soda and leave it at the
back of the fridge for half a decade. Look for specially designed packages
that are made for deodorizing fridges and freezers, and make sure you swap out
old for new packs based on manufacturer directions.

|

**RECIPES**  
Browse Recipes  
Featured Recipes

**ATCOenergy**

**LEARNING CENTRE**  
Cooking Classes  
Team Building  
Kids Cooking Classes  
Kids Spring and Summer Camps  
School Programs

**ANSWER LINE**  
Ask an Expert  
Cooking 101  
Grilling 101

**NEWS & EVENTS**  
In the Media  
What's Hot Newsletter  
Press Releases

**LEGAL**  
Terms of Use  
Disclaimer  
Return  & Cancellation Policy  
Site Map

**KEEP IN TOUCH**  
Contact Us  
Sign Up for our Newsletter

**RETAIL SHOP**  
Cookbooks  
Products

![](/SiteCollectionImages/group_footer_logo.png) |

With approximately 7,000 employees and assets of $22 billion, ATCO is a
diversified global corporation delivering service excellence and innovative
business solutions in Structures & Logistics (workforce housing, innovative
modular facilities, construction, site support services, and logistics and
operations management); Electricity (electricity generation, transmission, and
distribution); Pipelines & Liquids (natural gas transmission, distribution and
infrastructure development, energy storage, and industrial water solutions);
and Retail Energy (electricity and natural gas retail sales). More information
can be found at www.ATCO.com.

---|--- 

**All customers are free to purchase natural gas services from the default
supply provider or from a retailer of their choice and to purchase electricity
services from the regulated rate provider or from a retailer of their choice.
The delivery of natural gas and electricity to you is not affected by your
choice. If you change who you purchase natural gas services or electricity
services from, you will continue receiving natural gas and electricity from
the distribution company in your service area. For a current list of retailers
you may choose from, visitwww.ucahelps.gov.ab.ca or call 310-4822 (toll free
in Alberta). Some offers, in whole or in part, may not be available in gas co-
ops, municipally owned utilities, and some Rural Electrification
Associations.**

* * *

Copyright (C) ATCO Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Last updated on June 11, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

