  
  
![line](images/line3.gif) **Race/Ethnicity**

| **The 1996 National Youth Gang Survey revealed that Hispanics and African-
Americans constituted the majority of gang members.

* * *

Previous studies and surveys have reported that American street gang members
are predominantly African-American and Hispanic (Klein, 1995; Miller, 1982).
However, a few recent studies have shown an increase in the number of
Caucasian youth involved in gangs. In a survey of 122 cities, Curry, Ball, and
Fox (1994) found that the proportion of Caucasian youth involved in gang-
related crime, although quite small (4.4 percent), had increased. In their
evaluation of the Gang Resistance Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.) Program,
Esbensen and Osgood (1997) found that 25 percent of self-reported gang members
were Caucasian.

After controlling for the number of gang members reported in each
jurisdiction, the 1996 National Youth Gang Survey revealed that Hispanics and
African-Americans constituted the majority of gang members. The following
aggregate percentages were reported nationally: Hispanic 44 percent, African-
American35 percent, Caucasian14 percent, Asian5 percent, and other2
percent (see figure 11).

![Figure 11](images/fig_11.gif)

**The 1996 National Youth Gang Survey revealed that Hispanics and African-
Americans constituted the majority of gang members.

* * *

Table 17 illustrates the differences between the weighted and unweighted
averages. The unweighted average of Hispanics was much lower than the weighted
average, especially in large cities and suburban counties. This difference is
due to the large number of Hispanic gang members concentrated in a few large
metropolitan areas in the western region. The unweighted averages indicate a
smaller proportion of Hispanic gang members because there were fewer agencies
in small cities and rural counties reporting Hispanic gang members.

![Table 17](images/tbl_17.gif)

A significant difference also existed between the weighted and unweighted
averages for Caucasians. The unweighted average number of Caucasian gang
members was more than twice the weighted average for all area types combined.
This difference was the result of the large number of agencies in small cities
and suburban and rural counties reporting a high percentage of Caucasian gang
members. However, when the number of gang members reported in each
jurisdiction was controlled for, the actual proportion of Caucasian gang
members throughout the country was considerably lower than the actual
proportion of Hispanic and African-American gang members.

**The variation in race/ethnicity associated with area type for Hispanics,
Caucasians, and Asians was statistically significant.

* * *

When area type was taken into account, the unweighted averages for
race/ethnicity varied considerably. The average percentages of African-
American gang members reported by respondents in large cities (33 percent) and
rural counties (35 percent) were higher than the overall unweighted average
(see table 18). These variations for African-Americans were notable but were
not found to be statistically significant.

![Table 18](images/tbl_18.gif)

The variation in race/ethnicity associated with area type for Hispanics,
Caucasians, and Asians was statistically significant. The average proportion
of Hispanic gang members was highest in large cities (32 percent) and lowest
in rural counties (17 percent). The average proportion of Caucasian gang
members was lowest in large cities (26 percent) and highest in small cities
(42 percent). Furthermore, the average percentage of Caucasian gang members
reported by respondents was remarkably high (39 percent) in suburban counties
and rural counties. Higher average proportions of Asian gang members were
reported in large cities (7 percent) and suburban counties (6 percent) than in
small cities (3 percent) and rural counties (2 percent).

Nationally, only 2 percent of gang members were identified as "other."
Altogether, 169 agencies identified an "other" race/ethnicity, the majority of
which fell within four categories: American Indian, Polynesian (includes
Pacific-Islander, Filipino, Samoan, Tongan, and Hawaiian), Middle Eastern
(includes Arab), and Haitian. As figure 12 indicates, American Indian was most
frequently cited as "other" (45 percent), followed by Polynesian (27 percent),
Middle Eastern (8 percent), and Haitian (5 percent).

![Figure 12](images/fig_12.gif)

**The variation in race/ethnicity in region was determined to be statistically
significant.

* * *

Similar to findings on area type, the unweighted averages for race/ethnicity
varied considerably by region. As table 19 indicates, the average proportion
of African-American gang members was 45 percent in the South but only 10
percent in the West. The average percentage of Hispanic gang members was 56
percent in the West but only 16 percent in the Midwest and 19 percent in the
South. Furthermore, the average proportion of Caucasian gang members was
highest (42 percent) in the Midwest and lowest (21 percent) in the West. The
variation in race/ethnicity by region was determined to be statistically
significant.

![Table 19](images/tbl_19.gif)

A cross-tabulation with both area type and region revealed some additional
variations in the race/ethnicity of gang members (table 20). The highest
average proportion of African-American gang members (59 percent) was in rural
counties in the South. The average proportion of Hispanic gang members was
highest in the West, regardless of area type. In the Midwest, Caucasians
accounted for the largest average proportion of gang members in small cities
(49 percent), suburban counties (50 percent), and rural counties (61 percent).
The highest average proportion of Asian gang members was reported in western
large cities (11 percent).

![Table 20](images/tbl_20.gif)

**The highest average proportion of African-American gang members (59 percent)
was in rural counties in the South.

* * *

There was a moderate degree of association between ethnic composition and
population size (see Appendix L). In the 25,000-49,999 and the 250,000 or more
population ranges, the highest average proportion of gang members was for
African-Americans. The average proportion of Hispanic gang members was
predominant in the 50,000-99,999 and 100,000-249,999 population ranges. The
average proportion of Caucasian gang members was predominant in the 1-9,999
and 10,000-24,999 population ranges. The average proportion of Asian gang
members, although comparatively low, was above the overall average in
populations of 50,000-99,999 and 250,000 or more. Variations in race/ethnicity
associated with population size were found to be statistically significant for
all races/ethnicities except African-American.

Jurisdictions in which gang problems began prior to 1990 (older gang
jurisdictions) reported a much higher average percentage of Hispanic gang
members than of other racial/ethnic groups. As shown in table 21, the average
proportion of Hispanic gang members in newer gang jurisdictions was 21 percent
less than in older gang jurisdictions. In contrast, the average proportion of
Caucasian gang members was 23 percent higher in jurisdictions with a newer
gang problem than in jurisdictions with an older gang problem. African-
American and Asian gang membership differed by 2 percent on average. Table 21
also reveals this comparison for each area type, although not enough
observations were available for reliable estimation of gang problems that
began prior to 1990 in small cities and rural counties.

![Table 21](images/tbl_21.gif)

**Approximately 46 percent of gangs in the United States were estimated to be
multiethnic/multiracial.

* * *

**Multiethnic/Multiracial Gangs.** Because of anecdotal reporting of an
increase in gangs of mixed race and ethnicity, respondents were asked to
report the percentage of gangs in their jurisdictions that were
multiethnic/multiracial. No definition of these terms was provided in the
survey. When the number of gangs reported in each jurisdiction was controlled
for, approximately 46 percent of gangs in the United States were estimated to
be multiethnic/multiracial.

Unweighted averages were used to compare differences across jurisdictions.
Agencies in suburban counties reported the highest average percentage of
multiethnic/multiracial gangs (53 percent), followed by large cities (48
percent), small cities (45 percent), and rural counties (34 percent) (see
figure 13). There is little previous research on a national scope with which
to make comparisons, and respondents were not asked about the proportions of
the racial/ethnic mix of members in individual gangs. Future surveys will
gather more information on this topic.

![Figure 13](images/fig_13.gif)

Table 22 shows the average proportion of multiethnic/multiracial gangs by area
type and region. Agencies in the Midwest reported the highest average
proportions (55 percent) of multiethnic/multiracial gangs, while the Northeast
reported the lowest proportions (39 percent). Suburban counties in the
Midwest, South, and West reported the highest proportions of
multiethnic/multiracial gangs, compared with other area types.

![Table 22](images/tbl_22.gif)

## Survey Results Contents

Previous | Contents | Next

![line](images/line3.gif)  
_1996 National Youth Gang Survey_ | | _July 1999_  
---|---|---|---|---|--- _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_ [AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_ [UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_ [ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone _[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]: Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_ [@]: at 
  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

