

Breaking News

World+

USAfricaAmericasAsiaAustraliaChinaEuropeMiddle EastIndiaUK

WorldUS PoliticsBusinessEntertainmentSportTravelStyleHealthVideo

Live TV __

Search »

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

Home

World

    
        * US
    * Africa
    * Americas
    * Asia
    * Australia
    * China
    * Europe
    * Middle East
    * India
    * UK
    

US Politics

    
        * 45
    * Congress
    * Supreme Court
    * Facts First
    * 2020 Election
    

Business

    
        * Markets
    * Tech
    * Media
    * Success
    * Perspectives
    * Video
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

    
        * Stars
    * Screen
    * Binge
    * Culture
    * Media
    

Tech

    
        * Innovate
    * Gadget
    * Mission: Ahead
    * Upstarts
    * Business Evolved
    * Work Transformed
    * Innovative Cities
    

Sport

    
        * Football
    * Tennis
    * Equestrian
    * Golf
    * Skiing
    * Horse Racing
    * Formula E
    * F1
    * Sailing
    * Rugby
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

    
        * Destinations
    * Food & Drink
    * Play
    * Stay
    * Videos
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

    
        * Arts
    * Design
    * Fashion
    * Architecture
    * Luxury
    * Autos
    * Video
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

    
        * Food
    * Fitness
    * Wellness
    * Parenting
    * Live Longer
    

Features

    
        * Freedom Project
    * Impact Your World
    * Inside Africa
    * 2 degrees
    * CNN Heroes
    * All Features
    

Video

    
        * Video news
    * Feature shows
    * HLN
    * TV shows
    * TV schedule
    * Faces of CNN Worldwide
    * CNNVR
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

    
        * How To Watch VR
    * Archives
    

More…

    
        * Weather
    * CNN Profiles
    * Leadership
    * Pressroom
    * Partner sites
    * Work for CNN
    

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)U.S.

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)International

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_espaniol.png)Español

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_arabic.png)Arabic

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

FacebookTwitterInstagram

# What 7 statistics tell us about immigration and crime

By Catherine E. Shoichet, CNN

Updated 0347 GMT (1147 HKT) January 9, 2019

Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as
it unfolds.

![CNN fact-checks Trump's national address

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/190108211303-03-trump-immigration-address-

exlarge-169.jpg)

![CNN fact-checks Trump's national address

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/190108211303-03-trump-immigration-address-

exlarge-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## CNN fact-checks Trump's national address

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

CNN fact-checks Trump's national address 02:50

(CNN)US President Donald Trump doubled down on his claims tying immigrants to
crime as he made his case for the border wall in an Oval Office address
Tuesday night.

"Over the years, thousands of Americans have been brutally killed by those who
illegally entered our country and thousands more lives will be lost if we
don't act right now," Trump said.

But many researchers argue that immigrants are, in fact, less likely to commit
crimes.

Here's a look at some key statistics, where they come from and what people on
different sides of the debate say about them.

### 10.7 million

Read More

That's the latest estimate of the number of unauthorized immigrants in the
United States, according to the Pew Research Center. That's less than 4% of
the total US population.

### 105,140

The number of immigrants ICE arrested in fiscal year 2018 who were convicted
criminals. ICE says it's committed to targeting "criminal aliens" for arrest
and removal. Advocates accuse ICE of inflating statistics about criminals by
including minor charges such as traffic offenses in its tally.

### 83,573

The number of inmates in state and federal prisons who are not US citizens,
according to the latest prison population report from the Bureau of Justice
Statistics. That's less than 6% of the total prison population. The report
says that the total number of inmates who are not US citizens could, in fact,
be higher, noting that some states may have undercounted this figure and
others did not provide information. A past report from the bureau cautioned
that different jurisdictions use different definitions for "noncitizens," at
times basing the statistic on where people were born regardless of their
citizenship status.

### 21%

Administration officials have noted that roughly one in five inmates in
federal prison are foreign-born, and that the vast majority of those people
are in the United States illegally. They argue such statistics show the
dangers illegal immigration poses to society. "The illegal immigrant crime
rate in this country should be zero," US Attorney General Jeff Sessions said
in a statement earlier this year. "Every crime committed by an illegal alien
is, by definition, a crime that should have been prevented."

Advocates have slammed statistics released by the administration. "The vast
majority of immigrants in federal prison are there for crimes that only
immigrants can be charged with -- illegal entry and illegal entry after
removal," Tom Jawetz, the vice president for immigration policy at the Center
for American Progress, told The New York Times in 2017. "When you cook the
books you shouldn't pretend to be surprised by the results."

### 719

The criminal conviction rate per 100,000 immigrants in Texas. This number
comes from a study by the Cato Institute, which uses figures from Texas in
2015 as a case study to look at how crime rates compare among immigrant and
native-born populations.

"The criminal conviction and arrest rates for immigrants were well below those
of native-born Americans," Cato's Alex Nowrasteh wrote.

According to the libertarian think tank's analysis, the rate per 100,000
residents in each subpopulation was 899 for undocumented immigrants, 611 for
legal immigrants and 1,797 for native-born Americans.

### 142%

This is how much more likely undocumented immigrants are to be convicted of a
crime than other Arizonans, according to a study of data in that state by
economist John Lott of the Crime Prevention Research Center.

This study has been pointed to by the Justice Department and by a number of
politicians and organizations who favor restricting immigration. It's also
drawn sharp criticism from the Cato Institute and other researchers, who argue
that the study misinterpreted data. Lott has stood by his research.

An analysis of the study and critiques by The Washington Post's Fact Checker
was inconclusive.

### 25

The number of years of crime and immigration data researchers looked at in a
recent study published in the journal Criminology. "Increases in the
undocumented immigrant population within states are associated with
significant decreases in the prevalence of violence," authors Michael Light
and Ty Miller wrote. An analysis of data from 1990-2014, they said, suggests
"undocumented immigration over this period is generally associated with
decreasing violent crime."

The authors noted that more research needs to be done, and that it's possible
the data could be interpreted differently.

"Because we are using official crime statistics," they wrote, "there is a
plausible alternative interpretation: Increased unauthorized immigration
results in fewer crimes reported to the police."

In a release from the University of Wisconsin-Madison announcing the study's
findings, Light, a sociology professor, said it's important to look at data as
the immigration debate continues.

"I think public debate divorced entirely from data is problematic," he said.
"There are reasons to think undocumented immigrants would increase crime, but
the data doesn't support those arguments. It's telling us that has not been
the case."

    
        *     *     *     *     *     *     *     1. Home
    1. World
      1. US
      2. Africa
      3. Americas
      4. Asia
      5. Australia
      6. China
      7. Europe
      8. Middle East
      9. India
      10. UK
    1. US Politics
      1. 45
      2. Congress
      3. Supreme Court
      4. Facts First
      5. 2020 Election
    1. Business
      1. Markets
      2. Tech
      3. Media
      4. Success
      5. Perspectives
      6. Video
    1. ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)
      1. Stars
      2. Screen
      3. Binge
      4. Culture
      5. Media
    1. Tech
      1. Innovate
      2. Gadget
      3. Mission: Ahead
      4. Upstarts
      5. Business Evolved
      6. Work Transformed
      7. Innovative Cities
    1. Sport
      1. Football
      2. Tennis
      3. Equestrian
      4. Golf
      5. Skiing
      6. Horse Racing
      7. Formula E
      8. F1
      9. Sailing
      10. Rugby
    1. ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)
      1. Destinations
      2. Food & Drink
      3. Play
      4. Stay
      5. Videos
    1. ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)
      1. Arts
      2. Design
      3. Fashion
      4. Architecture
      5. Luxury
      6. Autos
      7. Video
    1. ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)
      1. Food
      2. Fitness
      3. Wellness
      4. Parenting
      5. Live Longer
    1. Features
      1. Freedom Project
      2. Impact Your World
      3. Inside Africa
      4. 2 degrees
      5. CNN Heroes
      6. All Features
    1. Video
      1. Video news
      2. Feature shows
      3. HLN
      4. TV shows
      5. TV schedule
      6. Faces of CNN Worldwide
      7. CNNVR
    1. ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)
      1. How To Watch VR
      2. Archives
    1. More…
      1. Weather
      2. CNN Profiles
      3. Leadership
      4. Pressroom
      5. Partner sites
      6. Work for CNN
    

International Edition

    
        * Set edition preference:
    * U.S.
    * International
    * Confirm
    * U.S.
    * International
    * Arabic
    * Español
    

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans ™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Accessibility & CC
    * AdChoices
    * Modern Slavery Act Statement
    * Advertise with us
    * About us
    * CNN Store
    * Newsletters
    * Transcripts
    * License Footage
    * CNN Newsource
    

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif?labels=noscript%3ANo%20Labels%20Set)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

