

### Editions

Africa Australia Canada Canada (français) España France Global Perspectives
Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States

### Sections

    
        * Home
    * Arts + Culture
    * Business + Economy
    * Cities
    * Education
    * Environment + Energy
    * FactCheck
    * Health + Medicine
    * Politics + Society
    * Science + Technology
    

### Search

### Services

    
        * Events
    * Job board
    * Newsletter
    * Read on Play Newsstand
    * Read on Apple News
    * Read on Flipboard
    

### Information

    
        * Who we are
    * Our charter
    * Our team
    * Our audience
    * Partners and funders
    * Republishing guidelines
    * Contact us
    * Donate
    * Friends of The Conversation
    * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
    * Privacy policy
    * Terms and conditions
    * Corrections
    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)

    
        * __
    * Edition:
    

Available editions

Australia __

    
        * Africa
    * Canada
    * Canada (français)
    * España
    * France
    * Global Perspectives
    * Indonesia
    * New Zealand
    * United Kingdom
    * United States
    * Job Board
    * Donate
    * Become an author
    * Sign up as a reader
    * Sign in
    * __ Get newsletter 
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)
Search

__

Academic rigour, journalistic flair

    
        1. Arts  + Culture
    2. Business + Economy
    3. Cities
    4. Education
    5. Environment + Energy
    6. FactCheck
    7. Health + Medicine
    8. Politics + Society
    9. Science + Technology
    

### __Follow Topics

    
        1. Democracy Futures
    2. Cities
    3. Malcolm Turnbull
    4. Donald Trump
    5. Same-sex marriage
    6. Asylum seekers
    7. Constitutional recognition
    8. China
    

# **Spanish use is steady or dropping in US despite high Latino immigration

**

January 23, 2018 10.21pm AEDT

____ Phillip M Carter, _Florida International University_

### Author

    
        1. ![](/assets/author/width170_default-19ec5bd0b0425d75df0ad1707d18c36b.jpg) Phillip M Carter
    

Associate Professor of Linguistics, Florida International University

### Disclosure statement

Phillip M Carter does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding
from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has
disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment.

### Partners

View all partners

Republish this article

![](/assets/call-to-actions/republish-ca547a7c5135cc6d1a28933dc8b6823c.png)
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons
licence.

____![](/assets/content/translations-432e4e50e91a8f156008a25ec3873293.svg)

### Languages

    
        * Español
    * English
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Political arguments against high Latino immigration into the U.S. often play
on fears that Spanish is pushing out English in American society. It’s not.
Lucas Jackson/Reuters

    
        * __ Email
    * __ Twitter
    * __ Facebook
    * __ LinkedIn
    * __ WhatsApp
    * __ Messenger
    

_Read in Spanish_.

Hidden just beneath the surface of the ongoing heated debate about immigration
in the United States lurks an often unspoken concern: language. Specifically,
whether immigration from Spanish-speaking countries threatens the English
language’s dominance.

Language and immigration have long been politically linked in the U.S. When
Farmers Branch, Texas, passed an English-only “requirement” in 2006, then-
Mayor Tim O'Hare justified it by saying that “we need to address illegal
immigration in our city and we need to do it now.”

The Farmers Branch city council voted unanimously to drop the controversial
ordinance last November, but 31 states and hundreds of towns in the United
States still have local English-only or “official English” laws.

The perception that Latino immigration has led Spanish to sideline or even
overtake English in the U.S. is widespread. After all, Spanish is the second
most dominant language in the country, after English. It is spoken by 48.6
million people: 34.8 million Spanish-speakers age 5 and older of various
national-origin backgrounds, 11 million undocumented Latin American immigrants
and an estimated 2.8 million non-Latinos who use Spanish in the home.

Census data on U.S. demographic changes project that by 2060 the Latino
population in the U.S. – the group most likely to speak Spanish – will grow
115 percent, to 119 million.

But these figures don’t tell the whole story. As a linguist, I have studied
Spanish-English bilingualism in Texas, California, Florida and beyond, and I
can attest that Spanish is not taking over the United States. Far from it:
Political fearmongering notwithstanding, Spanish actually holds a rather
tenuous position in the country.

## From bilingual to monolingual

How can the Latino population be growing rapidly while Spanish-speaking
remains stable? The answer lies in oft-overlooked peculiarities of census data
and in the particular linguistic history of the United States.

If one looks only at immigration patterns over the past half-century, it is
true that the U.S. has been gaining Spanish-speakers. From 1965 to 2015,
roughly half of all immigration has come from Latin American countries. This
trend added some 30 million people, most of whom came speaking Spanish, to the
American populace.

But this is only half the story. While new immigrants bring Spanish with them,
research shows that their children tend to become bilinguals who
overwhelmingly prefer English. As a result, the same immigrants’ grandchildren
likely speak English only.

Linguists call this phenomenon “the three-generation pattern.” In essence, it
means that non-English languages in the U.S. are lost by or during the third
generation.

We can see this pattern playing out in data from the Pew Hispanic Center.
Surveys show that in 2000, 48 percent of Latino adults aged 50 to 68 spoke
“only English” or “English very well,” and that 73 percent of Latino children
aged 5 to 17 did.

By 2014, those numbers had jumped to 52 percent and 88 percent, respectively.
In other words, the shift from Spanish to English is happening nationwide,
both over time and between generations.

## Why English dominates

Language shift is not a naturally occurring phenomenon. Rather, it is a
consequence of cultural forces that pressure speakers to give up one language
to get another. These forces include restrictive language laws that formally
prohibit the use of Spanish in educational or government settings, as Farmers
Branch, Texas, did for 11 years.

Schools also drive the three-generation pattern. Even though Latin American
parents often speak to their U.S.-born children in Spanish, those children
almost invariably attend English-only schools.

There, they learn that academic success is achieved in English. As a result,
first-generation children expand their vocabularies and literacy practices in
English, not in Spanish.

They may also encounter negative attitudes toward Spanish from teachers and
peers. For example, in October 2017, a New Jersey high school teacher was
caught on video reprimanding three students for speaking Spanish, encouraging
them, instead, to speak “American.” That no such language exists is beside the
point – her message was clear.

Social pressure to speak English is so great that Latino immigrant parents may
notice resistance to using Spanish at home as early as kindergarten. A
generation later, though grandparents may continue to use Spanish in the home,
grandchildren will often respond to them in English.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/202623/original/file-20180119-110117-wsvy9r.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
The children of Latino immigrants often feel social pressure to speak English
at school. Gosia Wozniacka/AP Images

The numerous blogs, websites and guides dedicated to helping Latino parents
navigate this bilingual terrain indicate just how common language shift is.

Indeed, when I ask my own Latino students about when they speak what to whom,
the answer is almost always the same: Spanish with elders, English with
everyone else.

This pattern seems to hold in small towns and big cities, on the East Coast
and on the West, and in towns with large and small Latino populations. From
Chicago to Southern California, children of Spanish-speaking immigrants become
English-dominant.

The Spanish-to-English shift even occurs in Miami, where over 65 percent of
the population is Latino and where speaking Spanish has clear economic
benefits. That’s why Miami struggles to find enough Spanish-speaking teachers
to staff its public schools.

## English on the rise

Spanish isn’t the only immigrant language that has struggled to keep a
foothold in the U.S. Germans, Italians, Poles and Swedes went through similar
language shifts in the 19th and 20th centuries. These languages, too, were
sometimes seen as a threat to American identity in their time.

Then as now, American anxiety about the role of English in U.S. society was
totally unfounded. In the roughly 150,000-year history of human language,
there has never been a more secure tongue than English.

More people worldwide do speak Mandarin and Spanish as their first language.
But with some 400 million first language speakers and more than 500 million
adoptive English speakers, English has a global standing enjoyed by none of
the roughly 6,000 other languages spoken worldwide. It has been that way for
about half a century.

If Latino immigration declines markedly in the U.S., language shift may
actually lead Spanish to disappear across America. English, on the other hand,
isn’t going anywhere fast.

__

    
        * Language
    * Immigration
    * Linguistics
    * English
    * Immigrants
    * Dreamers
    * Spanish
    * Latinos
    * DACA
    * immigration reform
    
    * __ Tweet
    * __ Share
    * __ Get newsletter Newsletter
    

### You might also like

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
A ‘dreamer’ reviews documents needed to apply for DACA. AP Photo/Luis Mogollon

## When I got DACA, I was forced to revert to a name I had left behind

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
People currently speak 7,000 languages around the globe. Michael Gavin

## Why do human beings speak so many languages?

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Trump on Jan. 19, 2018. AP Photo/Evan Vucci

## Shutdown under a unified government? Blame Trump

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Senators meet with President Donald Trump to discuss immigration on Jan. 9,
2018. AP Photo/Evan Vucci

## Ahead of government shutdown, Congress sets its sights on not-so-

comprehensive immigration reform

### Most popular on The Conversation

    
        * Are you burnt out at work? Ask yourself these 4 questions
    * Why the raids on Australian media present a clear threat to democracy
    * The Reserve Bank will cut rates again and again, until we lift spending and push up prices
    * ‘I really have thought this can’t go on’: loneliness looms for rising numbers of older private renters
    * Man’s stressed friend: how your mental health can affect your dog
    * Teachers are more depressed and anxious than the average Australian
    * Vital Signs. If we fall into a recession (and we might) we’ll have ourselves to blame
    * Why the idea of alien life now seems inevitable and possibly imminent
    * Kids are more vulnerable to the flu – here’s what to look out for this winter
    * We taught bees a simple number language – and they got it
    

### Events

    
        * Your Leadership Voice - Women In Focus (Classic)  -- Caulfield East , Victoria
    
    * Your Leadership Voice: Women in Focus -- Caulfield, Victoria
    
    * Updates in Commercial Leasing -- Melbourne, Victoria
    
    * Sydney Ideas: Cultural power in the online world -- Sydney, New South Wales
    
    * Effective policy implementation: a team approach -- Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
    

__ More events

### Jobs

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/2/logos/width36_logo-1501461860.png)
    

##### Technical Officer Optics

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/86/logos/width36_logo-1402876329.jpg)
    

##### Associate Professor/ Professor In Diagnostic Imaging

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/13/logos/width36_logo-1446011232.jpg)
    

##### Csiro Science Leader Digital Integration For Bio Prediction

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/79/logos/width36_logo-1537164695.jpg)
    

##### Ph D Scholarship Researching Mental Illness

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/1/logos/width36_logo-1520549009.png)
    

##### Experiential Learning Coordinator

__ More jobs

## The Conversation

###### Community

    
        * Community standards
    * Republishing guidelines
    * Friends of The Conversation
    * Research and Expert Database
    * __Analytics
    * __Job Board
    * __Events
    * __Our feeds
    * __Donate
    

###### Company

    
        * Who we are
    * Our charter
    * Our team
    * Our audience
    * Resource for Teachers
    * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
    * Our blog
    * Partners and funders
    * Resource for media
    * Contact us
    * Work with us
    

###### Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the

latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox.

Email address

_✔_ __![](/assets/spinner-9643e2633c59d728d78b58f465f2fb9c.gif)

###### Follow us on social media

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections

Copyright (C) 2010–2019, The Conversation Media Group Ltd

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

