

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

    
        *     *     *     * JOIN MWU
    

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

    
        * GAMES
    * BROWSE THESAURUS
    * WORD OF THE DAY
    * WORDS AT PLAY
    * MORE __
    

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

    
        * TIME TRAVELER
    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

    
        * JOIN MWU
    * GAMES
    * THESAURUS
    * WORD OF THE DAY
    * WORDS AT PLAY
    * TIME TRAVELER
    

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# cavalier

adjective

cav·​a·​lier | \ ˌka-və-ˈlir ![How to pronounce cavalier

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Definition of _cavalier_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 **:** marked by or given to offhand and often disdainful (see disdain entry
1) dismissal of important matters a cavalier attitude toward money has a
cavalier disregard for the rights of others

2 **:** debonair

3a capitalized **:** of or relating to the party of Charles I of England in
his struggles with the Puritans and Parliament

b **:** aristocratic portrayed the plantation owner as a cavalier fop

c capitalized **:** of or relating to the English Cavalier poets of the
mid-17th century

cavalier

noun

Definition of _cavalier_ (Entry 2 of 2)

1 **:** a gentleman trained in arms and horsemanship

2 **:** a mounted soldier **:** knight

3 capitalized **:** an adherent of Charles I of England

4 **:** a lady's escort or dancing partner **:** gallant

Other Words from _cavalier_ Synonyms  & Antonyms The Evolution of Cavalier
More Example Sentences Learn More about _cavalier_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _cavalier_

Adjective

cavalierism \ ˌka-​və-​ˈlir-​ˌi-​zəm ![How to pronounce cavalierism

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun

cavalierly adverb

## Synonyms & Antonyms for _cavalier_

Synonyms: Adjective

arrogant, assumptive, bumptious, chesty, haughty, high-and-mighty, high-
handed, high-hat, highfalutin (also hifalutin), huffish, huffy, imperious,
important, lofty, lordly, masterful, overweening, peremptory, pompous,
presuming, presumptuous, pretentious, self-asserting, self-assertive, sniffy,
stiff-necked, supercilious, superior, toplofty (also toploftical), uppish,
uppity

Synonyms: Noun

gentleman

Antonyms: Adjective

humble, lowly, modest, unarrogant, unpretentious

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## The Evolution of Cavalier

Noun

According to a dictionary prepared by Thomas Blount in 1656, a cavalier was "a
knight or gentleman, serving on horseback, a man of arms." That meaning is
true to the history of the noun, which traces back to the Late Latin word
_caballarius_ , meaning "horseman." By around 1600, it had also come to denote
"a roistering, swaggering fellow." In the 1640s, English Puritans applied it
disdainfully to their adversaries, the swashbuckling Royalist followers of
Charles I, who sported longish hair and swords. Although some thought those
cavaliers "several sorts of Malignant Men,… ready to commit all manner of
Outrage and Violence," others saw them as quite suave—which may explain why
_cavalier_ can be either complimentary or a bit insulting.

## Examples of _cavalier_ in a Sentence

Adjective

They are too _cavalier_ in their treatment of others. She has a _cavalier_
attitude about spending money. He has a _cavalier_ disregard for the rights of
others.

Noun

a novel about the dashing _cavaliers_ and gracious ladies of the South before
the Civil War

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web: Adjective

The action begins with an almost careless, _cavalier_ suicide by a young
subway worker whose wife, Annie, is pregnant with their first child. -- Mary
Gordon, _New York Times_ , "In Alice McDermott’s Novel, A Cloistered Life
Blows Open," 2 Oct. 2017 Such a _cavalier_ attitude towards existing
agreements will make future deals harder to strike. -- _The Economist_ ,
"Protectionism and its risks," 5 Oct. 2017 For visitors, the idea of taking
the wheel is daunting; roads are narrow and lined with limestone walls. Plus,
drivers in this sun-drenched, densely populated country of 450,000 are known
for a somewhat _cavalier_ attitude. -- Roy Harris, _chicagotribune.com_ ,
"Malta, the island nation just below Sicily, is an increasingly popular
stopover," 28 Aug. 2017 Prosecutors in his own office were repulsed and
embarrassed by his _cavalier_ dismissal of his own actions. -- Daniel
Borenstein, _The Mercury News_ , "Borenstein: DA Peterson, now a felon, should
have quit while ahead," 15 June 2017 For the first time in his career, his
character's _cavalier_ attitude towards death doesn't avoid it, but unleashes
it. -- Jake Kring-schreifels, _Esquire_ , "How Tom Cruise Rebranded Himself
Into Our Most Reliable Action Hero," 10 June 2017 Doug discovered a notation
for choreography for eight women that fit the _cavalier_ music perfectly and
costume sketches for eight Sugar Plum Fairy attendants. -- Leilah Bernstein,
_Los Angeles Magazine_ , "These ‘Lost’ Ballets Are Being Performed for the
First Time in L.A.," 16 June 2017 My former colleagues at the FBI who are
working on this case and have uncovered the full scale of Russia’s efforts
must be incredulous at Trump’s _cavalier_ attitude. -- James Hohmann,
_Washington Post_ , "The Daily 202: 40 questions for Jeff Sessions," 12 June
2017 Obstetric medicine is like aviation: As even the worst airlines go years
without a crash, so can even the most _cavalier_ , careless hospitals go years
without a mother or a baby dying or being serious injured. -- Adam Wolfberg,
_The Atlantic_ , "The Doctor Who Revolutionized Hospital-Birth Safety," 26 May
2017

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

For a quick lesson in cool-girl _cavalier_ , look to Bella Hadid, who headed
to Jesse Jo Stark's show at the The Peppermint Club on Tuesday night in an
offhand aesthetic defined by easy hair, exposed skin, and a group of in-step
girlfriends. -- Calin Van Paris, _Vogue_ , "Bella Hadid Turns Crop Top Abs and
Good Concert Hair Into a Girl's Night Out Win," 29 Aug. 2018 Nicole Morrison
of Houston, who was rescue coordinator for her local cavalier King Charles
spaniel club, says _cavaliers_ , for instance, need regular teeth brushing and
dental cleanings, as well as weight control to prevent obesity. -- Kim
Campbell Thornton, _sacbee_ , "Adopting the right furry friend for you takes
some forethought | The Sacramento Bee," 23 May 2018 The refined sensibilities
of his hippos stand in touching contrast to their obvious tonnage, and his pen
line — though never forgetting their impossible weight and size — endows them
with the grace and airiness of a ballerina and her _cavalier_. -- Amy Bloom,
_New York Times_ , "For the Love of ‘George and Martha’," 29 Mar. 2018 Ian
Hussey as her _cavalier_ was dashing, his soloing and partnering both solid.
-- Ellen Dunkel, _Philly.com_ , "Pennsylvania Ballet delivers the Christmas
magic in 'Nutcracker'," 10 Dec. 2017 Her _cavalier_ , or escort for the
evening, will be Maharaja Padmanabh Singh of Jaipur, who first gained the
title in 2011 at the young age of 13. -- Hilary Weaver, _vanityfair.com_ ,
"Ava Phillippe Is About to Become a Debutante," 9 Oct. 2017 Her _cavalier_ ,
or escort for the evening, will be Maharaja Padmanabh Singh of Jaipur, who
first gained the title in 2011 at the young age of 13. -- Hilary Weaver,
_Vanities_ , "Ava Phillippe Is About to Become a Debutante," 9 Oct. 2017 For a
man who could decide to use nuclear weapons to speak about them in a
_cavalier_ and bullying tone is obscene. -- James Fallows, _The Atlantic_ ,
"Trump's Shocking Recklessness," 24 Sep. 2017 Misty Copeland will perform the
title role at the May 31 matinée, squired by the company’s new Danish
_cavalier_ , Alban Lendorf. -- _The New Yorker_ , "American Ballet Theatre," 5
June 2017

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'cavalier.' Views expressed in
the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors.
Send us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _cavalier_

Adjective

circa 1641, in the meaning defined at sense 2

Noun

1589, in the meaning defined at sense 1

## History and Etymology for _cavalier_

Noun and Adjective

Middle French, from Old Italian _cavaliere_ , from Old Occitan _cavalier_ ,
from Late Latin _caballarius_ horseman, from Latin _caballus_

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _cavalier_

Share _cavalier_

Post the Definition of cavalier to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of cavalier on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _cavalier_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

Listen to Our Podcast about _cavalier_

Theme music by Joshua Stamper ©2006 New Jerusalem Music/ASCAP

Get Word of the Day delivered to your inbox!

Sign Up ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-transparent.svg)

From the Editors at Merriam-Webster

![alt

5caca8593ac8f](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Trending: 'Cavalier': Virginia NCAA...

### Trending: 'Cavalier': Virginia NCAA Champs

![election word trends

merriam](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Trending Words from Election 2016

### Trending Words from Election 2016

The words Americans looked up most

![cavalier](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Trending: Cavalier

### Trending: Cavalier

What does it mean to have a cavalier attitude?

## Dictionary Entries near _cavalier_

cava

Cavaco Silva

cavalcade

cavalier

cavaliere

Cavalier King Charles spaniel

cavalier projection

## Statistics for _cavalier_

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _cavalier_

## The first known use of _cavalier_ was in 1589

See more words from the same year

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _cavalier_

cavalier

_adjective_

![How to pronounce cavalier \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _cavalier_

disapproving **:** having or showing no concern for something that is
important or serious

cavalier

noun

cav·​a·​lier | \ ˌka-və-ˈlir ![How to pronounce cavalier

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Kids Definition of _cavalier_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 **:** a mounted soldier

2 **:** a brave and courteous gentleman

cavalier

adjective

Kids Definition of _cavalier_ (Entry 2 of 2)

1 **:** easy and lighthearted in manner

2 **:** having or showing no concern for a serious or important matter He has
a _cavalier_ attitude about money.

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _cavalier_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _cavalier_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _cavalier_

Spanish Central: Translation of _cavalier_

Nglish: Translation of _cavalier_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _cavalier_ for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about _cavalier_

Comments on _cavalier_

What made you want to look up _cavalier_? Please tell us where you read or
heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

    
        * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    
    * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
    
    * nectarine clementine
    * orange tangerine
    

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

    
        1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
    
    2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
    
    3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
    

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

    
        * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
    

Your poem could win $$

    
        * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
    

Going above and beyond

    
        * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
    

They sound alike but that's it

    
        * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
    

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

    
        * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
    

You all would not have guessed some of these

    
        * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
    

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

    
        * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
    

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

    
        * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
    

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

    
        * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
    

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

    
        * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
    

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

    
        * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
    

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

    
        * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
    

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

    
        * SPANISH CENTRAL
    * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
    * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
    * VISUAL DICTIONARY
    * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
    * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
    * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
    * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
    

FOLLOW US

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * YouTube
    * Instagram
    
    * Browse the Dictionary:
    * a
    * b
    * c
    * d
    * e
    * f
    * g
    * h
    * i
    * j
    * k
    * l
    * m
    * n
    * o
    * p
    * q
    * r
    * s
    * t
    * u
    * v
    * w
    * x
    * y
    * z
    * 0-9
    * Home 
    * Help 
    * Apps 
    * About Us 
    * Shop 
    * Advertising Info 
    * Dictionary API 
    * Contact Us 
    * Video 
    * Favorites 
    * Word of the Year 
    * Law Dictionary 
    * Medical Dictionary 
    * Privacy Policy 
    * Terms of Use
    * Browse the Thesaurus 
    * Browse the Medical Dictionary
    * Browse the Legal Dictionary
    * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
    

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

