

Accessibility links

    
        * Skip to main content
    * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
    
    * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)
    *     *     * NPR Shop
    *     * Open Navigation Menu
    

Close Navigation Menu

    
        * Home
    
    * News Expand/collapse submenu for News
    
      * National
      * World
      * Politics
      * Business
      * Health
      * Science
      * Technology
      * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life
    
      * Books
      * Movies
      * Television
      * Pop Culture
      * Food
      * Art & Design
      * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music
    
      * Tiny Desk 
      * All Songs Considered 
      * Music News 
      * Music Features 
      * New Music 
      * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts
    

Daily

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
      * More Shows & Podcasts
    
    * Search
    
    *     * NPR Shop
    
    * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)
    * Tiny Desk 
    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019
    
    * About NPR
    * Overview
    * Support
    * Careers
    * Connect
    * Press
    * Ethics
    

**FACT CHECK: Trump, Illegal Immigration And Crime** **In an effort to justify
his get-tough policies at the Southern border, President Trump met Friday with
victims of crime committed by immigrants who entered the country illegally.**

**Special Series**

## Fact Check

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg) **FACT CHECK:
Trump, Illegal Immigration And Crime**

# FACT CHECK: Trump, Illegal Immigration And Crime

    
        * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

June 22, 20184:49 PM ET

![Scott Horsley

2010](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2012/01/03/scotthorsley_1_sq-7f902d16d4289e137d4e37a5ea83639244170aff-s100-c85.jpg)

Scott Horsley

Twitter

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/22/ap_18173705150974trump_wide-20bc6dc36600224a4a1aedbf49274a5966fb17e4-s1100-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

President Trump speaks about immigration alongside family members affected by
crime committed by undocumented immigrants, at the White House Friday. **Evan
Vucci/AP** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Evan Vucci/AP

President Trump speaks about immigration alongside family members affected by
crime committed by undocumented immigrants, at the White House Friday.

Evan Vucci/AP

**Updated at 8:30 p.m. ET**

After days of damaging news stories about an administration policy that
separated immigrant families at the Southern border, President Trump tried to
change the narrative Friday. He spoke up for grieving family members who have
lost loved ones at the hands of people in the country illegally.

Trump has frequently pointed to sympathetic crime victims to justify his get-
tough policies at the Southern border. But experts say the president's
rhetoric overstates the threat posed by immigrants, who tend to commit crime
at lower rates than people who are born in the United States.

![Watch: 6-Year-Old Girl, Alone, Breaks Through Immigration Noise With A Phone

Number](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/22/propublica-

audio_sq-52fe7d831af036fe4fd3b4da30f712d82b6223ab-s100-c15.png)

### News

### Watch: 6-Year-Old Girl, Alone, Breaks Through Immigration Noise With A

Phone Number

"These are the families the media ignores," Trump said of crime victims.
"These are the stories that Democrats and people that are weak on immigration,
they don't want to discuss, they don't want to hear, they don't want to see,
they don't want to talk about."

![Mother And Son Reunite At Airport; U.S. Had Split Them Because Of Migrant

Status](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/22/ap_18173254807675_sq-

ae7af37e13128e5e588df95ad91c4607fb8cc849-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### Mother And Son Reunite At Airport; U.S. Had Split Them Because Of Migrant

Status

The president was joined at the White House by more than a dozen parents whose
children were killed — in some cases in traffic accidents — by immigrants in
the country illegally. Their stories offered a counterpoint to those filling
newspapers and television broadcasts this week of immigrant children forcibly
separated from their parents after crossing the border illegally.

Trump reversed course and ended his family separation policy on Wednesday. But
he vowed to continue a crackdown on illegal immigration, defying critics.

"They don't talk about the death and destruction caused by people who
shouldn't be here," the president said. "People that will continuously get
into trouble and do bad things."

![Immigrant Acquitted Of San Francisco Killing Sentenced On Lesser Gun

Charge](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/01/05/ap_273196055374_sq-945c8f1dd98d9eac8fde802fcc44ebabc71acbf4-s100-c15.jpg)

### The Two-Way

### Immigrant Acquitted Of San Francisco Killing Sentenced On Lesser Gun

Charge

During the 2016 campaign, Trump often highlighted the case of Kate Steinle,
who was fatally shot in San Francisco by Jose Ines Garcia Zarate, a Mexican
national who had repeatedly crossed the border illegally. Garcia Zarate was
acquitted of second-degree murder last year. A California jury was apparently
convinced by the defense argument that the shooting was accidental.

While any death is tragic, a February 2018 study by the Cato Institute using
2015 crime statistics from Texas found immigrants in the country illegally
were 25 percent less likely to be convicted of homicide than native-born
Americans. ( _Legal_ immigrants were 87 percent less likely.)

According to the study, immigrants in the country illegally were also 11.5
percent less likely than native-born Americans to be convicted of sexual
assault and 79 percent less likely to be convicted of larceny.

The study found higher conviction rates among illegal immigrants for gambling,
kidnapping, smuggling and vagrancy, but those offenses were rare and made up a
tiny fraction of overall crime in Texas in 2015.

A separate March 2018 study in the journal Criminology looked at whether
violent crime increases as the number of immigrants living illegally in a
community goes up. Researchers found it does not. If anything, the opposite is
true: Violent crime appears to fall when more immigrants are living in a
community illegally.

Trump disputed those findings during his White House event Friday but he did
not offer evidence to the contrary.

In the aggregate, Trump said, immigrants in the country illegally are
responsible for tens of thousands of crimes. He pointed to a 2011 study by the
Government Accountability Office that estimated immigrants had committed about
25,000 homicides, 42,000 robberies and nearly 70,000 sex offenses. That
estimate was extrapolated from a survey of 1,000 immigrants held in state and
federal prisons. But the sample included immigrants living both legally and
illegally in the country. It also offered no time frame in which the crimes
might have been committed and no basis for comparison with the native-born
population.

In the past, the president has exaggerated threats facing the U.S. to justify
his travel ban, tough-on-crime measures and a now-folded commission on voter
fraud.

![John Kelly On Trump, The Russia Investigation And Separating Immigrant

Families](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/05/10/john-kelly-npr-

poole_sq-9f3f5cd4baa0225871d5cd8e5124afbddc89c48d-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### John Kelly On Trump, The Russia Investigation And Separating Immigrant

Families

In an interview with NPR last month, White House chief of staff John Kelly
acknowledged that most people crossing the border illegally do not pose a
security threat.

"The vast majority of the people that move illegally into the United States
are not bad people," Kelly said. "They're not criminals. They're not MS-13"
gang members.

Kelly defended the administration's Southern border crackdown, however,
arguing that immigrants coming from rural parts of Central America with little
education might not easily assimilate into the United States.

"We must maintain a Strong Southern Border," Trump tweeted Friday. "We cannot
allow our country to be overrun by illegal immigrants as the Democrats tell
their phony stories of sadness and grief."

> We must maintain a Strong Southern Border. We cannot allow our Country to be
overrun by illegal immigrants as the Democrats tell their phony stories of
sadness and grief, hoping it will help them in the elections. Obama and others
had the same pictures, and did nothing about it!

>

> -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 22, 2018

The president made similar comments in a meeting with lawmakers earlier this
week.

"We have to be strong on the border," Trump said Wednesday. "Otherwise, you'll
have millions of people coming up — not thousands, like we have now; you'll
have millions of people flowing up and just overtaking the country. And we're
not letting that happen."

Loading...

Illegal immigration at the Southern border dropped off sharply in the early
months of the Trump administration. But in recent months, the number of
apprehensions has rebounded, driven in part by a growing number of children
and families. Overall, the number of illegal border crossers is still lower
now than it was in 2014 and a fraction of what it was a decade earlier.

![Crying Toddler On Widely Shared 'Time' Cover Was Not Separated From

Mother](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/22/gettyimages-973077510_sq-c4c12fac6de32bbeec16c0d84d2ecd9de1035b8c-s100-c15.jpg)

### Media

### Crying Toddler On Widely Shared 'Time' Cover Was Not Separated From Mother

![House GOP Leaders Forced To Again Delay Vote On Compromise Immigration

Bill](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/21/ap_18172582858461_sq-0095e116ecf22e38182c8cff531cb4020d780b4f-s100-c15.jpg)

### Politics

### House GOP Leaders Forced To Again Delay Vote On Compromise Immigration

Bill

![First Lady Melania Trump Visits Border Detention Facility In

Texas](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/21/gettyimages-980375876melania_sq-724e3694db778a9e0e5f982aaa7f5261c7e0749d-s100-c15.jpg)

### Politics

### First Lady Melania Trump Visits Border Detention Facility In Texas

![Military Asked To Provide 20,000 Beds For Detained Immigrant

Children](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/06/21/ap_919753084845_sq-02c864a152627076a29348230620a060227080a6-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### Military Asked To Provide 20,000 Beds For Detained Immigrant Children

##### Clarification Feb. 19, 2019

An earlier version of this story failed to note that a Government
Accountability Office study about immigrants who commit crime included data
about immigrants living in the country both legally and illegally.

    
        * President Trump
    * Illegal immigration
    * crime
    
    * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

#### Tuesday, June 11th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

    
        * ******Download**
    * ********Embed****
    

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/731545443/731548267" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

**Special Series**

## Fact Check

###### Read & Listen

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Arts & Life
    * Music
    * Podcasts
    * Programs
    

###### Connect

    
        * Newsletters
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * Contact
    * Help
    

###### About NPR

    
        * Overview
    * Finances
    * People
    * Press
    * Public Editor
    * Corrections
    

###### Get Involved

    
        * Support Public Radio
    * Sponsor NPR
    * NPR Careers
    * NPR Shop
    * NPR Events
    * Visit NPR
    
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy
    * Your Privacy Choices
    * Text Only
    * NPR thanks our sponsors
    

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

