

Skip to main content

![The Fiscal

Times](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/WTBDT2Z-5j_kgicbejvH9gJ0nnimKQd9b1jq3fNuj3E/mtime:1560109899/sites/all/themes/tft-

new/logo.png)

Bad News for Trump’s Wall: Watchdog Finds Plenty of Ways Around It

__

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=401214826749108&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?ev=6031119860094&cd\[value\]=0.00&cd\[currency\]=USD&noscript=1)

![The Fiscal

Times](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/WTBDT2Z-5j_kgicbejvH9gJ0nnimKQd9b1jq3fNuj3E/mtime:1560109899/sites/all/themes/tft-

new/logo.png)

## Search form

Search

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    
    * Free Newsletter
    * Budget
    * Taxes
    * Health Care
    * Social Security
    * The Debt
    * Search
    

Policy + Politics

Share

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

# Bad News for Trump’s Wall: Watchdog Finds Plenty of Ways Around It

![](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/k-mbiiT5nmUHUAZP9NB_zAZDwgepUxB4PVxvEvN9gLg/mtime:1558561541/sites/default/files/styles/article_hero_image/public/media/05032017_US_Mexico_Border_Wall.jpg?itok=q91FfIZ9)

REUTERS/Jose Luis Gonzalez

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

By Eric Pianin

Follow

May 3, 2017

## MOST POPULAR

Furious at the Democrats’ success this week in blocking funding for
construction of a wall along the border with Mexico for the remainder of the
fiscal year, President Trump and White House advisers doubled down on their
commitment to make good on one of Trump’s most important campaign pledges.

“Make no mistake, the wall will be built,” press secretary Sean Spicer told
reporters this week after Congress denied Trump even a small down payment on
the projected $25 billion project as part of a $1.2 trillion government
spending bill for the next five months.

**Related: Trump’s Wall Could Cost as Much as $70 Billion** ****

Despite the heated rhetoric, some senior administration officials have been
scaling back expectations for the “big, beautiful” wall Trump promised to
build. Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly testified last month that far
from being a towering monolithic structure, the wall now being envisioned by
the administration would be a patchwork of concrete barriers, high-tech
fencing and surveillance areas, tunnel-detection operations and existing
barriers to illegal crossings and drug smuggling.

Regardless of what the wall eventually looks like – presuming, of course, it
ever gets built – a new report by the Government Accountability Office
suggests there are plenty of ways for illegal immigrants, illicit drug
smugglers and human traffickers to breach almost any barrier the
administration might choose to erect. And they could do it by land, sea or
air.

Between 2011 and 2016, for example, 67 cross-border tunnels were uncovered in
the Border Patrol’s territory around Tucson, Arizona, and San Diego, according
to the report. While the number of cross-border tunnels uncovered declined
over the past five years, U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials say
illicit cross-border tunnels pose a “persistent threat to national security.”

Tunnels found in recent years range from crudely constructed holes the run
short distances to highly sophisticated, elaborately constructed passageways
with lighting, electricity, ventilation and train tracks.

**Related: 55 Major US Companies Founded by Immigrants** ****

What’s more, officials caution that as the administration increases border
enforcement and surveillance, smugglers will turn increasingly to alternative
routes.

The report states: “As DHS has increased the security of overland smuggling
routes, transnational criminal organizations have adapted their techniques to
smuggle drugs and humans through alternative methods. These methods include
cross-border tunnels, ultralight aircraft, panga boats, and recreational
maritime vessels. While these methods account for a small proportion of known
smuggling, they can be used to transport significant quantities of drugs or
for terrorist activity.”

The GAO analysis of Department of Homeland Security data revealed 534
incursions by ultralight aircraft and 309 detected smuggling operations
involving fishing and recreational vessels along the U.S. mainland borders
over the past five years.

“The number of known smuggling events involving these methods generally
declined over this period, but they remain threats,” the report cautioned.

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

## TOP READS FROM THE FISCAL TIMES

    
        * ![](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/3a87FJAzIV7oLldGiJ-Bzh7gERdnFmC7mPjaGcrqK58/mtime:1485798198/sites/default/files/styles/top_reads_thumb/public/US_Mexican_Border-%284%29.jpg?itok=UlkKxuJe)
    

### Before the Wall: 18 Photos of the US-Mexico Border

Donald Trump is sticking to his plan to build a wall on the southern border.
Take a look at the border as it appears...

    
        * ![](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/5d4gnuQdarX5EQ8Y6PebqqRgKrU-eQzDYMWaOyqfAOs/mtime:1493577955/sites/default/files/styles/top_reads_thumb/public/reuters/usa-trump-pennsylvania_7.jpg?itok=VGzcXCzz)
    

### What Happens When People Start Ignoring President Trump?

Even by the hectic standards of the first few months of Donald Trump’s
presidency, the first days of this week have...

    
        * ![](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/DsygaWY3-mP4S3ZHDkQqvuhz7_A2micNbOBc1WkyKKY/mtime:1493824682/sites/default/files/styles/top_reads_thumb/public/slides/7-1967-chevrolet-corvette-edit.jpg?itok=k3tIhIVd)
    

### 21 Classic American Cars That Have Skyrocketed in Value

    
        * ![](http://dcewboipbvgi2.cloudfront.net/cdn/farfuture/bJvTfmo-0qrNupfYSY8UP6DzjITTMp8XaUL9LBDYeDw/mtime:1449773942/sites/default/files/styles/bio_thumb/public/author/Eric_Pianin_author_page.jpg?itok=RyGAEUAv)
    

### Eric Pianin

    
          * __
      * __
    

Washington Editor and D.C. Bureau Chief Eric Pianin is a veteran journalist
who has covered the federal government, congressional budget and tax issues,
and national politics. He spent over 25 years at The Washington Post.

▶ Join the Discussion_

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=14117530&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c4gb0ythXExpc.gif)

    
        * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    

Follow Your Money

(C) 2009-2019 The Fiscal Times. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

