

We use cookies on this website, including web analysis cookies. By using this
site, you agree that we may store and access cookies on your device. You have
the right to opt out of web analysis at any time. Find out more about our
cookie policy and how to opt out of web analysis.

    
        * For media
      * Find a topic spokesperson
      * Press Releases
    * for contributors
    * about
    * contact
    * iza
    * subscribe to newsletter
    
    * Login
    

Email

Password

Login forgot your password?

Remember Me

    
        * register
    

![](/uploads/settings/logo/logo-main.svg)

Key topics

Leer en español - Read in Spanish

Workplace discrimination

The aging workforce and pensions reform

Digitalization and Big Data

Higher education and human capital

Jetzt auf Deutsch - Read in German

View all

Articles

Program evaluation

Occupational and classroom training

Wage subsidies and in-work benefits

Counseling, sanctioning, and monitoring

Micro-credits and start-up subsidies

Child-care support, early childhood education, and schooling

Behavioral and personnel economics

Pay and incentives

Organization and hierarchies

Human resource management practices

Migration and ethnicity

Labor mobility

Performance of migrants

Implications of migration

Migration policy

Labor markets and institutions

Wage setting

Insurance policies

Redistribution policies

Labor market regulation

Entrepreneurship

Transition and emerging economies

Labor supply and demand

Gender issues

Demographic change and migration

Institutions, policies, and labor market outcomes

Development

Active labor market programs

Microfinance and financial regulations

Technological change

Social insurance

Skills and training programs

Environment

Education and human capital

Economic returns to education

Social returns to education

Schooling and higher education

Vocational education, training skills, and lifelong learning

Demography, family, and gender

Demography

Family

Gender

Health

Data and methods

Data

Methods

Country labor markets

View all articles

Authors

News

Events

Commentary

Opinions

Videos

search

advanced search

![](/uploads/settings/logo/logo-main.svg)

    
        * Login
    

Email

Password

Login forgot your password?

Remember Me

    
        * register
    

First Name

Last Name

Email

re-type your email address

Password

re-type your password

areas of interest

Clear all Select all

Selecting your areas of interest helps us to better understand our audience.

Program evaluation

Behavioral and personnel economics

Migration and ethnicity

Labor markets and institutions

Transition and emerging economies

Development

Environment

Education and human capital

Demography, family, and gender

Data and methods

Country labor markets

I would like to register for the IZA World of Labor newsletter

I agree to the terms and conditions and data usage policy

Create Account

search

advanced search

Key topics

Leer en español - Read in Spanish

Workplace discrimination

The aging workforce and pensions reform

Digitalization and Big Data

Higher education and human capital

Jetzt auf Deutsch - Read in German

View all

Articles

Program evaluation

Occupational and classroom training

Wage subsidies and in-work benefits

Counseling, sanctioning, and monitoring

Micro-credits and start-up subsidies

Child-care support, early childhood education, and schooling

Behavioral and personnel economics

Pay and incentives

Organization and hierarchies

Human resource management practices

Migration and ethnicity

Labor mobility

Performance of migrants

Implications of migration

Migration policy

Labor markets and institutions

Wage setting

Insurance policies

Redistribution policies

Labor market regulation

Entrepreneurship

Transition and emerging economies

Labor supply and demand

Gender issues

Demographic change and migration

Institutions, policies, and labor market outcomes

Development

Active labor market programs

Microfinance and financial regulations

Technological change

Social insurance

Skills and training programs

Environment

Education and human capital

Economic returns to education

Social returns to education

Schooling and higher education

Vocational education, training skills, and lifelong learning

Demography, family, and gender

Demography

Family

Gender

Health

Data and methods

Data

Methods

Country labor markets

View all articles

Authors

News

Events

Commentary

Opinions

Videos

login register

advanced search

    
        * For media
      * Find a topic spokesperson
      * Press Releases
    * for contributors
    * about
    * contact
    * iza
    * subscribe to newsletter
    

Key topics

Leer en español - Read in Spanish

Workplace discrimination

The aging workforce and pensions reform

Digitalization and Big Data

Higher education and human capital

Jetzt auf Deutsch - Read in German

View all

Articles

Program evaluation

Occupational and classroom training

Wage subsidies and in-work benefits

Counseling, sanctioning, and monitoring

Micro-credits and start-up subsidies

Child-care support, early childhood education, and schooling

Behavioral and personnel economics

Pay and incentives

Organization and hierarchies

Human resource management practices

Migration and ethnicity

Labor mobility

Performance of migrants

Implications of migration

Migration policy

Labor markets and institutions

Wage setting

Insurance policies

Redistribution policies

Labor market regulation

Entrepreneurship

Transition and emerging economies

Labor supply and demand

Gender issues

Demographic change and migration

Institutions, policies, and labor market outcomes

Development

Active labor market programs

Microfinance and financial regulations

Technological change

Social insurance

Skills and training programs

Environment

Education and human capital

Economic returns to education

Social returns to education

Schooling and higher education

Vocational education, training skills, and lifelong learning

Demography, family, and gender

Demography

Family

Gender

Health

Data and methods

Data

Methods

Country labor markets

View all articles

Authors

News

Events

Commentary

Opinions

Videos

    
        * Subject areas
    * Authors
    
    *     *     *     *     *     * Home
    * articles
    * Should countries auction immigrant visas?
    

# Should countries auction immigrant visas?

### Selling the right to immigrate to the highest bidders would allocate visas

efficiently but might raise ethical concerns

Madeline Zavodny

Agnes Scott College, USA, and IZA, Germany

one-pager full article

## Elevator pitch

Many immigrant destination countries face considerable pressure to change
their immigration policies. One of the most innovative policies is auctioning
the right to immigrate or to hire a foreign worker to the highest bidders.
Visa auctions would be more efficient than current ways of allocating visas,
could boost the economic contribution of immigration to the destination
country, and would increase government revenues. However, visa auctions might
weaken the importance of family ties in the migration process and create
concerns about fairness and accessibility. No country has yet auctioned visas.

![In nearly all regions, far more people

    
                            want to emigrate than have been able to do so legally, 2000](/uploads/articles/202/images/IZAWOL.202.ga.png)
    

## Key findings

### Pros

Auctions would allocate visas more efficiently across immigrants or across
employers.

By enabling workers with the highest-valued skills to immigrate, auctions have
the potential to boost economic growth.

By enabling the government to fund other programs, cut taxes, or reduce the
deficit, auctions would increase government revenue.

Auctions would substitute market forces for government determination of who
should be able to immigrate.

Auctions are a flexible alternative to complicated point systems for
encouraging high-skilled workers to immigrate.

### Cons

No visa auctions have been conducted, so their effects are only theoretical.

Auctions do not guarantee the admission of immigrants who will contribute the
most to long-term economic growth.

Auctions might change the composition of immigrant populations in ways that
are unpopular, particularly among immigrants who want to bring in family
members.

Some potential immigrants and employers may view auctions as too complex or
unfair.

Sending countries might be adversely affected if the composition of emigrants
changes.

## Author's main message

Under work-based visa auctions, employers would bid for the right to hire
foreign workers, who would then receive a visa. Governments that opt to
auction such temporary work-based visas should also consider creating a
pathway to permanent resident visas for immigrants who succeed in the labor
market. A resale market in unused or unwanted visas, visa portability across
employers, and enforcement are all important components of a successful
program to auction visas. Policymakers who want to boost immigration’s
economic contribution should consider auctioning work-based visas rather than
auctioning visas directly to immigrants.

## Motivation

Around the world, far more people want to move to another country than are
able to do so legally. Immigration offers the possibility to rejoin family
members, to pursue better economic opportunities, and to be safer. Desirable
destination countries, worried about being overwhelmed by a flood of
immigrants, restrict the number of visas they offer. Countries that limit the
number of visas must decide how to allocate them. Common criteria for
allocating visas include skill, employment guarantees, and kinship ties; some
countries use a point system, in which immigrants are admitted based on the
number of points assigned for specific characteristics. Visas are typically
awarded to all people who meet certain qualifications or, if demand exceeds
supply, on a first-come, first-served basis. Some countries have introduced
additional mechanisms in recent years for allocating the right to immigrate,
such as lotteries and investor programs. One program that has been promoted by
some economists, including Nobel-laureate Gary Becker, but that no country has
yet adopted, is a visa auction, or selling the right to immigrate to the
highest bidder.

## Discussion of pros and cons

### How visa auctions would work

Visa auctions would allocate a specified number of visas to the highest
bidders. The number of visas could be determined by the government or by an
independent commission. Visa auctions could take several different forms.
Potential immigrants themselves could bid for visas, or employers could bid
for permits that allow them to hire foreign workers, who would then receive
visas. Visas and permits could be temporary or permanent; even the right to
citizenship could, in theory, be auctioned. Separate auctions could be held
for different categories of immigrants, such as for different education or
skill groups or for year-round versus seasonal workers [2].

There are multiple ways to conduct an auction. A sealed-bid, single-price
format might be the best option for a visa auction. Bidders would submit
secret bids, and visas or permits would then be allocated from highest to
lowest bid until the quota has been met. Winners would pay the price of the
lowest accepted bid. In economics, this type of auction is often called a
“Vickrey auction.” This structure would help reduce concerns about the
“winner’s curse,” or paying too much. It would also make more people willing
to participate in the auction and bid their true willingness to pay.

There is considerable precedent in other markets for government auctions.
Governments regularly auction bonds to investors in order to fund deficits.
The US Treasury uses a sealed-bid, single-price format to sell trillions of
dollars of debt. The US government has also auctioned offshore oil leases, the
wireless spectrum, and sulfur dioxide allowances, among others. The EU
auctions emission permits as part of the EU Emissions Trading System; Iceland,
Liechtenstein, and Norway also auction emission permits. Many people have
experience with auctions thanks to eBay.

#### Paying for visas and setting up resale markets

One concern about auctioning visas directly to immigrants is their ability to
pay. Many potential immigrants whose income gains would be expected to exceed
the price of a visa might be unable to pay upfront for a visa, and they might
not be able to borrow enough to pay for a visa because of limited credit
markets in their home country. Auctioning permits to employers would avoid
this concern. Alternatively, the government could offer loans to auction
winners, who might be required to make a down payment. Winners would then
repay the loans over time, perhaps when they file their taxes each year.

Having a resale market is critical to the success of visa auctions,
particularly if permits to hire foreign workers are auctioned to employers.
The government could run an electronic resale, or secondary, market where
employers who hold valid permits can post them for sale. Tradable permits make
employers more willing to participate in auctions by reducing their risk of
holding a permit they no longer need. A resale market also allows employers to
buy a permit later if they did not bid high enough in an auction or did not
participate in an auction at all but later want to hire a foreign worker.
Small businesses, in particular, might find a resale market more accessible
than an auction.

#### Portability of visas

Visa portability—the ability of foreign workers to switch employers—is also
critical to the success of an auction system. Foreign workers who cannot
switch employers are more vulnerable to being exploited, and they have limited
bargaining power. This, in turn, may put downward pressure on wages and
working conditions not only for foreign workers but for competing native-born
workers as well. Visa portability also allows foreign workers to move to
sectors or areas with stronger demand for labor. Such movement reduces
bottlenecks and promotes economic efficiency and growth. New immigrants are an
important source of “grease in the wheels of the labor market,” and
immigrants’ willingness to go where the jobs are is a key source of the
economic gains from immigration [3].

A system that auctions visas directly to immigrants would presumably allow
them to choose whether and for whom to work in the destination country [2],
while a system that auctions tradable permits to employers should give foreign
workers the flexibility to move across permit-holding employers. However,
auctioning visas directly to immigrants might not help alleviate labor market
shortages since auction winners might not have the skills that labor-seeking
employers need. If employers bid for permits that allow them to hire a foreign
worker, they presumably would bring in immigrants with skills that are in
short supply among the domestic workforce.

#### Pathway to permanent visas

A government that opts to auction temporary work permits to employers could
create a pathway toward permanent visas for immigrants who succeed in the
labor market. The government could hold a separate auction that immigrants
with a temporary visa could enter after a set number of years, or permanent
visas could be automatically offered to temporary visa holders who meet
certain conditions, such as being employed on a temporary visa for five or ten
years. Immigrants with permanent visas would not be restricted to working for
employers who have a permit to hire a foreign worker. Creating a pathway
toward permanent residence for immigrants can help avoid creating a persistent
underclass of workers who are vulnerable to exploitation by employers who
threaten not to renew a worker’s temporary visa.

#### Enforcement

A final key component of a visa auction system is enforcement. If immigrants
can easily enter a country or work there without a visa, there is little
reason for them to pay for a visa or for their employers to pay for a permit.
Effective enforcement might encompass border security and internal
enforcement, depending on the country. Worksite enforcement that ensures that
workers are eligible to work in a country is one component of internal
enforcement. Worksite enforcement tools include audits of employers’ records,
electronic verification of workers’ employment eligibility, raids,
deportations of unauthorized workers, and punishment for employers who violate
the law.

#### Other considerations

Although visa auctions may seem like a radical departure from current
immigration policies in most countries, many immigrants or their employers
already pay a fee. For example, as of mid-2015, the fee for an employment-
based permanent resident visa in the US was US$1,070; Canada’s Express Entry
system for employment-based permanent visas costs C$1,040; and Australia
charges A$3,520 for its skilled independent visa class.

Some current immigration systems also involve fees that are not paid to the
government. Many immigrants or their employers hire a lawyer or consultant to
guide them through complex immigration program requirements. Potential
immigrants abroad often pay an agent to help them secure a work-based visa.
Visa auctions would capture some of the funds that legal immigrants and their
employers currently pay to lawyers, consultants, and agents.

At the same time, many people who are migrating illegally pay large fees to
smugglers or bribes to border guards. The government could potentially capture
some of these funds and reduce the risks of unauthorized immigration by
allowing migrants who pay a fee to migrate legally instead of illegally. Most
unauthorized immigrants would probably be willing to pay more in order to
migrate legally if they could; illegal immigration is a consequence of limits
on the number and type of visas available [4]. Since an auction system would
still limit the number and type of visas available, it must be combined with
enforcement in order to minimize unauthorized immigration.

Across the globe, the desire to emigrate far outstrips the actual emigration
rate—millions of people are willing to pay considerable sums of money in order
to move [1]. Even at current fees, there is excess demand for visas to
immigrate to certain countries, as evidenced by the long backlogs of people
waiting to emigrate to Canada and the US [5], [6]. Under an auction system,
there would be no backlogs, or excess demand. The price would adjust to clear
the market, moving up automatically when demand for visas rises, and down when
demand falls.

### Economic advantages of auctions

Auctions offer several advantages over current immigration policies. Most
important, auctions have the potential to allocate visas to their highest-
valued use [7]. When there is a limit on the number of visas and they are
issued on a first-come, first-served basis, visas are awarded to whoever is
first in line regardless of whether that person—or the person’s
employer—values a visa more than other potential immigrants do. Visa auctions,
in contrast, use market forces to allocate visas efficiently based on
willingness to pay. Employment-based auctions are an “invisible hand”
directing the admission of immigrants with the skills valued the most in the
labor market—the immigrants with the highest productivity.

It is difficult for governments to estimate or forecast the number of workers
needed in specific occupations in the face of changing labor market demand
[5]. Auctions of employment-based visas eliminate the need for the government
to try to determine which occupations are in highest demand or are
experiencing a shortage of workers. Immigrants who work in those occupations
or their employers should be willing to pay the most for visas. In addition,
auctions would reveal information to policymakers about bottlenecks in the
labor market—situations where labor supply does not meet demand [8].
Policymakers could use this information to design education or training
programs to alleviate bottlenecks in the long term, while allowing immigration
to alleviate them in the short term. Alleviating bottlenecks would boost
economic growth.

In theory, the government could simply set a higher price for visas instead of
holding an auction. This could also lead to an efficient allocation of visas.
However, the government is unlikely to know the demand for visas, which
changes over time, and hence is unlikely to know the optimal price. Auctions
would reveal this price and allow it to fluctuate. Further, changes in visa
prices, either at auction or in the resale market, would provide a useful
market-based signal to the government of changes in the demand for visas. An
increase in prices would indicate an increase in demand for visas. The
government might then want to increase the number of visas available.
Otherwise, it would risk incurring more unauthorized immigration or worker
shortages and bottlenecks to economic growth. If the government wants to
reduce the number of foreign workers during an economic downturn, it could
decrease the number of visas available at auction and even buy back visas in
the resale market. However, a government that tries to manipulate the number
of visas in response to the business cycle must do so nimbly and adeptly.
Otherwise, changes in the number of visas may kick in just as the business
cycle shifts to another phase.

Auctions have the potential to generate considerably more revenue than
governments currently receive for visas. The gains to immigration are
substantial, suggesting that many immigrants or their employers would be
willing to pay large sums for visas or permits. Low-skilled workers can earn
ten times as much in the US as in Egypt, Haiti, or Nigeria; workers from
Guatemala and Mexico can earn at least 2.5 times as much [9]. In 2000, low-
skilled Mexican men earned an average of US$10,000 more annually in the US
than in Mexico [10]. In 2009, Indian computer programmers working in the US on
temporary visas earned about US$58,000 more annually than they would have
earned at the same job in India [11]. Visa auctions would transfer some of
these gains from immigrants (and their employers) to the government.

Government revenues would also increase indirectly if an auction system leads
to an increase in average incomes among immigrants [2]. Auctioning visas
directly to immigrants would presumably result in a shift toward higher-income
immigrants since they would be more able to afford a visa; an employer-based
auction system would likely also result in a shift towards higher-paid
immigrant workers. Either way, government coffers would swell due to higher
tax revenue.

The revenue raised by visa auctions can alleviate some of the concerns of
opponents of immigration. The funds could be used to pay for training classes
for native-born workers who work in immigrant-intensive sectors or areas. The
funds could also be used to offset costs incurred by areas that receive large
numbers of immigrants, such as the costs of educating their children or
providing publicly funded health care or other services to immigrants.
Alternatively, the government could cut taxes commensurate with the increase
in revenue from visa auctions.

Visa auctions also help address concerns that immigration drives down wages
and employment among native-born workers. By raising the price of hiring
foreign-born workers, auctions increase employers’ incentive to hire native-
born workers. Meanwhile, visa portability benefits both foreign- and native-
born workers.

### Concerns about visa auctions

Although auctions should admit immigrants with the greatest willingness to pay
for a visa, auctions do not guarantee that the number of immigrants admitted
will be optimal. Auctions should result in the efficient allocation of a given
number of visas, but the government still must set the number of visas.
However, current immigration policies also require the government to set the
number of visas. One benefit of an auction system over current policies is
that the government can use visa prices as a signal of when it should change
the number of visas.

Auctions of employment-based visas should admit the workers who are the most
highly valued in the labor market at the time of the auction, but those
workers may not be the most highly valued in the future. For example, computer
programmers or their employers might be willing to pay the most for visas
during an information technology boom, but those workers might become
unemployed during an information technology bust. Governments might want to
auction only temporary visas, not permanent ones. However, the same concern
applies to other schemes used to admit immigrants; the skills in demand today
may not be in demand in the future.

Of even greater concern is the fact that an auction system does not
necessarily admit the immigrants who contribute the most to long-term economic
growth. For example, an auction system might result in lots of investment
bankers, but long-term economic growth might be higher if the country instead
admitted lots of scientists and engineers. A system that prioritizes certain
occupations or skills may better boost long-term economic growth, as long as
the government is able to successfully target immigrants who make the greatest
contributions to growth. Relatedly, a market-based system like visa auctions
ignores any positive—or negative—externalities associated with immigrants. For
example, discoveries made by immigrant scientists might boost patent activity
in other companies. Employers are willing to pay for visas based on the value
of contributions to their own companies, but are unlikely to be willing to pay
for the value of positive spillovers to other companies. Alternatively, a
system that auctions visas directly to individuals might result in many visas
going to wealthy retirees, who do not contribute to the labor force at all but
who make considerable demands on publicly funded health care.

An auction system might lead to a decline in the number of workers in
relatively low-paying fields. Separate auctions could be created for certain
categories of workers to ensure that low-skilled workers are able to
immigrate, but the workers with the skills most in demand within those
categories would still be the ones with the greatest willingness to pay for a
visa. There is no obvious optimal set or number of categories for which to run
visa auctions. Indeed, creating categories voids the simplicity and market-
based nature of a visa auction scheme.

A deeper objection to visa auctions is that they are unfair—that the right to
immigrate should not be decided solely on economic grounds. Immigrants may
contribute to a country’s diversity and its culture in ways that are not
valued by markets. In particular, markets do not value family ties to people
already living in a country. Being able to sponsor relatives to immigrate may
be important to a country’s residents, particularly those who themselves
immigrated to the country. Likewise, an auction system does not admit
immigrants on the basis of humanitarian considerations. Concerns that an
auction system unfairly places economic considerations ahead of family ties or
valid asylum claims may make it politically untenable, or at least deeply
unpopular [12]. An immigration scheme that loses popularity might lead to
backlash against immigrants or force the government to reduce the number of
visas available. It is worth considering, however, that immigration policies
that admit people on the basis of family ties or being first in line could
also be considered unfair by people without family ties or not near the front
of a line.

Finally, visa auctions might adversely affect sending countries if the
auctions lead to changes in the composition of immigrants. Visa auctions could
lead to more “brain drain” if they result in more high-skilled people leaving
a country than current policies do. Visa auctions also could lead to a
decrease in a sending country’s capital if visas are auctioned directly to
immigrants. Potential adverse consequences include higher interest rates, less
innovation, lower tax revenues, and slower economic growth. On the other hand,
allowing more high-skilled people to immigrate could boost remittances and the
transfer of ideas and technology to sending countries.

### How other innovative models compare with visa auctions

Although no country has yet auctioned visas, there are several other
innovative ways that countries currently allocate visas. These include point
systems, visa lotteries, and investor visa programs.

Several countries use point systems to allocate certain classes of visa,
particularly for economic immigrants. Applicants earn points based on
specified characteristics, such as age, education, occupation, language
ability, and having a job offer. Australia, Canada, and New Zealand have had
point systems for a long time, while several other countries (including the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Japan, Singapore, Sweden, and the UK) have recently
created point systems.

An auction system has several advantages over a point system. A point system
requires determining the relative importance of potential migrants’ various
attributes—policymakers must decide how to award points. Points cannot be
awarded for attributes that cannot be observed or quantified. An auction
system does not require such decisions; immigrants (or employers) who are
willing to pay the most are admitted. A point system does not ensure that
immigrants will have the characteristics that are valued most by employers; a
system that auctions permits to employers does. A point system that includes a
limit on the number of visas available can result in considerable backlogs if
the number of people who meet the point threshold exceeds the number of visas
available; an auction system clears the market.

A few countries use a lottery to allocate some types of visas. The US
currently uses a lottery to allocate up to 55,000 permanent resident visas
(“green cards”) per year through its diversity visa program for immigrants
from countries that send relatively few immigrants to the US. New Zealand runs
a lottery, or ballot, called the Pacific Access Category, that admits a small
number of immigrants from several Pacific island nations. In both the US and
New Zealand, immigration authorities use a lottery because the programs are
oversubscribed—far more applications are submitted than the number of visas
available. The US also uses a lottery to allocate H-1B temporary foreign
worker visas for skilled specialty workers in years when more applications are
received the first week than are available for the entire fiscal year.
Otherwise, H-1B visas are allocated on a first-come, first-served basis until
they run out; the program is capped at 65,000 visas per year plus 20,000 visas
for applicants with a US master’s degree or higher.

Awarding visas based on a lottery creates a perception of fairness, but it
does not allocate visas to their highest-valued users. In addition, lotteries
may encourage people to try to game the system. In the US, for example, some
companies submit far more applications for foreign workers than they need, and
some workers have multiple H-1B visa applications submitted on their behalf.

A number of countries have programs that award visas to people who invest a
certain amount in that country. In the US, for example, the EB-5 investor visa
program allocates up to 10,000 permanent resident visas annually to people who
invest at least US$1 million in the US and create or preserve at least ten
full-time jobs or invest at least US$500,000 in a high-unemployment or rural
area. The UK’s Tier 1 investor visa requires investing at least £2,000,000.
Malta (an EU member) and the Caribbean nation Saint Kitts and Nevis even offer
citizenship upfront to investors who meet certain requirements. The existence
of these programs may signal that countries are open to auctioning visas.
However, Canada scrapped its federal investor visa program in 2014 despite a
considerable backlog of applicants because of its unpopularity with many
Canadians, who complained that too many of the immigrants were wealthy Chinese
investors who bid up housing prices in big cities. The Canadian province of
Quebec still has its investor visa program, however.

The key advantage of auctions over existing investor visa programs is that
investors may be willing to pay more for a visa than governments are currently
charging. Auctions reveal prospective immigrants’ willingness to pay. However,
the high prices likely to result from auctions aimed at investors would
preclude most people or employers from being able to afford a visa. Another
advantage of auctions is that they may avoid concerns about fraud that plague
some investor visa programs.

In addition to visa auctions, economists have suggested creating tradable
immigration quotas for refugees or other groups of migrants [13]. Assigning
countries the number of immigrants they must accept and at the same time
allowing countries to buy or sell those quotas via electronic auctions could
increase global welfare. Under such a scheme, higher-income countries with
high anti-immigrant sentiment would pay lower-income countries with low anti-
immigrant sentiment to accept more immigrants. Such proposals do not include
direct auctions of visas to refugees and other humanitarian immigrants; visa
auctions would be aimed primarily at employment-based immigrants.

## Limitations and gaps

To date, no country has auctioned visas, so the real-world success or failure
of visa auctions and their short- and long-term effects are unknown. Visa
auctions are more likely to be successful in countries that admit immigrants
primarily on the basis of employment or skills, not family ties or for
humanitarian reasons. The potential scope of auctions may be limited in EU
countries that have a large share of “free movement” immigrants from other EU
countries, unless they greatly increase the number of non-EU immigrants
admitted. The unpopularity of Canada’s federal investor visa program suggests
that auctions may be untenable even in countries that admit immigrants
primarily on the basis of skills or employment.

## Summary and policy advice

Far more people want to move to another country than are able to do so
legally. Popular destination countries restrict the number of visas they offer
and need a mechanism for allocating them. Visas are typically awarded to all
applicants who meet specified criteria or, if demand exceeds supply, on a
first-come, first-served basis. Some countries have introduced additional
mechanisms, such as lotteries and investor programs. A promising but as yet
untried mechanism is auctioning the right to immigrate or to hire a foreign
worker to the highest bidders. Visa auctions could boost efficiency, increase
immigrants’ economic contribution to the destination country, and increase
government revenues. However, visa auctions do not consider the role of family
ties in migration and create concerns about fairness and accessibility. On
balance, the economic benefits are likely to outweigh the costs, and
policymakers should consider auctioning visas.

Policymakers who want to create a visa auction should consider starting with a
pilot program. The best pilot program might be an auction aimed at investors,
who are willing to pay substantial sums for visas. This might generate public
support for broader auctions aimed at replacing employment-based visas for
high- and low-skilled workers. Using the funds from visa auctions to reimburse
localities that absorb large shares of immigrants for immigration-related
costs or to cut taxes would also increase public support for visa auctions.
Continuing to admit some immigrants based on family ties or for humanitarian
reasons might make a visa auction more palatable. Economists have considerable
experience at designing successful auctions in other markets, which
policymakers can draw on in designing visa auctions.

## Acknowledgments

The author thanks an anonymous referee and the IZA World of Labor editors for
many helpful suggestions on an earlier draft.

## Competing interests

The IZA World of Labor project is committed to the IZA Guiding Principles of
Research Integrity. The author declares to have observed these principles.

(C) Madeline Zavodny

#### evidence map

Should countries auction immigrant visas?

    
        * Facebook
    
    * Twitter
    
    * LinkedIn
    
    * show one-pager
    * download pdf
    
    * cite
    
    *     *     *     * download pdf
    
    * cite
    *     *     *     * Facebook
    
    * Twitter
    
    * LinkedIn
    

Keywords

auction, visas, immigrants

Search Phrase

Classification

    
        * Migration and ethnicity
      * Migration policy
    

Evidence map

    
        * Background information
    
      * Vickrey auction
    

### Vickrey auction

A Vickrey auction is a second-price, sealed-bid auction. Each bidder submits a
confidential, or sealed price, bid. The highest bid wins the auction, but the
winner pays the price of the second-highest bid. If multiple copies of the
item are being auctioned, all winners pay the price of the lowest accepted
bid—this is called a single-price auction. The economist William Vickrey
showed that this auction design gives bidders an incentive to bid their true
value of the good being auctioned instead of under-bidding in order to pay
less if they win.

_Source_ : Lucking-Reiley, D. “Vickrey auctions in practice: From nineteenth-
century philately to twenty-first-century e-commerce.” _Journal of Economic
Perspectives_ 14:3 (2000): 183–192.

    
        * Related Articles
    
      * ### Circular migration
    

Klaus F. Zimmermann

    
          * ### Do migrants take the jobs of native workers?
    

Amelie F. Constant

    
          * ### Worker displacement in transition economies and in China
    

Hartmut Lehmann

    
          * ### The welfare magnet hypothesis and the welfare take-up of migrants
    

Corrado Giulietti

    
          * ### Taxpayer effects of immigration
    

James P. Smith

    
          * ### Freedom of movement for workers
    

John Kennan

    
          * ### The good and the bad in remittance flows
    

Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes

    
          * ### Late-life work and well-being
    

Carol Graham

    
          * ### Who benefits from return migration to developing countries?
    

Jackline Wahba

    
          * ### Do minimum wages induce immigration?
    

Corrado Giulietti

    
          * ### Occupational choice of return migrants
    

Matloob Piracha

    
          * ### Smart policy toward high-skill emigrants
    

Michael A. Clemens

    
          * ### Gravity models: A tool for migration analysis
    

Raul Ramos

    
          * ### Can market mechanisms solve the refugee crisis?
    

Jesús Fernández-Huertas Moraga

    
          * ### Legalizing undocumented immigrants
    

Cynthia Bansak

    
          * ### Migration and female genital mutilation
    

Sandrine Mesplé-Somps

    
          * ### The changing nature of citizenship legislation
    

Chiara Strozzi

    
          * ### Measuring flows of international migration
    

James Raymer

    
          * ### Why does unemployment differ for immigrants?
    

Stephen Drinkwater

    
          * ### Family-friendly and human-capital-based immigration policy
    

Harriet Duleep Mark Regets

    
          * ### The labor market in New Zealand, 2000–2017
    

David C. Maré

More Less

    
        * Further reading
    
      * Becker (2011)
    

Becker, G. S. _The Challenge of Immigration: A Radical Solution_. London:
Institute of Economic Affairs, 2011.

    
          * Klemperer (2004)
    

Klemperer, P. _Auctions: Theory and Practice_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2004.

    
        * Key references
    
      * [1] Docquier et al. (2015)
    

[1]Docquier, F., Machado, J., Sekkat, K. "Efficiency gains from liberalizing
labor mobility" _Scandinavian Journal of Economics_ 117:2 (2015): 303–346.

[1]United Nations

[2]World Development Indicators (WDI)

[3]Gallup World Poll

[1]Other - Time series

[2]Other - Time series

[3]Survey data (Micro data): Household data - Cross section

Macro-level analysis - Simulations

    
          * [2] Orrenius and Zavodny (2010)
    

[2]Orrenius, P. M., Zavodny, M. _Beside the Golden Door: U.S. Immigration
Reform in a New Era of Globalization_. Washington, DC: American Enterprise
Institute Press, 2010.

Macro-level analysis - Other

United States

    
          * [3] Borjas (2001)
    

[3]Borjas, G. J. "Does immigration grease the wheels of the labor market?"
_Brookings Papers on Economic Activity_ 2001:1 (2001): 69–119.

[1]Census of Population and Housing, USA

[1]Census/Microcensus data (Micro data) - Cross section

Macro-level analysis - Regression

United States

    
          * [4] Hanson (2010)
    

[4]Hanson, G. H. _Regulating Low-Skilled Immigration in the United States_.
Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute Press, 2010.

Macro-level analysis - Other

United States

    
          * [5] Reitz (2014)
    

[5]Reitz, J. G. "Canada: New initiatives and approaches to immigration and
nation building" In: Hollifield, J. F., Martin, P. L., Orrenius, P. M. (eds).
_Controlling Immigration: A Global Perspective_. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 2014.

Macro-level analysis - Other

Canada

    
          * [6] Jasso et al. (2010)
    

[6]Jasso, G., Wadwa, V., Gereffi, G., Rissing, B., Freeman, R. "How many
highly skilled foreign-born are waiting in line for U.S. legal permanent
residence?" _International Migration Review_ 44:2 (2010): 477–498.

[1]US Citizenship and Immigration Services Performance Analysis System

[1]Administrative data (Micro data) - Cross section

Macro-level analysis - Regression

United States

    
          * [7] Freeman (2006)
    

[7]Freeman, R. B. "People flows in globalization" _Journal of Economic
Perspectives_ 20:2 (2006): 145–170.

Macro-level analysis - Review

    
          * [8] Zimmermann (2009)
    

[8]Zimmermann, K. F. "Labor mobility and the integration of European labor
markets" In: Nowotny, E., Mooslechner, P., Ritzberger-Grünwald, D. (eds). _The
Integration of European Labour Markets_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publishing, 2009.

Macro-level analysis - Review

    
          * [9] Clemens et al. (2008)
    

[9]Clemens, M., Montenegro, C. E., Pritchett, L. _The Place Premium: Wage
Differences for Identical Workers across the U.S. Border_ Center for Global
Development Working Paper No.148, 2008.

[1]World Bank

[2]Census of Population and Housing, USA

[1]Survey data (Micro data): Household data - Cross section

[2]Census/Microcensus data (Micro data) - Cross section

Micro-level analysis - Regression

Argentina, Bangladesh, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Mexico, Morocco,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, United
States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen

    
          * [10] Hanson (2009)
    

[10]Hanson, G. H. "The economic consequences of the international migration of
labor" _Annual Review of Economics_ 1:1 (2009): 179–207.

Macro-level analysis - Review

    
          * [11] Clemens (2013)
    

[11]Clemens, M. A. "Why do programmers earn more in Houston than Hyderabad?
Evidence from randomized processing of US visas" _American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings_ 103:3 (2013): 198–202.

[1]Data set from Clemens (2013)

[1]Other - Cross section

Micro-level analysis - Regression

United States, India

    
          * [12] Martin (2004)
    

[12]Martin, P. "Migration" In: Lomborg, B. (ed). _Global Crises, Global
Solutions_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Macro-level analysis - Other

    
          * [13] Fernández-Huertas Moraga and Rapoport (2014)
    

[13]Fernández-Huertas Moraga, J., Rapoport, H. "Tradable immigration quotas"
_Journal of Public Economics_ 115:7–8 (2014): 94–108.

Macro-level analysis - Theory

    
        * Additional References
    
      * Orrenius et al. (2013)
    

Orrenius, P. M., Peri, G., Zavodny, M. "Overhauling the temporary work visa
system" In: Greenstone, M., Harris, M., Li, K., Looney, A., Patashnik, J.
(eds). _15 Ways to Rethink the Federal Budget_. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution, 2013.

    
          * Peri (2012)
    

Peri, G. _Rationalizing U.S. Immigration Policy: Reforms for Simplicity,
Fairness, and Economic Growth_ The Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution
Discussion Paper No.2012-01, 2012.

### Further reading

    
        * Becker, G. S. _The Challenge of Immigration: A Radical Solution_. London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 2011.
    * Klemperer, P. _Auctions: Theory and Practice_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004.
    

### Key references

    
        * Docquier, F., Machado, J., Sekkat, K. "Efficiency gains from liberalizing labor mobility" _Scandinavian Journal of Economics_ 117:2 (2015): 303–346.
    

Key reference: [1]

    
        * Orrenius, P. M., Zavodny, M. _Beside the Golden Door: U.S. Immigration Reform in a New Era of Globalization_. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute Press, 2010.
    

Key reference: [2]

    
        * Borjas, G. J. "Does immigration grease the wheels of the labor market?" _Brookings Papers on Economic Activity_ 2001:1 (2001): 69–119.
    

Key reference: [3]

    
        * Hanson, G. H. _Regulating Low-Skilled Immigration in the United States_. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute Press, 2010.
    

Key reference: [4]

    
        * Reitz, J. G. "Canada: New initiatives and approaches to immigration and nation building" In: Hollifield, J. F., Martin, P. L., Orrenius, P. M. (eds). _Controlling Immigration: A Global Perspective_. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2014.
    

Key reference: [5]

    
        * Jasso, G., Wadwa, V., Gereffi, G., Rissing, B., Freeman, R. "How many highly skilled foreign-born are waiting in line for U.S. legal permanent residence?" _International Migration Review_ 44:2 (2010): 477–498.
    

Key reference: [6]

    
        * Freeman, R. B. "People flows in globalization" _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ 20:2 (2006): 145–170.
    

Key reference: [7]

    
        * Zimmermann, K. F. "Labor mobility and the integration of European labor markets" In: Nowotny, E., Mooslechner, P., Ritzberger-Grünwald, D. (eds). _The Integration of European Labour Markets_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2009.
    

Key reference: [8]

    
        * Clemens, M., Montenegro, C. E., Pritchett, L. _The Place Premium: Wage Differences for Identical Workers across the U.S. Border_ Center for Global Development Working Paper No.148, 2008.
    

Key reference: [9]

    
        * Hanson, G. H. "The economic consequences of the international migration of labor" _Annual Review of Economics_ 1:1 (2009): 179–207.
    

Key reference: [10]

    
        * Clemens, M. A. "Why do programmers earn more in Houston than Hyderabad? Evidence from randomized processing of US visas" _American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings_ 103:3 (2013): 198–202.
    

Key reference: [11]

    
        * Martin, P. "Migration" In: Lomborg, B. (ed). _Global Crises, Global Solutions_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
    

Key reference: [12]

    
        * Fernández-Huertas Moraga, J., Rapoport, H. "Tradable immigration quotas" _Journal of Public Economics_ 115:7–8 (2014): 94–108.
    

Key reference: [13]

### Additional References

    
        * Orrenius, P. M., Peri, G., Zavodny, M. "Overhauling the temporary work visa system" In: Greenstone, M., Harris, M., Li, K., Looney, A., Patashnik, J. (eds). _15 Ways to Rethink the Federal Budget_. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2013.
    * Peri, G. _Rationalizing U.S. Immigration Policy: Reforms for Simplicity, Fairness, and Economic Growth_ The Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution Discussion Paper No.2012-01, 2012.
    

Full reference list

Open full reference list

print all references

Version(s)

Current Version: **1**

date

November 2015

DOI

10.15185/izawol.202

Author

Madeline Zavodny

Article number: **202**

Download Copy

### Full citation

### Full citation

### Data source(s)

### Data type(s)

### Method(s)

### Countries

#### Get the latest news and articles delivered to your inbox

Subscribe to the IZA World of Labor Newsletter

subscribe to newsletter

![](/uploads/settings/logo/logo-main.svg)

![](/uploads/settings/second_logo/IZA_Institute_of_Labor_Economics.svg)

Follow IZA WORLD OF LABOR

    
        *     *     *     * Frequently asked questions
    * Privacy and cookie policy
    * Terms and conditions
    

Copyright (C) IZA 2019 Impressum.  
All Rights Reserved. ISSN: 2054-9571

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

