
    
        * Politics
    
      * White House
      * Congress
      * Campaigns
      * All Politics
    
    * Policy
    
      * Defense & National Security
      * Energy
      * Healthcare
      * Finance & Economy
      * Tech & Cyber
      * Budgets & Spending
      * Courts
      * Foreign
      * All Policy
    
    * News
    
    * Opinion
    
      * Editorials
      * Columnists
    
        * Byron York
        * Salena Zito
        * Michael Barone
        * Paul Bedard
        * Philip Klein
        * Kristen Soltis Anderson
        * Timothy P. Carney
        * Dan Hannan
        * W. James Antle III
        * David Freddoso
        * Fred Barnes
    
      * Contributors
      * Op-Eds
      * All Opinion
    
    * Business
    
    * Magazine
    
      * Latest Edition
      * All Magazine Editions
      * Digital Reader
      * Member Login
      * Member Access
    
    * Multimedia
    
      * Videos
      * Podcasts
      * Ahead of the Trend
      * Barone's Guide to Government
      * Modern Conservatives
      * Policy Bosses
      * Sea Island Summit
    
    * Beltway Confidential
    
    * Washington Secrets
    
    * Events
    
    * Newsletters
    

Tuesday June 11, 2019 Former Navy employee enticed boys, 13, to send...

Tuesday June 11, 2019 Bill Maher: Trump won't leave White House even if...

Search

    
        *     *     * **Complete D.C. Coverage * Weekly Video with Editor Must-Read Picks * More.** The Washington Examiner Magazine, Digital Edition.
    

Tuesday, June 11, 2019

    
        * Politics
    
      * White House
      * Congress
      * Campaigns
      * All Politics
    
    * Policy
    
      * Defense & National Security
      * Energy
      * Healthcare
      * Finance & Economy
      * Tech & Cyber
      * Budgets & Spending
      * Courts
      * Foreign
      * All Policy
    
    * News
    
    * Opinion
    
      * Editorials
      * Columnists
    
        * Byron York
        * Salena Zito
        * Michael Barone
        * Paul Bedard
        * Philip Klein
        * Kristen Soltis Anderson
        * Timothy P. Carney
        * Dan Hannan
        * W. James Antle III
        * David Freddoso
        * Fred Barnes
    
      * Contributors
      * Op-Eds
      * All Opinion
    
    * Business
    
    * Magazine
    
      * Latest Edition
      * All Magazine Editions
      * Digital Reader
      * Member Login
      * Member Access
    
    * Multimedia
    
      * Videos
      * Podcasts
      * Ahead of the Trend
      * Barone's Guide to Government
      * Modern Conservatives
      * Policy Bosses
      * Sea Island Summit
    
    * Beltway Confidential
    
    * Washington Secrets
    
    * Events
    
    * Newsletters
    

# Census confirms: 63 percent of ‘non-citizens’ on welfare, 4.6 million

households

by Paul Bedard

| December 03, 2018 08:15 AM

    
        * __
    * __
    

**Print this article**

A majority of “non-citizens,” including those with legal green card rights,
are tapping into welfare programs set up to help poor and ailing Americans, a
Census Bureau finding that bolsters President Trump’s concern about immigrants
costing the nation.

In a new analysis of the latest numbers, from 2014, 63 percent of non-citizens
are using a welfare program, and it grows to 70 percent for those here 10
years or more, confirming another concern that once immigrants tap into
welfare, they don’t get off it.

![numbers-

welfare-18-f1.jpg](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/4f6aa44/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2250x1507+0+0/resize/2250x1507!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fea%2F95%2F0d1737134c4c8146881119d56769%2Fnumbers-

welfare-18-f1.jpg)

The Center for Immigration Studies said in its report that the numbers give
support for Trump’s plan to cut non-citizens off welfare from the “public
charge” if they want a green card that allows them to legally work in the
United States.

“The Trump administration has proposed new ‘public charge’ rules making it
harder for prospective immigrants to qualify for lawful permanent residence --
green cards -- if they use or are likely to use U.S. welfare programs,” said
CIS.

“Concern over immigrant welfare use is justified, as households headed by non-
citizens use means-tested welfare at high rates. Non-citizens in the data
include illegal immigrants, long-term temporary visitors like guest workers,
and permanent residents who have not naturalized. While barriers to welfare
use exist for these groups, it has not prevented them from making extensive
use of the welfare system, often receiving benefits on behalf of U.S.-born
children,” added the Washington-based immigration think tank.

The numbers are huge. The report said that there are 4,684,784 million non-
citizen households receiving welfare.

And nearly all, 4,370,385, have at least one worker in the house..

In their report, Steven A. Camarota, the director of research, and Karen
Zeigler, a demographer at the Center, said that in census data, about half of
those are in the United States illegally.

Their key findings in the analysis:

    
        * In 2014, 63 percent of households headed by a non-citizen reported that they used at least one welfare program, compared to 35 percent of native-headed households.
    * Welfare use drops to 58 percent for non-citizen households and 30 percent for native households if cash payments from the Earned Income Tax Credit are not counted as welfare. EITC recipients pay no federal income tax. Like other welfare, the EITC is a means-tested, anti-poverty program, but unlike other programs one has to work to receive it.
    

![numbers-

welfare-18-f2.jpg](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/092d82b/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2250x1673+0+0/resize/2250x1673!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fa8%2Fbf%2F9fd92f3c490abc5cbd8561fa89e7%2Fnumbers-

welfare-18-f2.jpg)

    
        * Compared to native households, non-citizen households have much higher use of food programs (45 percent vs. 21 percent for natives) and Medicaid (50 percent vs. 23 percent for natives).
    * Including the EITC, 31 percent of non-citizen-headed households receive cash welfare, compared to 19 percent of native households. If the EITC is not included, then cash receipt by non-citizen households is slightly lower than natives (6 percent vs. 8 percent).
    * While most new legal immigrants (green card holders) are barred from most welfare programs, as are illegal immigrants and temporary visitors, these provisions have only a modest impact on non-citizen household use rates because: 1) most legal immigrants have been in the country long enough to qualify; 2) the bar does not apply to all programs, nor does it always apply to non-citizen children; 3) some states provide welfare to new immigrants on their own; and, most importantly, 4) non-citizens (including illegal immigrants) can receive benefits on behalf of their U.S.-born children who are awarded U.S. citizenship and full welfare eligibility at birth.
    

Washington Secrets

Welfare

Immigration

    
        * __
    * __
    

__ Share your thoughts with friends.

    
        *     * #####  More Washington Examiner
    
      * ![051217 Giaritelli john cornyn college pic](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/ecc36da/2147483647/strip/true/crop/1500x849+0+75/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F64%2Fc2%2Faf49cd9f597cef3775e24dfcaafe%2F4e7034700d5467d61173bb007190da34.jpg)
    

##### Cornyn blames Congress for continued border crisis: 'We have been AWOL'

Anna Giaritelli

Tuesday June 11, 2019

A senior Republican senator on Tuesday said Congress is to blame for the
continued surge of migrants arriving at the southern border each month and for
the beleaguered state that border officials are in as they try to process
families, unaccompanied children, and single adults.

    
          * ![Donald Trump Paper Mexico](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/9503820/2147483647/strip/true/crop/4924x2787+0+28/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F38%2Fe2%2F8399ec1a488fa9f87baca8e43b64%2Fap-19162627794497.jpg)
    

##### Photos of paper brandished by Trump suggest details of secret Mexico

deal

Steven Nelson

Tuesday June 11, 2019

President Trump taunted journalists with a one-page document Tuesday that he
said contained a secret deal with Mexico that was too fragile to publicly
unveil.

    
          * ![DT Mexico Paper](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/74835fc/2147483647/strip/true/crop/5094x2883+0+28/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fdb%2Fa1%2F913f8ab4476b99fe6cccedd349ff%2Fap-19162625097931.jpg)
    

##### Trump's Mexico 'deal' isn't an immigration fix, it's a temporary Band-

Aid

Eddie Scarry

Tuesday June 11, 2019

It’s great that President Trump, while having failed to curb illegal
immigration, and while still struggling to build his “wall,” is engaged in
piecemeal efforts to stop the flow of migrants bum-rushing the southern
border. His supporters undoubtedly appreciate it, but they should know: Once
Trump is gone, everything he tried to do will disappear with him.

    
          * ![Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., left, and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., discuss as they walk through Capitol Hill in D.C.](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/335bcd3/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fc6%2Faf%2F1cd708794b1eaf733c66d949076b%2Fap-18038820028625.jpg)
    

##### Senate will try to advance Trump's border funding request next week

Susan Ferrechio

Tuesday June 11, 2019

The Senate next week will try to advance President Trump’s emergency spending
request to deal with the massive surge in illegal immigration on the Texas
border.

    
          * ![Mick Mulvaney](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/1bda453/2147483647/strip/true/crop/3190x1806+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F4a%2F3d%2F5bea00094b09b46c5d6be766217f%2Fmick-mulvaney-2.jpg)
    

##### Mulvaney says there is 'no center of gravity' for cutting government

spending

Colin Wilhelm

Tuesday June 11, 2019

Acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney said he sees no way forward to
cutting federal spending and the only hope for reducing deficits is to
increase revenues through economic growth.

    
          * ![Cat McKay of Alexandria, Va., holds an impeachment sign during a protest.](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/1d47757/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fd8%2F04%2F7805737a4031bc71b1e271dfea4f%2Fap-19049738667303.jpg)
    

##### Saturday: #ImpeachTrump Day of Action takes off, 133 events nationwide

Paul Bedard

Tuesday June 11, 2019

Saturday’s planned #ImpeachTrump Day of Action has expanded greatly in the
past week with over 100 events now set around the nation to call for House
impeachment hearings against President Trump.

    
          * ![Migrant Children Lined](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/0a74169/2147483647/strip/true/crop/3000x1698+0+17/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F2f%2Fb4%2F050a596941ef970252917566f2e9%2Fap-19157788208013.jpg)
    

##### Texas border sector has 8,000 illegal immigrants in custody, busting

capacity by 5,000

Eddie Scarry

Tuesday June 11, 2019

The Rio Grande Valley sector of the Texas border is currently in custody of
more than 8,000 illegal immigrants, nearly three times the intended capacity
of 3,363, according to a U.S. Customs and Border Protection press release.

    
          * ![Andrew Wheeler 0](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/8248cf4/2147483647/strip/true/crop/5472x3097+0+30/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fb2%2F63%2F3aee04ba45d786c5e9fa4da55967%2Fap-19154645757034.jpg)
    

##### EPA cuts 40 regulations, saves $3.6B, seeks balance on costs

Paul Bedard

Tuesday June 11, 2019

Aiming to erase the “fuzzy math” past administrations used to hide the costs
of politically favored policies, the Environmental Protection Agency is
pulling back the curtain on costs and benefits, and planning to kill
regulations that are out of whack.

    
          * ![GOP 2016 Trump Hats](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/76be523/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+13/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fa1%2Fb1%2F107f96cc486e9eae5db128c2b7be%2Fgop-2016-trump-hats.jpg)
    

##### 1M ‘Make America Great Again’ hats sold

Paul Bedard

Tuesday June 11, 2019

President Trump’s red “Make America Great Again” hat is still hot.

    
          * ![cover.jpg](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/7114553/2147483647/strip/true/crop/1646x932+0+119/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fb1%2F30%2Fdc8d673747fcb4d2da25735e5793%2Fcover.jpg)
    

##### Inside this week's magazine

Washington Examiner Staff

Tuesday June 11, 2019

Check out a few of the features inside this week’s magazine:

    
          * ![California Legislature](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/8bf8bf2/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+13/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Ffa%2F24%2F6cb84a244e1bb5e22d6b894d12e0%2Fap-77178942734.jpg)
    

##### What's the matter with California?

Washington Examiner

Tuesday June 11, 2019

California wants to look after its people, so it keeps expanding its social
safety net. It also wants to welcome all comers and so embraces illegal
immigrants and protects them in sanctuary cities.

    
          * ![Canada US border-file-060719](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/0d34d7a/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+13/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F6a%2F0d%2F8536055b431ba6e9cbad12eb7f22%2Fap-18164566914592.jpg)
    

##### Canada-style refugee deal still on the table in Trump talks with Mexico

Sean Higgins

Tuesday June 11, 2019

The Trump administration's deal with Mexico on Friday to avoid tariffs could
lead to Mexico adopting the same agreement Canada has with the U.S. regarding
refugees: Whatever country gets the refugees first keeps them.

    
          * ![John Dean](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/c8ec652/2147483647/strip/true/crop/4739x2682+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fcb%2F4c%2F690f60654afdbe9b264a685ffd24%2Fjohn-dean.jpg)
    

##### Republicans assail Dean’s record: 'How many presidents have you accused

of being Richard Nixon?'

Susan Ferrechio

Monday June 10, 2019

Republican lawmakers on the House Judiciary Committee Monday attacked star
witness John Dean’s credibility, citing his criminal record and history of
attacking President Trump and other Republicans.

    
          * ![Chuck Schumer ](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/c8a09b1/2147483647/strip/true/crop/4198x2376+0+24/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F53%2F6b%2Fd5c990d94b7fbce7893154218b27%2Fap-19043768387804.jpg)
    

##### Schumer: Trump’s Mexico deal 'warmed-up leftovers'

Susan Ferrechio

Monday June 10, 2019

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., on Monday refused to credit
President Trump for reaching a deal to get Mexico to stop illegal immigration.

    
          * ![Diamond, Steve King, and Silk](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/ba565ff/2147483647/strip/true/crop/1060x600+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2F35%2F37%2Fbe16a6b945c0bea300ef05cd157f%2Funtitled-1.jpg)
    

##### Rep. Steve King makes a mockery of homelessness, veterans issues

Becket Adams

Monday June 10, 2019

Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa, who was removed from his committee assignments in
January following remarks he made in defense of “white nationalist, white
supremacist, Western civilization,” resurfaced this week to announce a bill
aimed at aiding the homeless and veterans.

    
          * ![Secretary of State Mike Pompeo appears at a press conference.](https://mediadc.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/7be0287/2147483647/strip/true/crop/2290x1296+0+0/resize/1060x600!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmediadc.brightspotcdn.com%2Fb8%2F81%2F8b92ba8d43ac9d04bbe64225636a%2Fap-19151339136526.jpg)
    

##### Pompeo calls Mexico deal 'diplomacy at its finest,' warns tariffs could

return

Joel Gehrke

Monday June 10, 2019

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo defended the Trump administration's
negotiations with Mexico over immigration as “diplomacy at its finest.”

    
        * About Examiner
    
    * Magazine Archive
    
    * Staff
    
    * Advertise
    
    * Contact
    
    * Subscribe
    
    * Events
    
    * Newsletters
    
    * Facebook
    
    * Twitter
    
    * Terms Of Use
    
    * Privacy Policy
    

###### Copyright 2019. Washington Examiner. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

