

Accessibility links

    
        * Skip to main content
    * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
    
    * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)
    *     *     * NPR Shop
    *     * Open Navigation Menu
    

Close Navigation Menu

    
        * Home
    
    * News Expand/collapse submenu for News
    
      * National
      * World
      * Politics
      * Business
      * Health
      * Science
      * Technology
      * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life
    
      * Books
      * Movies
      * Television
      * Pop Culture
      * Food
      * Art & Design
      * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music
    
      * Tiny Desk 
      * All Songs Considered 
      * Music News 
      * Music Features 
      * New Music 
      * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts
    

Daily

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
      * More Shows & Podcasts
    
    * Search
    
    *     * NPR Shop
    
    * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)
    * Tiny Desk 
    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019
    
    * About NPR
    * Overview
    * Support
    * Careers
    * Connect
    * Press
    * Ethics
    

**Mexicans In The U.S. Are Sending Home More Money Than Ever : Goats and
Soda** **A new report finds that remittances by migrants from Latin America
and the Caribbean topped $69 billion last year — the highest amount on
record.**

![Goats and

Soda](https://media.npr.org/branding/sections/goatsandsoda/branding_icon-7ba13924e5a8207f207c89db39b852dbc0aeca08.png)

## **Goats and Soda**

**STORIES OF LIFE IN A CHANGING WORLD**

    
        * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Health
    * Development
    * Women & Girls
    * Culture
    
    * Twitter
    

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg) **Mexicans In The
U.S. Are Sending Home More Money Than Ever**

### Economics

# Mexicans In The U.S. Are Sending Home More Money Than Ever

    
        * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

February 10, 20178:41 AM ET

Nurith Aizenman

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2017/02/08/170208_latinamericancurrency_006_custom-8d65cbcbe9d6d1bacf140a35e9bef7749b6754ce-s1100-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

Last year, a record amount in remittances was sent home by Latin American and
Caribbean migrants. **Ryan Eskalis/NPR** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Ryan Eskalis/NPR

Last year, a record amount in remittances was sent home by Latin American and
Caribbean migrants.

Ryan Eskalis/NPR

Migrants from Latin America and the Caribbean are sending more money to their
families back home than ever before.

These annual "remittances" — as they're called by analysts — topped $69
billion in 2016, according to central bank data compiled in a new report by
the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington, D.C.-based think-tank. The money
has been a lifeline for the national economies of many countries in the region
since at least the 1990s, when Manuel Orozco, a political scientist who
authored the report, first began tracking remittances. They climbed steadily
since then, only to plummet when the Great Recession hit the U.S. economy in
2008. But they began to rise again in 2012. The 2016 tally is the highest
amount on record and an increase of nearly 8 percent over 2015.

About 40 percent of the money goes to just one country — Mexico — practically
all of it sent by migrants in the United States. The recent surge is all the
more notable because migration from Mexico has slowed to a crawl — with the
number of migrants in the U.S. increasing by just 1 percent between 2010 and
2016 to a total of 11.8 million. Also, says Orozco, the median amount that any
given Mexican migrant sends hasn't changed — about $300 at a go, 14 times a
year, most commonly through a money transfer company such as Western Union.

So what accounts for this surge in cash to Mexico? Orozco explains that a much
larger share of Mexicans already in the United States are now wiring money
back. In 2010 fewer than half of Mexican migrants sent money home. Today two-
thirds do.

Orozco can't be sure why. Though he regularly does large-scale surveys of
Mexican migrants, "I haven't asked that question," he notes.

A possible explanation, he says, is that many Mexican migrants who would have
gone back to Mexico are now staying put in the United States. His survey
research indicates that from 2011 to 2016, **** the median length of time a
Mexican migrant has lived in the United States increased from seven years to
12. Some migrants are deterred by rising violence back in their hometowns,
says Orozco.

Also, he says, for migrants who are in the United States illegally, stricter
U.S. border enforcement under the Obama administration has raised the stakes
of going home. Many now worry that if they leave the United States they'll
never be able to get back in.

Whatever their reasons, Orozco posits that the fact that more Mexican migrants
are remaining in the United States means many people who previously would have
simply brought cash home in their pockets may now be sending it via money
transfers.

The growing importance of remittances is particularly significant in light of
proposals that President Trump has floated to confiscate or otherwise target
this flow in order to pressure Mexico into paying for an expansion of the
border wall. During the campaign, Trump discussed various versions of the idea
— including some that could potentially impact remittances to all countries,
not just those to Mexico. As much as such a move would affect Mexico — for
which remittances account for just over 2 percent of GDP — the ramifications
could actually be greatest for the region's poorest, most violence-prone
countries. Remittances make up nearly 20 percent of GDP for Honduras and El
Salvador, for instance. And in the case of Haiti they account for one-fourth.

    
        * remittances
    * Caribbean
    * migrants
    * Latin America
    * Mexico
    * immigrants
    * Haiti
    
    * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

#### Tuesday, June 11th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

    
        * ******Download**
    * ********Embed****
    

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/731545443/731548267" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

![Goats and

Soda](https://media.npr.org/branding/sections/goatsandsoda/branding_icon-7ba13924e5a8207f207c89db39b852dbc0aeca08.png)

## **Goats and Soda**

**STORIES OF LIFE IN A CHANGING WORLD**

###### Read & Listen

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Arts & Life
    * Music
    * Podcasts
    * Programs
    

###### Connect

    
        * Newsletters
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * Contact
    * Help
    

###### About NPR

    
        * Overview
    * Finances
    * People
    * Press
    * Public Editor
    * Corrections
    

###### Get Involved

    
        * Support Public Radio
    * Sponsor NPR
    * NPR Careers
    * NPR Shop
    * NPR Events
    * Visit NPR
    
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy
    * Your Privacy Choices
    * Text Only
    * NPR thanks our sponsors
    

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

