

Explore

Parents Home

    
        * Explore
    

Trending Topics

    
          * ![Happy Asian Girl Playing Game on Cell Phone](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)Casezy idea/Shutterstock![Happy Asian Girl Playing Game on Cell Phone](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-public%2Fstyles%2Fnfp_1080_portrait%2Fpublic%2Fshutterstock_619796660.jpg%3FtQydeEmAmf.4pzLMhnfsM2gkx2V2t3pD&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=200&h=200)
    

1 Mom Is Warning Parents About an Online Game After Her 7-Year-Old's Character
Was Sexually Assaulted Read More

    
          * ![kids lunch with plastic storage](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)Creativa Images/Shutterstock![kids lunch with plastic storage](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-public%2Fstyles%2Ffp_1x1_1080%2Fpublic%2Fshutterstock_109269587.jpg%3Fh1.QnbNzIyDuZ1n2rKeq1.2Yq6WnzjCT%26h%3De5565190&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=200&h=200)
    

2 Pediatricians Issue Cautions About Chemicals in Plastics & Food Packaging |
Parents Read More

    
          * ![driving](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)iStockphoto![driving](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-public%2Fstyles%2Fnfp_1080_portrait%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fp_101869503.jpg%3FZzV0vGyYv4eNAsGQVrgnujwhcSakWgC6&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=200&h=200)
    

3 Mom's Story Proves There's No Such Thing as Being 'Naggy' When It Comes to
Car Seat Safety Read More

    
        * Getting Pregnant
    

Getting Pregnant See all Getting Pregnant

    
          * Ovulation
      * Reproductive Age
      * Maximizing Your Fertility
      * Pre-Pregnancy Health
      * Trying to Conceive
      * Dealing With Infertility
      * Genetics
    
    * Pregnancy
    

Pregnancy See all Pregnancy

    
          * Signs of Pregnancy
      * Pregnancy Week-by-Week
      * Giving Birth
      * Labor & Delivery
      * Pregnancy Symptoms
      * Due Date Calculator
      * Pregnancy Complications
      * Fetal Development
      * Gender Prediction
      * Baby Showers
    
    * Baby Names
    

Baby Names See all Baby Names

    
          * Baby Girl Names
      * Most Popular Names
      * Names by Origin
      * Twin Names
      * Baby Boy Names
      * Names by Religion
      * Celebrity Baby Names
      * Baby Name Quizzes
    
    * Baby
    

Baby See all Baby

    
          * Newborn Care
      * Crying Baby
      * Health
      * Baby Development
      * Safety
      * Gear
      * Breastfeeding
      * Diapers
      * Sleep Issues
      * Feeding
      * Nursery
    
    * Toddler
    

Toddler See all Toddler

    
          * Preschool Activities
      * Behavior & Discipline
      * Toddler Development
      * Milestones
      * Potty Training
      * Starting School
      * Health
      * Safety
      * Childcare
    
    * Big Kid
    

Big Kid See all Big Kid

    
          * Education
      * Health
      * Food & Nutrition
      * Bullying & School Problems
      * Child Development
      * Safety
      * Manners & Responsibility
    
    * Fun
    

Fun See all Fun

    
          * Birthdays
      * Indoor Activities
      * Outdoor Activities
      * Arts & Crafts
      * Printable Coloring Pages
      * Kids' Entertainment
      * Best Toys
      * Holidays
      * Family Vacation Ideas
    
    * Health
    

Health See all Health

    
          * ADD & ADHD
      * Allergies
      * Autism
      * Cold & Flu
      * Cough
      * Down Syndrome
      * Emergency Aid
      * Fever
      * Medication & Vitamins
      * Obesity
      * Rashes
      * Stomach Aches
      * Vaccines
    
    * Parenting
    

Parenting See all Parenting

    
          * Positive Parenting
      * Parenting Style
      * Celebrity Parents
      * Family Dynamics
      * Divorce
      * Home
      * Adoption
      * Just for Mom
      * Money
      * Toy Recalls
      * Stroller Recalls
    
    * Food
    

Food See all Food

    
          * Family Recipes
      * Baby Food
      * Toddler Finger Food Recipes
      * Hints & Tips
      * Healthy Eating
      * Birthdays
      * Holiday Recipes
      * Quick & Easy Meals
      * Food for Pregnant Women
    
    * Holiday
    

Holiday See all Holiday

    
          * 4th of July
      * Halloween
    
    * News
    

News See all News

    
        * Shop
    

Shop See all Shop

    
        * More
    

More See all More

    
          * Newsletters
      * Contests
      * ParentsIRL
    
    * Our Magazines
    

Our Magazines

    
          * ![fitPregnancy logo](https://assets.parents.com/s3fs-public/2018-07/fpgLogo.svg?6I2s0Sc_YqB18_kMsGKFYVbHUoL92Ceh)
    

###### From the latest issue

    
            * Emily Skye On Being Pregnant for the First Time: 'I Feel Like a Superhero!'
        * 7 Soothing Cradles for Your Baby
        * pinterest
        * twitter
    
      * ![FamilyFun logo](https://assets.parents.com/s3fs-public/2018-07/familyfun_logo.svg?WHpTq6zohTjlb6q1reEJ1_n6.4haxk6b)
    

###### From the latest issue

    
            * How to Have the Ultimate Lemonade Stand
        * Fourth of July Parade Decorations
        * facebook
        * pinterest
        * twitter
    
      * ![Parents Latina logo](https://assets.parents.com/s3fs-public/2018-07/parentsLatina.svg?CbaE9Sc2w8S4Fx4gewB9XIV_ThHFtOH2)
    

###### From the latest issue

    
            * The All-Time Best Books for Tweens
        * These Brands Help Moms in Latin America
        * facebook
    
      * ![Ser Padres logo](https://assets.parents.com/s3fs-public/2018-07/serpadres.svg?bNomSPw7HqKJd1nZGARNNMd1moQw_oqF)
    

###### From the latest issue

    
            * 8 cosas que te dicen que tu hijo ya no es un bebÃ© (FOTOS)
        * 6 mentiras que tu hijo necesita escuchar (FOTOS)
        * facebook
        * pinterest
        * twitter
    

Your Account Join Now Login

Your Account Join Now

    
        * Join Now
    * Your Account
    * Newsletter Preferences
    * Manage Your Subcription
    * Manage Your Subcription
    * Give a Gift Subscription
    * Digital Subscription
    * Help
    * Log Out
    

Subscribe

Follow Us

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Pinterest
    * Instagram
    

Parents Home

    
        * Getting Pregnant
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby Names
    * Baby
    * Toddler
    * Big Kid
    * Fun
    * Health
    * Parenting
    * Food
    * Holiday
    * News
    * Shop
    * More
    

Subscribe

Login Join Now Your Account

    
        * Join Now
    * Your Account
    * Newsletter Preferences
    * Manage Your Subcription
    * Manage Your Subcription
    * Give a Gift Subscription
    * Digital Subscription
    * Help
    * Log Out
    
    1. HOME
    2. Pregnancy & Birth
    3. My Pregnant Life
    4. Maternity & Paternity Leave
    5. Working While Pregnant: How to Handle It Like a Boss
    

# Working While Pregnant: How to Handle It Like a Boss

Doing the 9-to-5 thing can be tough when you're pregnant, but the right
research and planning can help you meet any challenges that come your way.

By Joanna Goddard

    
        * Pinterest
    * Facebook
    * More
      * Twitter
      * Google+
      * Send Email
      * Send Text Message
      * Comments
      * Print
    
    * Pinterest
    

![pregnant woman walk to

work](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)Alexkich/Shutterstock![pregnant

woman walk to work](https://assets.parents.com/s3fs-

public/styles/fp_1x1_1080/public/images/2018-11/shutterstock_1165941937.jpg?uOYsviygjA8YjcUH.3cM6VKveBwst8je&h=c5733990)

Sometimes, being pregnant can feel as if it's a full-time job. And that is a
problem if you've already got a full-time job -- the kind that requires you to
be at your desk, not at the doctor's, or to be pleasant to clients even when
you feel like you're about to barf.

Don't panic, mama. Here's how to handle working while pregnant.

## Your Workplace Rights During Pregnancy

The first step? Fairness. Whether you're a working parent or a working parent-
to-be, you deserve to be treated fairly by your employer. As a start, get to
know your legal rights and keep this information for easy reference.

### Your pregnancy must be treated like any other employee disability or

medical condition.

If you work for a company with 15 or more employees, it is illegal for your
employer to discriminate against you because of pregnancy, childbirth, or
pregnancy-related conditions. Pregnancy must be treated as a temporary medical
disability. You may also be protected by state and local laws regarding
pregnancy discrimination.

### You can't be fired because you're pregnant or may become pregnant.

An employer can't fire, deny a job, or deny a promotion to a woman because of
her pregnancy or pregnancy-related conditions as long as she can perform the
major functions of her job. Note: An employer is not legally required to make
it easier for a pregnant woman to do her job.

**RELATED** : 11 Ways to Actually Enjoy Your Maternity Leave

### You can't be forced to take leave as long as you can do your job.

Pregnant employees cannot be forced to take leave while they are pregnant as
long as they can perform their assigned work tasks. If an employee is absent
from work due to a pregnancy-related condition and she recovers, the employer
can't force her to remain on leave until the baby's birth.

### You're entitled to the same benefits received by other employees with

medical conditions.

You must be offered the same level of medical benefits, leave, and temporary
disability insurance that are provided to employees who have other medical
conditions or disabilities.

### You can take part of your maternity leave before your baby is born.

Under the Family and Medical Leave Act, you can part of your unpaid maternity
leave while still pregnant if you are physically unable to work due to
pregnancy or pregnancy-related conditions. Your job will be protected for a
total of 12 weeks, including time before and after birth.

**RELATED** : Know Your FMLA Maternity Leave Rights

### Spouses are entitled to insurance coverage for pregnancy-related

conditions if your company's health plan includes spousal coverage.

Employers cannot deny coverage for the pregnancy care of a male employee's
spouse, provided that spouses of female employees are usually covered by
comprehensive health insurance.

### You cannot be denied the standard benefits if you are a single mother-to-

be.

Pregnancy-related benefits cannot be limited to married employees.

## Balancing Work and Pregnancy

Despite its challenges and discomforts, pregnancy isn't a ticket to slack off
at work. Here are some tips for handling every situation successfully, from
sharing your pregnancy news to prepping for maternity leave.

### Share your pregnancy news with your boss first.

Whenever you decide to announce the news, make sure your boss is the first one
to know; you want her to hear it straight from you, not through the office
grapevine. Schedule an appointment to tell her that you're expecting and to
let her know when your baby is due. Keep your tone positive and upbeat, and
spare any overly personal details. (Whatever you do, don't pull that sonogram
image out of your purse!)

"Be prepared with a general idea of your company's maternity-leave policy, but
don't talk about your specific plans for time off just yet," says Marjorie
Greenfield, MD, author of _The Working Woman's Pregnancy Book_. "Right now,
your boss needs reassurance from you that your productivity won't be
affected." Once you've clued your boss in, you can share the news with as
many, or as few, people as possible. Pretty soon, even the guy in the mail
room will know.

**RELATED** : How to Get More Paid Days During Maternity Leave

### Curb your symptoms so they don't interfere with your job performance.

If you have "morning sickness" (and up to 85 percent of pregnant women do —
though not necessarily only in the A.M.), the best advice is to eat, eat, eat.

"Constantly snacking kept my queasiness at bay, so I kept Kashi bars and
Goldfish in the pockets of my white coat all the time," says Lindsay Mazotti,
MD, a physician in San Francisco. Small, healthy snacks throughout the day can
keep your blood sugar steady and curb nausea. Many women find that ginger ale,
gingersnaps, or lemon drops are helpful, too, says Dr. Greenfield. Just in
case, grab a seat by the door during meetings so you can make a quick exit if
you start to feel nauseated. If your symptoms are really severe, consider
asking your doctor about medication.

**RELATED** : 15 Tips for Dealing With Morning Sickness

Your biggest challenge will probably be fighting fatigue. "When I was pregnant
with my twins, I was so exhausted that once I snuck a nap in the supply
closet," says Jane Roper, an advertising copywriter in Boston. To boost your
energy, get moving. A brisk walk at lunchtime can do wonders, says Nancy W.
Hall, PhD, author of _Balancing Pregnancy and Work_. And something as simple
as chewing mint-flavored gum is instantly refreshing. Try getting to bed a
little earlier too.

To deal with lack of focus ("pregnancy brain"), take copious notes and use
"cheat sheets." Do your most challenging tasks first thing when you get to
work or when you're feeling your best. Say no to requests to take on extra
duties until you see how you are handling the basics, and use your e-mail's
calendar program to keep track of appointments and meetings.

### Schedule doctor's appointments wisely.

Plan them for before work or during your lunch break if your ob-gyn is close
by, and try to be the first patient in a morning or an afternoon session. That
way, the doctor is less likely to be running late. Still, waiting is
inevitable: Always take along some light busywork so you won't feel too
frustrated if you get stuck.

It's also important to schedule your appointments according to your work
calendar — completely avoid days when you know you have your weekly meeting or
monthly presentation. Occasionally, your doctor may need you to stay for
additional tests or treatment, and you don't want to have the added stress of
missing an important work function.

### Before you say goodbye to work, hammer out the details of your leave.

A month in advance, tell your boss the precise day you expect to stop working
and a tentative date that you'll be back. "Setting a return date helps your
colleagues see the light at the end of the tunnel," says Dr. Greenfield.
Consider planning for the maximum time off; if you end up returning earlier
than planned, you'll look like a hero.

A few weeks before you leave, make a list of all the tasks you're responsible
for, and offer suggestions to your supervisor about how to get them covered by
coworkers. Talk to your boss about what work issues (if any) you want to know
about while you're away, and let her know how she can reach you. Just be sure
not to overextend yourself by promising too much too soon. Your priority in
those first few weeks is to let your body recover and enjoy your new baby.

**RELATED** : Your Ultimate Guide to Maternity Leave

### Consider returning with a flexible schedule.

More companies are adding parental perks, such as flexible start and end
times, telecommuting, and compressed work weeks, according to a recent
national survey. Here are three ways to make the trend work for you:

    1. Discuss easing back in and/or aiming for a regular flexible schedule. Your boss may fear you won't return at all, so she may be more receptive than you think to the idea. "If you've been a high-performing employee, your bargaining position is strong," says Sally Thornton, a former human resources director and president of Flexperience Consulting in San Francisco. "But don't say, 'I can only work three days a week.' Instead, focus on how a more flexible schedule will help you and the company meet specific results and potentially save costs."

    2. Consider taking your baby to work. Yes, it really happens, and people really get work done, according to the Parenting in the Work place Institute. More than 100 organizations allow babies in the workplace; visit babiesatwork.org to learn how to manage it successfully at your company.

    3. Check out part-time and freelance opportunities. Several companies that match professionals with temporary, part-time, and project-based job (as well as full-time) positions have sprung up in recent years. MomCorps.com, On-Ramps.com, FlexibleResources.com and FlexibleExecutives.com are just a few. Industry specific sites, such as FlexTimeLawyers.com, Aquent (for marketing executives and designers) and HRoptin.com, are another option.

By Joanna Goddard

Parents Magazine

## Comments

Be the first to comment!

* * *

## Popular in Maternity & Paternity Leave

Prev Next

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fimages%2Fwordpress%2F666%2FBlake-Lively-

pregnant_0.jpg%3FWawF5IeN53UgKSs70Zd3CnKIFrewH04b&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Maternity
Style Secrets

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fshutterstock_1110630770.jpg%3FjYa6_O_MTrp3HEgE6vQwY_iVODfnEnre&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)The
Ups and Downs of Pregnancy Emotions

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fimages%2Fp_101525826.jpg%3FqoTSSz1rK0gBggy1Ec6COuM8X.Wkds6k&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)15
Hysterical Mommy-to-Be Meltdowns

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fimages%2F550_101670113.jpg%3FahS4p6xjm_qyyTzZNuhqk5shXohtxpHH&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)A
Week of Delicious Pregnancy Meals and Snacks

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fimages%2Fp_week18_Girl_ultrasound.jpg%3FU8eDHprCKViujEnjme_qpPGClTEC1YgO&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Week
18 Ultrasound: What It Would Look Like

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2F2016_12_listicle_6_hormones_that_rule_your_pregnant_life_still.png%3FghGd4SyDrMi6cs8USdQcmWAmRnG4ryTr&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)A
Cheat Sheet to Pregnancy Hormones

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fweek7_ultrasound.jpg%3FetzvqdGp87RSLYxEEhjMK_3q.AK1oSTb&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Week
7 Ultrasound: What It Would Look Like

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fweek9_ultrasound.jpg%3Fy48HulOfPDS2wQyxD3sBO0cTWJTuO53u&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Week
9 Ultrasound: What It Would Look Like

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fweek16_ultrasound.jpg%3F5vZZbMiz345q80frI6DBCuQ4GAm1jtfm&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Week
16 Ultrasound: What It Would Look Like

    
        *       * Pinterest
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://imagesvc.timeincapp.com/v3/mt/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.parents.com%2Fs3fs-

public%2Fimages%2Fp_week28_doppler.jpg%3Fw6fw4qh.PrKl13_rhIuLISe.s.gDbhTM&q=85&poi=face&c=sc&w=300&h=300)Week
28 Ultrasound: What It Would Look Like

## All Topics in Maternity & Paternity Leave

Prev Next

    
        * Maternity Clothes
    * Pregnancy Week 23
    * Pregnancy Nutrition
    * Pregnancy Week 13
    * Pregnancy Week 18
    * Pregnancy Emotions
    * Pregnancy Week 30
    * Pregnancy Week 7
    * Pregnancy Week 9
    * Pregnancy Week 16
    * Pregnancy Week 28
    * Fetal Development
    

* * *

![Parenting

Shop](data:image/png;base64,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)

    
        * Teen Bedding
    * Nursery Furniture
    * Toddler Bedding
    * Kids Desks
    * Bookcases
    * Curtains & Blinds
    * Shower Curtains
    * Mirrors
    * Desks
    * Bedroom Sets
    * Shop More
    

Parents may receive compensation when you click through and purchase from
links contained on this website.

Parents Home

## Magazines & More

## Learn More

## Connect

Follow Us

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Pinterest
    * Instagram
    

Subscribe to Our Newsletter

Sign Up

Other Meredith Sites

![Meredith Logo](https://images.meredith.com/common/logos/meredith_logo.svg)

    
        * Parents.com is part of the Parents Network. (C) Copyright 2019 Meredith Corporation. All Rights Reserved
    * Privacy Policy
    * Data Policy
    * Terms of Service
    *     * AdChoices
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

