
    
        * Education
    
      * Reference
    
        * Dictionary 
        * Investing 101 
        * The 4 Best S&P; 500 Index Funds 
        * World's Top 20 Economies 
        * Stock Basics Tutorial 
        * Options Basics Tutorial 
        * Economics Basics 
      * Topics
    
        * Stocks 
        * Mutual Funds 
        * Options 
        * Tech 
        * ETFs 
        * Bonds/Fixed Income 
        * Commodities
    
    * Markets
    
      * News
    
        * Watchlist 
        * Company News 
        * Market/Economy News 
      * Popular Stocks
    
        * Apple (AAPL) 
        * Tesla (TSLA) 
        * Amazon (AMZN) 
        * AMD (AMD) 
        * Facebook (FB) 
        * Netflix (NFLX)
    
    * Simulator
    
      * Simulator
    
        * Create an Account 
        * Join a Game 
      * My Simulator
    
        * My Game 
        * Create a Game
    
    * Your Money
    
      * Personal Finance
    
        * Credit 
        * Budgeting/Saving 
        * Taxes 
        * Retirement 
        * Mortgage 
        * Insurance 
        * Small Business 
        * Wealth Management 
      * Reviews & Ratings
    
        * Broker Reviews 
        * Charles Schwab Review 
        * E*TRADE Review 
        * Robinhood Review
    
    * Advisors
    
      * Financial Advice
    
        * Advisor Insights 
        * Investopedia 100 
      * For Financial Advisors
    
        * Join Advisor Insights 
        * Your Practice
    
    * Academy
    
      * Popular Courses
    
        * Investing for Beginners 
        * Become a Day Trader 
        * Trading for Beginners 
        * Technical Analysis 
      * Courses by Topic
    
        * All Courses 
        * Trading Courses 
        * Investing Courses 
        * Financial Professional Courses
    

Submit

    
        * Login
    * Advisor Login
    * Newsletters
    

Economy

    
        * Government & Policy
    * Monetary Policy
    * Fiscal Policy
    * Economics
    

Economy Government & Policy

# 5 Hardest Countries For Getting Citizenship

##

    
        * FACEBOOK 
    * TWITTER 
    * LINKEDIN
    

By Kerri Fivecoat-Campbell

Updated Feb 3, 2019

Obtaining permanent residency status or gaining citizenship in a foreign
county may seem like a good idea for those who no longer want to live in the
country where they were born or whose passport they hold. But some nations
make that transition especially difficult unless you marry a citizen of that
country or – in some cases – have ancestors who were citizens.

In addition to marriage and ancestry, countries with high barriers to
attaining citizen status may have special residency or citizenship tracks for
people who fit certain categories, such as being a highly skilled professional
or investing substantially in a business enterprise. But these situations
don't apply to the vast majority of prospective citizens.

1:51

#### 5 Hardest Countries For Getting Citizenship

Below, in alphabetical order, are five nations that make it especially
difficult for foreigners to establish permanent residency or obtain
citizenship:

### Austria

Many EU countries have tough immigration laws, but Austria seems to have one
of the longest processes to become a citizen. Anyone who is not a citizen of
an EU country and is staying longer than six months must have a residence
permit before entering the country.

People who plan to stay longer than 24 months must also sign an Integration
Agreement, a process designed to enhance their German-language skills and
ability "to participate in the social, economic and cultural life in Austria."

Permanent residents must live in the country continuously for a period of 15
to 30 years before being eligible to apply for citizenship. If approved,
applicants must renounce any other citizenship.

### Germany

Obtaining permanent residency in Germany is difficult unless you are a citizen
of another EU country. Foreign nationals living in Germany must demonstrate
competency in language and knowledge of the political system and society in
order to gain German citizenship. Applicants must also demonstrate that they
have the ability to earn a living and have contributed to the national pension
plan. They must also have proof of suitable accommodation.

To become a citizen, applicants must have lived in the country at least eight
years (seven, if they’ve passed a competency test) and renounce citizenship in
any other country.

### Japan

It takes longer to be granted a permanent resident visa in Japan than to
become a citizen. Those who want to become a citizen of Japan must have lived
in the country for five years, receive permission from the Justice Minister
and complete a slew of paperwork (some have complained of unnecessary
questions involving their personal lives). The process, according to the
Japanese Ministry, can take six to 12 months, although those who have gone
through it have reported that it can take years. If approved, applicants must
be ready to renounce citizenship in other countries.

### Switzerland

To obtain a settlement, or permanent residence visa (unless you are an EU
citizen), you must have lived in the country for 10 years. If you qualify for
permanent residence by the length of time you have lived in the country, you
also qualify to apply for citizenship, but that is not guaranteed; applicants
for citizenship must also prove they are assimilated into Swiss society and do
not pose a threat to security. What's more, all cantons and municipalities
have their own rules about granting citizenship. Switzerland permits dual
citizenship.

### United States

While the United States was founded mostly by immigrants, the process for
achieving permanent residency and citizenship has become even more complicated
since the early 2000s and the war on terrorism. Unless a person is coming to
the U.S. through family or an approved job, it is very difficult to establish
permanent residency (sometimes known as receiving a green card). There are
special categories for those seeking refugee or asylum status, and a lottery
for others who wish to apply.

Those who have had permanent residency status for five years can begin the
process of applying for citizenship by filling out the application and taking
a test, which includes knowledge of history/government and English. Before
becoming a citizen, people must swear an oath to the Constitution. The United
States permits dual citizenship.

### The Bottom Line

Moving from a temporary visa to permanent resident status – or citizenship –
is particularly difficult in some countries. Stay on track with each step and
keep the faith – because a few do succeed.

Compare Popular Online Brokers

Provider

Name

Description

Advertiser Disclosure

×

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which
Investopedia receives compensation.

### Related Articles

![](//:0)

Retirement Planning

### 5 Developed Countries That Welcome Expats

![](//:0)

Retirement Planning

### 5 Countries With Easy Citizenship for Retirement

![](//:0)

Lifestyle Advice

### Dual Citizenship: Advantages and Disadvantages

![](//:0)

Government & Policy

### Ace the U.S. Citizenship Test!

![](//:0)

Lifestyle Advice

### The Foreigner's Guide To Retiring In Japan

![](//:0)

Lifestyle Advice

### The 5 Countries Without Income Taxes

Partner Links

### Related Terms

Resident Alien

A resident alien is a foreign born, non-U.S. citizen who is currently residing
in the United States.

more

Expatriation Tax

An expatriation tax is a government fee charged to those who renounce their
citizenship or take up residency in another country.

more

Expatriate

An expatriate is an individual living in a country other than his or her
country of citizenship, often temporarily and for work reasons. An expatriate
can also be an individual who has relinquished citizenship in their home
country to become a citizen of another.

more

Brexit

Brexit refers to Britain's leaving the European Union, which is slated to
happen in May or April this year.

more

Form 1078: Certificate of Alien Claiming Residence Definition Overview

Form 1078: Certificate of Alien Claiming Residence was an official document
issued by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) permitting the undersigned to
claim residency within the U.S. for income tax reporting purposes. The form
was replaced by Form W-9 in the 1998 tax year.

more

Brexodus

Brexodus refers to a potential spillover effect of Brexit whereby there is an
exodus of people and businesses from the United Kingdom.

more

    
        * Terms
    * News
    * Tutorials
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Contact
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Careers
    
    * #
    * a
    * b
    * c
    * d
    * e
    * f
    * g
    * h
    * i
    * j
    * k
    * l
    * m
    * n
    * o
    * p
    * q
    * r
    * s
    * t
    * u
    * v
    * w
    * x
    * y
    * z
    

Investopedia is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * The Balance
    * Lifewire
    * TripSavvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

