

FactCheck.org® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center

![Become a Facebook fan](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook-mini.png)

![Follow us on Twitter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

twitter.png)

![Get the RSS feed](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-rss.png)

![Follow us on Tumblr](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

tumblr.png)

![Sign up for the email

newsletter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-email.png)

![Help us hold politicians accountable.

](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-donate.png)

Skip to content

FactCheck.org®

    
        * Home
    * Articles 
      * Featured
      * The Wire
      * SciCheck
      * Debunking False Stories
      * 2018 Election
    * Ask a Question 
      * Ask FactCheck
      * Ask SciCheck
    * Donate
    * Archives 
      * President Trump
      * Nancy Pelosi
      * Mitch McConnell
      * Chuck Schumer
      * Kevin McCarthy
      * 2020 Election
      * Russia investigation
      * climate change
      * immigration
      * View All
    * About Us 
      * Our Mission
      * Our Process
      * Our Funding
      * Our Staff
      * Undergraduate Fellows
      * Awards
      * Request a Correction
      * Contact Us
    * Search
    * More 
      * Viral Claims
      * FactCheck On the Air
      * Mailbag
      * Quiz Archive
      * Party Lines
    

FactCheck.org is celebrating 15 years of holding politicians accountable.

The Wire

# Is Illegal Immigration Linked to More or Less Crime?

By Robert Farley

Posted on June 27, 2018

* * *

President Donald Trump said it’s “not true” that immigrants in the U.S.
illegally are “safer than the people that live in the country,” providing
several crime statistics he claimed represented the “toll of illegal
immigration.” Sen. Bernie Sanders made the opposite claim, saying: “I
understand that the crime rate among undocumented people is actually lower
than the general population.”

Who is right?

There are not readily available nationwide statistics on all crimes committed
by immigrants in the country illegally. Researchers have provided estimates
through statistical modeling or by extrapolating from smaller samples. One
such study backs the president’s claim, but several others support Sanders'
statement.

Trump made his claim during a press conference on June 22 with "angel
families" whose loved ones were killed by immigrants without legal status.
Trump sought to debunk the idea that immigrants who come to the country
illegally have lower rates of violent crime than native-born Americans. But he
rattled off government statistics on various crimes committed by all
immigrants in an attempt to make his point.

> **Trump, June 22** : So here are just a few statistics on the human toll of
illegal immigration. According to a 2011 government report, the arrests
attached to the criminal alien population included an estimated 25,000 people
for homicide, 42,000 for robbery, nearly 70,000 for sex offenses, and nearly
15,000 for kidnapping. In Texas alone, within the last seven years, more than
a quarter million criminal aliens have been arrested and charged with over
600,000 criminal offenses. You don't hear that.

>

> I always hear that, "Oh, no, the population's safer than the people that
live in the country." You've heard that, fellas, right? You've heard that. I
hear it so much, and I say, "Is that possible?" The answer is it's not true.
You hear it's like they're better people than what we have, than our citizens.
It's not true.

Two days after Trump made his remarks, Sanders responded on CNN's "State of
the Union," saying that the crime rate for those in the country illegally "is
actually lower than the general population."

The issue is ripe for dispute because, as we said, there are not readily
available statistics on this issue. The Justice Department keeps data on
_federal_ crimes committed by immigrants in the country illegally -- and an
analysis from the U.S. Sentencing Commission found that undocumented
immigrants made up a disproportionate share of federal inmates sentenced for
nonimmigration crimes in 2016. But the vast majority of crimes (more than 90
percent) are dealt with at the state and local level, where those kinds of
data are harder to come by because those jurisdictions rarely record whether
prisoners are immigrants in the country illegally.

##### Trump's Case

In making his case, Trump did not cite any kind of study that attempts to show
whether illegal immigration is associated with more crime. Rather, he provided
statistics on the _number_ of crimes committed by all noncitizens, whether
they are in the country illegally or legally.

The first set of numbers on homicides, robberies, sex offenses and kidnappings
nationwide come from a Government Accountability Office report in 2011 (see
Table 2 on page 21) based on FBI arrest histories of all immigrants
incarcerated in local jails and state and federal prisons. The figures include
arrests of "criminal aliens," which are all noncitizens, between August 1955
and April 2010, though about 90 percent of the arrests were after 1990. The
report does _not_ compare the crime rates of immigrants in the country
illegally with those for native-born residents.

The Texas numbers cited by Trump come from the state Department of Public
Safety, and Trump has inaccurately cited the state's figures before. They,
too, are for arrests for all noncitizens, even though the state does give some
figures for arrests of those identified as being in the country illegally.
Still, the state agency acknowledges that its figures “do not attempt to
allege that foreign nationals in the country illegally commit more crimes than
other groups.”

##### Research Showing Lower Crime Rates

Alex Nowrasteh, with the libertarian Cato Institute, analyzed the Texas data
to make a comparison of immigrants in the country illegally and native-born
residents. In a recent post he noted that in 2015 Texas police made 815,689
arrests of native-born Americans, 37,776 arrests of immigrants in the country
illegally and 20,323 arrests of legal immigrants. Given the relative
populations for each group, he wrote, "The arrest rate for illegal immigrants
was 40 percent below that of native-born Americans."

In addition, he wrote, the homicide arrest rate for native-born Americans was
"about 46 percent higher than the illegal immigrant homicide arrest rate."

Other research from the Cato Institute attempted to provide national
estimates. A study published on June 4 used data from the Census Bureau's
American Community Survey for 2016 and applied statistical modeling to
estimate the number of incarcerated immigrants in the country illegally. It
filtered the data using characteristics correlated with being an immigrant in
the country illegally, such as whether someone is a noncitizen but has not
served in the military or received Social Security income. The research
concluded: "Illegal immigrants are 47 percent less likely to be incarcerated
than natives." (And legal immigrants are even less likely to be in jail or
prison.)

> **Cato, June 4** : If native-born Americans were incarcerated at the same
rate as illegal immigrants, about 930,000 fewer natives would be incarcerated.
Conversely, if natives were incarcerated at the same rate as legal immigrants,
about 1.5 million fewer natives would be in adult correctional facilities.

Another study, "Does Undocumented Immigration Increase Violent Crime?," which
was published in the journal _Criminology_ in March, looked at the influx of
undocumented immigrants into communities in recent decades and concluded,
"Increased concentrations of undocumented immigrants are associated with
statistically significant decreases in violent crime."

One of the study's authors, Michael Light, a professor of sociology and
Chicano/Latino studies at the University of Wisconsin, told us via email that
the president is conflating two different issues and misusing statistics.

"The claim that immigrants are less crime prone refers exactly to the type of
findings [from his study and the one from Cato]: that the rate of crime within
the immigrant community is lower than the rate of crime among U.S. citizens.
OR, that communities with high levels of immigrants tend to have lower crime
rates than communities with fewer immigrants," Light said. "And those
statements are not contradicted by stating the number of offenses committed by
immigrants (as the President did)."

"Imagine I were to claim that women are less violent than men, which is as
close to a social fact that we have in criminology," Light said. "And one were
to reply saying that this isn’t true because in 2015 over 78,000 women were
arrested for violent crimes, and nearly 1,000 were arrested for homicide.
Those statistics in no way contradict the original statement that men tend to
be more violent."

Research published in _Social Science Quarterly_ in 2016 looked at rates of
violent crime and drug arrests by state for 2012 to 2014 and compared them
with statistics on the foreign‐born and Mexican nationals living in the United
States, as well as estimates of the undocumented foreign and undocumented
Mexican population by state. The study found no association between immigrant
population size and increased violent crime, though it found a “small but
significant association between undocumented immigrant populations and drug-
related arrests.”

Interestingly, a Pew Research Center report in 2013 found that crime rates
rise among second-generation immigrants, more closely mirroring the rates of
other native-born residents. Some researchers say this is a result of
assimilation and simply "catching-up" to their peers.

Numerous other studies have found that immigrants overall -- including those
with legal status -- do not commit crimes at a higher rate than non-
immigrants, and that higher concentrations of immigrants do not lead to higher
rates of violent crime. A recap of the literature on this topic can be found
here. But those studies don't look specifically at _illegal_ immigration.

##### Conflicting Research

There is, however, one study that backs the president's claim. John Lott,
president of the Crime Prevention Research Center, looked at data on prisoners
in Arizona state prison between the beginning of 1985 and June 2017 and
concluded that "undocumented immigrants are at least 146% more likely to be
convicted of crime than other Arizonans." They also tend to commit more
serious crimes, and have significantly higher rates for such crimes as murder,
manslaughter, sexual assault and armed robbery, Lott concluded, and are more
likely to be gang members. Conversely, Lott found that _legal_ immigrants
"were extremely law-abiding," committing crimes at a lower rate than native-
born residents.

Although Lott says his study is unique because "for the first time" he was
able to differentiate between immigrants in the country legally and illegally,
that claim was contested by Nowrasteh of the Cato Institute. Nowrasteh argues
Lott's study contains a "fatal flaw" in its assumption that it was able to
"identify illegal immigrants" from the data. The _Washington Post_ Fact
Checker did a deep dive on the arguments and counterarguments about the
validity of the study.

"The overall picture of immigrants and crime remains confused due to a lack of
good data and contrary information," Steven Camarota and Jessica Vaughan of
the Center for Immigration Studies, a group that advocates low immigration,
wrote in 2009.

Camarota told us it is somewhat irrelevant whether immigrants in the country
illegally commit crimes at a slightly higher or lower rate than native-born
Americans.

"Does releasing illegal immigrants allow them to commit crimes they otherwise
would not have committed, yes it does," Camarota told us in an email. "Do the
crimes committed by released illegal immigrants number in the thousands, yes
they do."

But we are looking at a claim from Trump about the comparison of crime rates
of immigrants in the country illegally and native-born residents.

"If you are asking if illegals commit crimes out of their proportion of the
population as I said maybe, maybe not," Camarota said. "Data is limited and it
depends on who you compare them to."

As we said, there aren't readily available nationwide crime statistics broken
down by immigration status. But the available research that estimates the
relationship between illegal immigration and crime generally shows an
association with lower crime rates. The impetus is on the president to provide
evidence of his claim, and Trump instead simply cited statistics on violent
crime committed by all noncitizens without attempting to compare those figures
to crimes committed by native-born residents.

Share the Facts

2018-06-27 20:17:20 UTC

FactCheck.org

![FactCheck.org](https://dhpikd1t89arn.cloudfront.net/logos/factcheckdotorg_logo.png)

-1

-1

-1

![FactCheck.org rating logo](https://dhpikd1t89arn.cloudfront.net/custom-

rating/custom-ratings-b4ac2848-7d77-48f2-af6b-f1f8eac5e183) FactCheck.org
Rating:

Most Research Disputes

It's "not true" that immigrants in the U.S. illegally are "safer than the
people that live in the country" in terms of crimes committed.

Donald Trump

President of the United States

http://www.whitehouse.gov

![](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/Trump-new-widget.png)

Press conference

Friday, June 22, 2018

2018-06-22

Read More

info

    
        * Categories
      * The Wire
    * Issue
      * Illegal immigration
      * immigrant crime
      * immigration
    * People
      * Bernie Sanders
      * Donald Trump
    

* * *

Previous StoryRhode Island Tax Returns Bill Didn't Pass

Next StoryIllegal Immigration Statistics

* * *

##### Ask FactCheck

**Q: Did the comedian Steve Harvey author a post in support of President
Donald Trump circulating on social media?** **  
**

**A: No. It was written by an anonymous, 80-year-old American, according to
the conservative website that first published it in 2016.**

Read the full question and answer

View the Ask FactCheck archives

Have a question? Ask us.

Donate Now

Because facts matter.

![SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-scicheck.png)

##### SciCheck

###### Fact-checking science-based claims.

![Facebook Initiative](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook.png)

##### Facebook Initiative

###### Debunking false stories.

![State of the Union](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

sotu.png)

##### State of the Union

###### Our fact-checking video collaboration.

![Trump Transcripts](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

trump.png)

##### Trump Transcripts

###### Annotated transcripts of Trump’s remarks.

![Health Watch](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

healthwatch.png)

##### Health Watch

###### Fact-checking the health care debate.

![2018 Players

Guide](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/PlayersGuide2018-square.png)

##### 2018 Players Guide

###### The special interest groups behind the TV ads.

![Sign Up](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-signup.png)

##### Sign Up

###### Get free email alerts.

![Ask SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

askscicheck.png)

##### Ask SciCheck

###### Answers to your science questions.

![Viral Spiral](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

viralspiral.png)

##### Viral Spiral

###### Don’t get spun by internet rumors.

![NewsFeed

Defenders](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/factchecksidebar_icon-1.png)

##### NewsFeed Defenders

###### A media literacy game to detect misinformation.

![On the Air](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-ota.png)

##### On the Air

###### Our staff on TV and radio.

![Party Lines](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-partylines.png)

##### Party Lines

###### Misleading political talking points.

![FlackCheck.org](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

flackcheck.png)

##### FlackCheck.org

###### Our sister site for political literacy.

![Mailbag](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-mailbag.png)

##### Mailbag

###### Letters from our readers.

    
        * Archives
    * Privacy
    * Copyright Policy
    * Contact Us
    

(C) Copyright 2019 FactCheck.org ®  
A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of
Pennsylvania

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

