

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods Blog About Follow DONATE

Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About

Follow

My Account __

Log in View Account Log out

Donate

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-standard.svg)

__

__

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-white-alt.svg)

__

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods

    
        * Publications
    * Topics
    * Datasets
    * Interactives
    * Fact Tank
    * Experts
    

__

    * Main

More __

FactTank-logos

### NEWS IN THE NUMBERS

September 29, 2017

__

* * *

# Hispanic dropout rate hits new low, college enrollment at new high

By John Gramlich

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/FT_17.09.29_HispanicEducation_Hispanichighschool.png)The
high school dropout rate among U.S. Hispanics has fallen to a new low,
extending a decades-long decline, according to recently released data from the
Census Bureau. The reduction has come alongside a long-term increase in
Hispanic college enrollment, which is at a record high.

The Hispanic dropout rate was 10% in 2016, with about 648,000 Hispanics ages
18 to 24 – out of more than 6.5 million nationally in that age group – not
completing high school and not enrolled in school. Just five years earlier,
the rate had been 16%.

The overall high school dropout rate in the U.S. has also fallen substantially
in recent decades, matching a record low of 6% in 2016. Hispanics have
accounted for much of that decline. Since 1999, the earliest year for which
data on all major races and ethnicities are available, the dropout rate among
Hispanics has fallen by 24 percentage points, compared with 9 points among
blacks, 3 points among whites and 2 points among Asians. (Hispanics, however,
still have the highest dropout rate of these four groups.)

The decline in the Hispanic dropout rate is particularly noteworthy given the
large increase in Hispanic enrollment in U.S. public and private schools.
Between 1999 and 2016, the number of Hispanics enrolled in public and private
nursery schools, K-12 schools and colleges increased 80%, from 9.9 million to
17.9 million. By comparison, enrollment during the same period increased 30%
among Asians (from 3.6 million to 4.7 million) and 4% among blacks (from 11.3
million to 11.7 million) while falling 14% among whites (from 47.3 million to
40.6 million). Total public school enrollment grew 7%, from 72.4 million to
77.2 million.

The rise in Hispanic student enrollment reflects broader demographic shifts
that have occurred in the U.S., with Hispanics accounting for a growing share
of the nation’s overall population. But educational progress has also improved
among Hispanics.

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/FT_17.09.29_HispanicEducation_MoreHispanic.png)As the
Hispanic dropout rate has declined, the share of Hispanic high school
graduates who enroll in college has risen. In 2016, 47% of Hispanic high
school graduates ages 18 to 24 were enrolled in college, up from 32% in 1999.
By comparison, the share of college enrollees among 18- to 24-year-old white,
black and Asian high school graduates increased more modestly.

A record 3.6 million Hispanics were enrolled in public and private colleges in
the U.S. in 2016, up 180% from the 1.3 million who were enrolled in 1999. The
increase in Hispanic college enrollment outpaced Hispanic enrollment growth in
U.S. nursery and K-12 schools during the same span.

While Hispanics have made important strides in educational attainment in
recent decades, it’s important to note they still lag behind other races and
ethnicities in several other academic measures. For example, Hispanics are
less likely than other groups to obtain a four-year college degree.

Topics:

School EnrollmentEducational AttainmentHispanic/Latino
DemographicsEducationRace and Ethnicity

Share this link:

__

* * *

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Gramlich_John.jpg?w=200)

John Gramlich _is a writer/editor at Pew Research Center._

POSTS BIO TWITTER EMAIL

donate-icon

### MAKE A FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO SUPPORT OUR WORK

DONATE

##### Related

Fact TankOctober 2, 2014

U.S. high school dropout rate reaches record low, driven by improvements among
Hispanics, blacks

Fact TankJuly 28, 2016

5 facts about Latinos and education

Fact TankSeptember 4, 2013

Among recent high school grads, Hispanic college enrollment rate surpasses
that of whites

Fact TankAugust 17, 2015

Analysis shows fewer Hispanic young adults ‘disconnected’ from school, jobs

HispanicSeptember 18, 2017

How the U.S. Hispanic population is changing

##### Popular on Fact Tank

Fact TankJanuary 17, 2019

Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact TankSeptember 6, 2018

Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact TankNovember 28, 2018

5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Fact TankNovember 30, 2018

Key findings about U.S. immigrants

Fact TankApril 5, 2017

Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in
Europe

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-alt.svg)  
1615 L St. NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20036  
USA  
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main  
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax  
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries

##### Research Areas

U.S. Politics & Policy Journalism & Media Internet & Technology Science &
Society Religion & Public Life Hispanic Trends Global Attitudes & Trends
Social & Demographic Trends Methods

##### Follow Us

__Email Newsletters __Facebook __Twitter __Tumblr __YouTube __RSS

**About Pew Research Center** Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank
that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the
world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content
analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does
not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy
Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers

We need to confirm your email address

To complete the subscription process, please click the link in the email we
just sent you.

Cancel

OK

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

