

Skip to main content

__

## FiveThirtyEight ![FiveThirtyEight](https://fivethirtyeight.com/wp-

content/themes/espn-fivethirtyeight/assets/images/logo-fox-head-color.svg)

Search

Search Menu

Why Fights Over Immigration Keep Shutting Down The Government

Share on Facebook Share on Twitter

    
        * Politics 
    * Sports 
    * Science & Health 
    * Economics 
    * Culture 
    * ABC News
    

Politics Podcast: Is Elizabeth Warren Surging?

Dec. 21, 2018, at 1:34 PM

# Why Fights Over Immigration Keep Shutting Down The Government

By Perry Bacon Jr.

Filed under The Trump Administration

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * ![US-POLITICS-TRUMP-WALL](https://fivethirtyeight.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/GettyImages-931532180.jpg?w=575)
    

President Trump inspects border wall prototypes in San Diego in March.

Mandel Ngan / AFP / Getty Images

We’re facing the third government shutdown in less than a year this Friday
thanks, in part, to a fight over immigration policy. President Trump wants $5
billion for a border wall -- an amount that is unlikely to make it through the
Senate. Back in January, a disagreement over the Deferred Action for Childhood
Arrivals program caused a partial government shutdown.1 So it’s worth taking a
step back and asking: Why is immigration such a stumbling block?

After all, it wasn’t always like this. Conservatives once backed more liberal
immigration policies, and liberals have at times backed more restrictionist
ones. In 1986, for example, Ronald Reagan signed a law that granted amnesty to
nearly 3 million undocumented immigrants. Reagan and George H.W. Bush both
used their executive powers to declare that children of undocumented
immigrants affected by the Reagan-era law could not be deported. In 2006,
Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, who were both then senators, voted for 700
miles of additional fencing on the U.S.-Mexico border as part of a provision
to satisfy conservatives concerned about a rise in illegal immigration.2

But over the past couple of decades -- as the number of unauthorized
immigrants in the U.S. rose steeply and then began to decline -- immigration
policy has come to symbolize the two parties’ broader values and electoral
coalitions. The battle over immigration policy is about way more than just
immigration, in other words, in the same way that the tensions between the two
parties on health policy reflect deeper fault lines. The politics of
immigration today are notably more divided and partisan than they were 10 or
20 years ago, and there are a few reasons why.

First, there are the party coalitions. Compared to the mid-2000s, the
Democratic Party of today includes fewer non-Hispanic white voters: 67 percent
people who are or lean toward being Democrats were non-Hispanic whites in
2007, but that number had dropped to 59 percent in 2017, according to the Pew
Research Center. Forty percent of self-identified Democrats are now nonwhite.
Republicans too have grown more racially diverse, but only barely, and they
are still overwhelmingly white: 88 percent in 2007, compared to 83 percent in
2017. About 12 percent of Democrats are Hispanic, roughly double the
percentage of Republicans who are of Hispanic descent.

So the Democrats have a huge bloc of people in their party who have racial,
ethnic and cultural ties to America’s most recent immigrants, who are largely
Asian- and Latino-American. And while “minorities” and “people of color” are
fraught terms that often ignore differences both between and within racial and
ethnic groups, the Democrats are essentially now the home party for Americans
who might feel that U.S. society treats them as “other.”

Secondly, while both parties have undergone ideological shifts, Democrats have
shifted more dramatically. Pollsters ask a variety of questions to measure
public opinion on immigration, but they all show the same thing: Democrats
have become far more pro-immigration in recent years.

According to Pew, in 2006, 37 percent of Democrats3 said that legal
immigration to the U.S. should be decreased, compared to 20 percent who said
it should increase.4 Pew found a huge reversal in those numbers earlier this
year: 40 percent of Democrats back higher immigration levels, compared to 16
percent who want them lowered. According to Gallup, 85 percent of Democrats
now feel immigration is a “good thing” for America, compared to 69 percent who
said the same in 2006. Republicans haven’t actually become more anti-
immigration, according to Pew and Gallup. But, per Pew, there are more
Republicans5 who want immigration decreased (33 percent) than who want it
increased (22 percent).

As a result, the _gap_ between the parties on questions about immigration has
become a chasm:

![](https://fivethirtyeight.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/bacon-

SHUTDOWN-1221-1.png)

And immigration is indicative of a broader shift: Democratic voters have grown
more liberal on issues of race, gender and identity generally. That includes
_white_ Democrats.

The voters are not alone. Elites in each party have moved toward the
ideological poles on immigration policy. Liberal-leaning activists and
Democratic politicians argue that policies like the wall aren’t just bad or
ineffective, they are immoral and racist. Trump and other conservatives have
suggested that more immigration could both hurt the U.S. economy and lead to
more crime.

Let me avoid making this a both-sides story: For the most part, Democrats are
more aligned with overall public opinion on immigration. The majority of
voters want undocumented young people who were brought to the U.S. as children
to be protected from deportation, and Democrats’ demand for that provision
that led to last winter’s shutdown. Likewise, most voters don’t support a
border wall, but Trump is driving toward a shutdown in pursuit of a wall, an
idea that many congressional Republicans are fairly lukewarm about.

That said, America did elect a president (in 2016) and a Senate majority (in
2016 and 2018) who belong to the party that is generally less supportive of
immigration, so either there is some appetite for a middle ground or
immigration is not a deal-breaker issue for many Americans. Either way, it
would be logical for the two sides to find a compromise. But the shifts the
parties have undergone in the last 10 or so years make such a compromise hard
to execute. Democratic leaders can’t easily sign on to _any_ funding for a
wall that their base thinks is a physical monument to racism, particularly
since the top Democratic leaders are white but much of the party base is not.
Trump can’t easily give up on the wall, since he basically campaigned on the
idea that America needs a wall to remain a great nation.

So we’re already at two shutdowns involving immigration policy in the Trump
era -- and I would not rule out a few more.

## Footnotes

    
        1. The second shutdown, which occurred in February, included a dispute over immigration. But the lapse in government funding, which lasted only a few hours, might have been avoided if Sen. Rand Paul had not delayed consideration of a compromise bill not because he objected to its immigration policy, but simply because he felt it included too much spending.
    
    2. Let me not overstate the flip-flopping by the two parties. Obama’s DACA program affected far more people than Reagan and Bush’s executive moves. Trump’s proposed border wall is bigger (physically and symbolically) than a fence.
    
    3. Including people who lean Democratic.
    
    4. Thirty-six percent of respondents said that immigration levels should remain about the same.
    
    5. Including people who lean Republican.
    

Perry Bacon Jr. is a senior writer for FiveThirtyEight. ____ @perrybaconjr

### Comments

Filed under

Donald Trump (1076 posts) The Trump Administration (637) Congress (375)
Immigration (140) Government Shutdown (41)

## Most popular stories

June 11, 2019 9:09 AM

### What Kevin Durant’s Injury Means For KD, The Finals And Free Agency

FiveThirtyEight

6:01 AM

### Pelosi's Agenda Is Popular -- Much More So Than Impeaching Trump

FiveThirtyEight

7:26 AM

### The Warriors' Durant Gamble Backfired -- And Helped Save Their Season

FiveThirtyEight

## Interactives

#### Want more FiveThirtyEight? Get our weekly most popular stories

newsletter.

Subscribe

All newsletters

Get more FiveThirtyEight

    
        * Newsletter
    * Videos
    * Podcasts
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Data
    * RSS
    
    *     * Follow @FiveThirtyEight
    
    * Contact
    * Jobs
    * Masthead
    * About Nielsen Measurement
    

Powered by WordPress.com VIP

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Your California Privacy Rights
    * Children's Online Privacy Policy
    * Interest-Based Ads
    

(C) 2019 ABC News Internet Ventures. All rights reserved.

Close Additional Information Terms of Use and Privacy Policy and Safety
Information/Your California Privacy Rights/Children's Online Privacy Policy
are applicable to you. © 2019 ABC News Internet Ventures. All rights reserved.
Interest-Based Ads. Cookie Policy.

 Get us in your inbox.

No thanks. Done.

#### Stories that resonated

##### Get a newsletter of our most popular stories of the week.

Subscribe

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

