
    
        * our latest
    * most popular
    * contributors
    * subscribe
    

![The Federalist](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/logo.png)

![The Federalist](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/eagle.png) ![The Federalist RSS

Feed](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-rss.png) ![Follow TheFederalist on

Twitter](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-twitter.png) ![Follow TheFederalist on

Facebook](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-facebook.png) ![Follow the Federalist Radio Hour on

iTunes](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-podcast.png)

![Browse The Federalist](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/header-menu.png)

    
        * our latest
    * most popular
    * podcast
    * subscribe
    

![3 Benefits Of A Border Wall That No One Is Talking

About](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/pixel.gif)![3 Benefits Of A Border Wall That No One Is Talking

About](https://thefederalist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/Border_Wall_at_Tijuana_and_San_Diego_Border-998x646.jpg)

    
        * Immigration
    

## 3 Benefits Of A Border Wall That No One Is Talking About

In addition to taking a strong stance to reassert the rule of law, a southern
border wall would save untold lives, reduce the flow of people and drugs, and
protect private property.

By Benjamin R. Dierker

![Benjamin R. Dierker](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/pixel.gif)![Benjamin R. Dierker](https://thefederalist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/Benjamin-R.-Dierker.jpg)

By Benjamin R. Dierker

June 20, 2018

The media has kept national coverage of the border wall deceptively
superficial. If we think about the border wall in limited terms, we will only
see limited benefits. Some intentionally blind themselves to the benefits in
order to downplay the need for border infrastructure. While a wall is a clear
deterrent to illegal immigration, it will also protect and improve the lives
of millions of Americans in less than obvious ways.

A towering border wall the scale of President Trump’s proposal, spanning the
entire southern border, is an enormous undertaking. The cost will also be
immense, not only for construction and maintenance, but also affecting
business transaction costs around the border. The question remains whether the
benefits outweigh the costs.

Using the left’s two-dimensional caricature, the project looks too expensive
and ineffective. Media and Democrats cite huge cost estimates and derisively
mention tunnels and ladders. The problem is that their costs are not
contextualized with positive externalities, and they mischaracterize the
wall’s purpose by joking about ladders.

For reasons totally outside of national sovereignty, and truly unrelated to
ethic or national identity, the border wall is a net benefit. In addition to
the federal government taking a strong stance to reassert the rule of law, a
southern border wall would save untold lives, reduce the flow of people and
drugs, and protect private property.

## 1. A Border Wall Will Save Lives

Immigration is caused by pull factors. The relative prosperity of two nations
will affect whether people stay or leave. It is clear why people want to come
to the freest, most diverse, and most prosperous nation in history. In the
United States, individuals are not bound by class systems, and opportunities
of all kinds abound.

It is a crime to enter the United States without proper documentation. But as
with any crime, the law itself is not the end of the story. An effective
deterrent balances the repercussion of violating the law with the probability
of getting caught.

With no border infrastructure, the detection rate for illegal crossings would
be low. A wall would be a strong deterrent, because many would not be able to
get through, and it would give Border Patrol personnel time to locate
violators if they did overcome the wall.

By creating an effective deterrent, a border wall minimizes the pull factor of
illegal immigration. A child or family is less likely to take a perilous
journey just to end up staring up at a 30-foot wall or being turned around by
security personnel.

Reversing the incentive for the dangerous attempt at illegal crossing is
essential. Great numbers of vulnerable women, children, and families travel
thousands of miles every year, through deserts, cartel territories, and the
material deprivation of food and shelter for a chance to cross the southern
border. As many as 80 percent are reportedly raped during their journey.
Families pay smugglers great sums to bring them across Central America and
Mexico to the United States. These smugglers may be careless about their
customers’ security, reducing them to the status of packages.

Many die or fall ill on the journey. These devastating outcomes don’t happen
if people did not attempt the journey in the first place, because they knew
there was no chance of crossing the border. If we think only about U.S.
citizens, we miss the broader picture. A border wall saves lives by
discouraging dangerous migration before it starts.

Importantly, a wall can save lives another way. Those genuinely fleeing
violence and oppression may have a valid claim for asylum. Under current law,
even legitimate asylum seekers who illegally cross the border are prosecuted
for a misdemeanor of illegal entry and temporarily separated from any children
they may have during proceedings.

A wall would prevent these people from being able to enter illegally, sparing
them the prosecution and separation, while funneling them to ports of entry
and U.S. embassies in their home countries, where asylum claims are correctly
processed. In this way, a wall works with our laws to promote safety for those
who need asylum, while maintaining order.

## 2. Reduce Illegal Immigration, Smuggling, And Trafficking

Of course, many will be undeterred by a border wall and attempt the journey
anyway. When they arrive, they will have to face the 30-foot barrier. If we
were only concerned with illegal aliens entering the country and residing
among us, the wall would not be fully effective. Tunnels have been documented
beneath the border and ladders rise over it.

This is a critical topic about which the media does a disservice to its
audience, because we are not only concerned with individual illegal aliens.
This persistent rhetoric serves the narrative that the wall is motivated by
xenophobia and racism. Instead, the motivation is reducing infiltration by
cartels, gangs, drugs, and human trafficking.

Individuals can climb ladders, but it slows them down and limits what they can
carry. Vehicles cannot breach the wall, so any truck loaded with weapons,
drugs, sex slaves, or worse has to stop, and the smugglers have to climb
ladders with only what they can carry. There are two clear benefits of the
wall in this instance alone.

First, slowing down violators allows Border Patrol time to arrive at the scene
and increases the chance of an apprehension, while limiting the cargo that can
be illegally imported. Even if they manage to get past the border, violators
will have fewer supplies and less dangerous material. They will also be on
foot, giving Border Patrol the advantage in speed and timing.

Second, by preventing vehicles from driving over the border, the environment
is spared. The southern border is vulnerable. Federal law protects around 20.7
million acres of land just inside the border as national parks and wilderness
area. When smugglers and traffickers enter the country, they do not think
about environmental protection. They drive all-terrain vehicles that tear up
plant life, disturb drainage, and harm animals. They are also likely to litter
and pollute as they go.

Writing off a wall because people can still cross it ignores how people are
forced to interact with a barrier. Without considering vehicles and cargo, the
media misses critical aspects of border activity. A border wall saves lives by
reducing weaponry, drugs, and human trafficking, while protecting the
environment from devastating impacts.

## 3. A Border Wall Will Protect Private Property

Not every aspect of a border wall has to do with immigration. By only
addressing immigration and to some extent covering smuggling, the media misses
one of the most critical aspects of a wall: Many communities are ravaged by
theft and burglary.

It is only rational to construct a barrier between dangerous places and safe
ones.

In some locations, enterprising criminals run across the border only to grab
what they can, including vehicles, and retreat to Mexico. These individuals
have no plans to immigrate or even smuggle things into the country. Repeat
burglaries affect small towns and vulnerable residents. Texas sheriffs have
also reported home burglaries by criminals heading back south.

While typical analysis struggles to conjure crime statistics for immigrants
relative to the natural-born population years after entering the country,
attention should be paid directly to illegal criminal activity happening
instantly upon entry. The wall is useful in both directions for these cases.
It severely limits criminal mobility into the United States, and means they
have to carry their stolen loot over a ladder on their way back, preventing
automotive theft.

One Mexican state bordering the United States is subject to the strictest
travel warnings the State Department issues, due to criminal activity and
violence. Two Mexican border cities were ranked among the top most dangerous
in the world. It is only rational to construct a barrier between dangerous
places and safe ones. The wall would reduce the spillover of violence, drugs,
and burglary that plague so many along the border.

The Left has made its opposition to the border wall clear, not only through
direct commentary, but by what they leave out. Clear benefits of a border wall
are being ignored. If these voices prevail and border infrastructure is not
adequately addressed, the cost will be human lives, environmental damage, and
loss of personal property.

Benjamin Dierker is a law student at the Antonin Scalia Law School at George
Mason University. He holds a master's degree in public administration and a
bachelor's degree in economics, both from Texas A&M; University. He is a
Christian and a Texan and loves to talk about both.

Photo © Tomas Castelazo, www.tomascastelazo.com / Wikimedia Commons / CC BY-SA
4.0

Border Border wall Crime deterrence human trafficking Illegal Immigration
Immigration immigration policy infrastructure smuggling theft U.S. border

Copyright (C) 2019 The Federalist, a wholly independent division of FDRLST
Media, All Rights Reserved.

# Comments![](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/arrow.png)

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

![The Federalist RSS Feed](https://thefederalist.com/wp-

content/themes/attitude-child/images/social-rss.png) ![Follow TheFederalist on

Twitter](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-twitter.png) ![Follow TheFederalist on

Facebook](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-facebook.png) ![Follow the Federalist Radio Hour on

iTunes](https://thefederalist.com/wp-content/themes/attitude-

child/images/social-podcast.png)

Our Latest - Most Popular - Contributors - Contact Us - Subscribe

Be lovers of freedom and anxious for the fray.

Copyright (C) 2019 The Federalist, a wholly independent division of FDRLST
Media, All Rights Reserved.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=683573541742108&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-BqQyNQgUPawzV.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

