

Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About Follow

My Account __

Log in View Account Log out

Donate

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewhispanic.org/wp-content/plugins/pew-

refactor-shim/assets/img/logos/desktop-header.svg)

Hispanic Trends

    
        * Menu
    * Research Areas
    
    * Home
    * U.S. Politics
    * Media & News
    * Social Trends
    * Religion
    * Internet & Tech
    * Science
    * Hispanics
    * Global
    * Methods
    
    * Publications
    * Topics
    * Interactives
    * Data and Resources
    * Experts
    

__

* * *

July 14, 2011

# The Mexican-American Boom: Births Overtake Immigration

## II. Mexican-American Fertility Patterns

![](https://assets.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/sites/7/2011/07/2011-births-05.png)U.S. births are
disproportionately Hispanic, accounting for one-in-four (25%) of the nation’s
newborns in 2008 (Martin, et. al, 2008). U.S. births are also
disproportionately Mexican-American. While 10% of the nation’s population in
2008 was Mexican-American, 16% of the nation’s births were to Mexican-American
mothers.

Two demographic factors explain the high share of births among Mexican-
Americans: age and fertility. On average, Mexican-Americans are younger than
other major racial and ethnic groups. The median age of Mexican-Americans in
this country is 25, compared with 30 for non-Mexican-origin Hispanics, 32 for
blacks, 35 for Asians and 41 for whites.6 This means that a higher share of
Mexican-American women is of child-bearing age than is the case for other
racial or ethnic groups.![](https://assets.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/sites/7/2011/07/2011-births-04.png)

In addition, Mexican-American women have more children than do their same-aged
counterparts in other racial and Hispanic origin groups. For example,
according to Pew Hispanic Center tabulations from the 2006 to 2010 June
Fertility Supplements of the U.S. Current Population Survey, the typical
Mexican-American woman ages 40 to 44 has given birth to 2.5 children, compared
with 1.9 children for the typical same-aged non-Mexican-Hispanic woman, 1.8
children for the typical same-aged white woman, 2.0 for the typical same-aged
black woman and 1.8 for the typical same-aged Asian woman.

Mexican-American fertility is also higher than that of non-Mexican-origin U.S.
Hispanics. Across all cohorts ages 20 and older, Mexican-American women have
anywhere from about 20% to 50% more children than non-Mexican U.S. Hispanic
women.

Among Mexican-American women, fertility differs by immigration status. On
average, the typical Mexican immigrant woman ages 40 to 44 has about one-third
more children over the course of her lifetime than the typical U.S.-born
Mexican-American in the same age group—2.7 versus 2.1.

    
        6. In this report, white, black and Asian populations include only non-Hispanics who reported a single race. Native Americans and mixed-race groups are not shown. Hispanics can be of any race. ↩
    

## Pagination

Next: III. Comparing Mexicans and Mexican-American Immigrants Next Page -> <\-
Prev Page

    
        1. Page 1
    2. You are reading page 2
    3. Page 3
    4. Page 4
    5. Page 5
    

##### Report Materials

    
        * Complete Report PDF
    

## Table of Contents

    
        * The Mexican-American Boom: Births Overtake Immigration
    * II. Mexican-American Fertility Patterns
    * III. Comparing Mexicans and Mexican-American Immigrants
    * IV. The Mexican Migration
    * Appendix
    

##### Related

ReportsSep 8, 2016

## U.S. Latino Population Growth and Dispersion Has Slowed Since Onset of the

Great Recession

Statistical PortraitsApr 29, 2014

## 2012, Foreign-Born Population in the United States Statistical Portrait

Statistical PortraitsJan 29, 2013

## 2011, Foreign-Born Population in the United States Statistical Portrait

Statistical PortraitsFeb 21, 2012

## 2010, Foreign-Born Population in the United States Statistical Portrait

ReportsFeb 17, 2011

## 2009, Foreign-Born Population in the United States Statistical Portrait

##### Topics

    
        * Hispanic/Latino Demographics
    * Immigration
    * Immigration Trends
    * Population Trends
    * Country of Origin
    * Birth Rate and Fertility
    

##### Popular On Pew Research

Fact Tank01/17/2019

## Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact Tank09/06/2018

## Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact Tank11/28/2018

## 5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Internet & Tech03/01/2018

## Social Media Use in 2018

Social Trends01/17/2019

## Generation Z Looks a Lot Like Millennials on Key Social and Political

Issues

Get **Pew Research Center** data by email

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewhispanic.org/wp-content/plugins/pew-

refactor-shim/assets/img/logos/desktop-footer.svg) 1615 L St. NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036 USA (+1) 202-419-4300 | Main (+1) 202-419-4349 | Fax (+1)
202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries

## Research Areas

    
        * U.S. Politics & Policy
    * Journalism & Media
    * Internet & Technology
    * Science & Society
    * Religion & Public Life
    * Hispanic Trends
    * Global Attitudes & Trends
    * Social & Demographic Trends
    

## Follow Us

    
        * Email Newsletters
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Tumblr
    * YouTube
    * RSS
    

**About Pew Research Center** Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank
that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the
world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content
analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does
not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

    
        * Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center
    * About
    * Terms & Conditions
    * Privacy Policy
    * Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy
    * Feedback
    * Careers
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

