

#

    
        * News
      *         * US
        * World
        * Politics
        * Entertainment
        * Health
        * MoneyWatch
        * Technology
        * Science
        * Crime
        * Sports
      *         *           * Jon Stewart to House: "You should be ashamed of yourselves"
          * House votes to enforce subpoenas for Trump administration officials
          * 2020 Daily Trail Markers: Trump, Biden exchange barbs in Iowa
          * U.S. women's team breaks World Cup records in win over Thailand
          * Pilot in helicopter crash wasn't authorized to fly in poor weather
          * Trump Jr. to testify before Senate Intel Committee
          * New York could become first state to decriminalize sex work
          * Jury deadlocks on border activist charged with helping migrants
          * Southern Baptist Church addresses sexual abuse at annual convention
    
    *     * Shows
      * CBS This Morning
      * CBS Evening News
      * 60 Minutes
      * Face The Nation
      * Sunday Morning
      * 48 Hours
      * CBSN Originals
      * NCIS: The Cases They Can't Forget
      *     * Live
    
      * ![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/81793425-57dc-4351-9e00-c2d515e0c45c/thumbnail/100x100/7f7f34333981766af2683ca0c015cdd1/logo-cbsn-1920x1080-new.jpg#)
    

### Latest headlines

Latest headlines

    
          * ![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/d0b656c8-f79a-4492-946a-68278fcda687/thumbnail/100x100/c101c312e7ab9236c00d7805ad6f72f6/logo-cbsnny-1920x1080-new.jpg#)
    

### CBSN New York

CBSN New York

    
          * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/f864d4e3-8707-4b99-9cc0-ba1778552e15/thumbnail/100x100/c9a2498b6f0c74255d22bd80460c812b/logo-cbsnla-1920x1080-new.jpg#)
    

### CBSN Los Angeles

CBSN Los Angeles

    
          * ![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/dad0b33e-13cb-4470-8c12-4c1fc69a0106/thumbnail/100x100/609c00acd1c1c941b5cf163dd72f9a50/logo-sports-alt-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### CBS Sports HQ

CBS Sports HQ

    
          * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/03214531-586b-4683-813e-a3252999e063/thumbnail/100x100/979bdc5ee0c75e8f700fe63beffc3e96/et-live-logo-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### ET Live

ET Live

    
        * LIVE
    * More
      *         * Latest
        * Video
        * Photos
        * Podcasts
        * In Depth
        * Local
      *         * Log In
        * Alerts
        * Mobile
        * RSS
        * Shop
    * Live
    

Watch CBSN Live

# Trump's border wall would stop less than half of illegal immigration in the

U.S.

    
        *     *     * By Kate Smith
    

January 3, 2019 / 5:48 PM / CBS News

Trump pushes for border wall at briefing

President Donald Trump has always linked illegal immigration to the southern
border and the need for a wall. On Thursday -- the 13th day of a government
shutdown tied to the issue -- Mr. Trump tweeted a video called "crisis on the
border" depicting rioting migrants trying to rush into the country.

But only one-third of the recent undocumented immigrant population came to the
United States through the southern border, according to the Center for
Migration Studies (CMS), a New York City-based think tank. The rest came
legally on work visas and stayed after they expired, according to CMS.

In other words, a wall wouldn't have kept them out.

#### Trending News

    
        * Jon Stewart Testifies
    * Women's World Cup
    * Trump Slams Biden
    * Unknown Mass On Moon
    

According to CMS, about 42 percent of the 10.7 million undocumented immigrants
living in the U.S. in 2014 -- the most recent year for which data was
available -- were doing so on expired visas. As the southern border has
hardened, that number is estimated to have risen to over half, Randy Capps,
director of research for U.S. Programs at the Migration Policy Institute,
said.

> pic.twitter.com/jsOrDtwdEa

>

> \-- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 3, 2019

"The fight over a border wall is a typical issue of 'fighting the last war':
ten years ago was the fight against Mexican migration to the U.S.," Capps said
in a telephone interview with CBS News. "The problem isn't Mexican migration
anymore. Now the immigration problem is **** overstayers, not border
crossers."

The undocumented immigrant population hit a 12-year low in 2016, the most
recent year for which data is available, almost entirely due to a sharp drop
in unauthorized border crossings by Mexican nationals, according to the Pew
Research Center. Pew estimated that the unauthorized Mexican immigrant
population decreased by 22 percent since its peak in 2007.

Over a five-year period ending 2016, a little over half a million Mexicans
illegally entered the U.S. through the southern border. That was down from
2.05 million during five years ending 2007, according to Pew.

While there has been an increase in Central American migrants arriving at the
southern border recently, a vast majority have claimed asylum, a legal mode of
immigration, said Capps.

Mr. Trump has made immigration, specifically a border wall, a signature piece
of his administration's priorities. While there have been some measures to
rein in visa overstays since Mr. Trump was sworn into office, the changes have
been less resource-draining.

One such change is that Immigration Customs and Enforcement now emails visa
holders to warn them that their legal residency is about to expire, said
Jessica Vaughan, Director of Policy Studies at the Center for Immigration
Studies, a research group that supports policy which "admits fewer
immigrants."

"It'll make people think twice about staying," Vaughan said in a telephone
interview with CBS News. "I think it'll help."

In the year ending September 30, 2017, the most recent year for which data is
available, about 700,000 foreigners were living in the U.S. on visas that had
expired in the prior 12 months, according to data from the Department of
Homeland Security. The agency estimated that about 15 percent of those have
since left the country, but the rest remain in the U.S. as undocumented
immigrants. 2017 was only the second year that DHS reported the overstay
figure.

Like most other immigration data points, pinpointing the total undocumented
population and how they arrived in the U.S. is equal parts art and science,
Vaughan said. Using deportation data from ICE, which tracks how immigrants
arrive in the U.S., Vaughan estimates that visa overstays comprise somewhere
between 40 and 50 percent of the undocumented immigration population.

"Both modes of entry are a big problem," said Vaughan.

First published on January 3, 2019 / 5:48 PM

(C) 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved.

### U.S.

More U.S.

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/12/cf1b3896-0396-48b9-9a01-1bc2bfb9ad7d/thumbnail/640x360/8686cb5071e18b61877b7011c99069cb/ap-00050102235.jpg#)

#### Jail on lockdown due to mumps outbreak

Jail officials said the outbreak involves inmates in the general population
and not ICE detainees

13M ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### Americans taking on Thailand in first World Cup match

The U.S. women open up group play today

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/40e7766d-372a-45b6-b3e1-062e27ae957e/thumbnail/640x360/dd9c6e38b513e41dd877778ca3aa3145/ap-19162752258207.jpg#)

#### Men accused of killing Native women allegedly took child hostage

The child managed to escape; the men were later arrested and face assault
charges related to the Saturday killings

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### U.S. women's team breaks World Cup records in win over Thailand

The United States Women's National Team opened its 2019 World Cup title
defense with authority

updated 23M ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

3H ago

More in U.S.

### Politics

More Politics

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/d1314ff1-b0ca-4035-8380-0e79ccc5d625/thumbnail/640x360/b550be6924f75eba34e888f34e668c6a/trail-

markers-graphic-presidential.jpg#)

#### 2020 Daily Trail Markers: Trump, Biden exchange barbs in Iowa

After campaigning throughout the Hawkeye state Tuesday, President Trump​ and
Joe Biden​ each have one event in Iowa on Tuesday evening

updated 59M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/564adcaf-5151-4044-8b43-56db0bd2221d/thumbnail/640x360/2e60a4075badccee49a74b84416ee565/gettyimages-935039722.jpg#)

#### Trump administration to defend Saudi arms deal before House committee

Some members of Congress, including many Republicans, have criticized the
Trump administration for bypassing congressional review of the deal

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/01fa51b0-4c58-45f3-89d3-9b50eb4fe6d9/thumbnail/640x360/6ed27707ebaf86810528bf8f8cb19806/gettyimages-1148240291.jpg#)

#### Justice Dept to ask Trump to invoke privilege over census documents

The House Oversight Committee has subpoenaed administration officials
requesting documents related to the 2020 census

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/03/29/c3041637-cc06-4441-86e5-257dd51caaf3/thumbnail/640x360g3/cf91b1485eaf21798c8a1215255d9bcc/gettyimages-1138956761.jpg#)

#### Trump Jr. to testify before Senate Intel Committee on Wednesday

Trump Jr. reached an agreement to testify before the committee after he was
subpoenaed

5H ago

More in Politics

### World

More World

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### Americans taking on Thailand in first World Cup match

The U.S. women open up group play today

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/05/12/224eb2d4-610f-4faa-947e-701fe18a9b25/thumbnail/640x360/121409b83fba1fd04c2a0b3eb7fc2c7b/ap-17132571185428.jpg#)

#### Uganda confirms first Ebola case outside outbreak in Congo

A child in Uganda has tested positive for Ebola in the first cross-border case
of the deadly virus since an outbreak started in neighboring Congo last year

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### U.S. women's team breaks World Cup records in win over Thailand

The United States Women's National Team opened its 2019 World Cup title
defense with authority

updated 23M ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/41bf8de0-7886-4fde-a661-001d5825d82b/thumbnail/640x360/7f2669f6b7192ccffbcf03bf4fa421df/gettyimages-1148534270.jpg#)

#### Mexico begins cracking down on Central American migrants

There's a plan to send 6,000 members of the National Guard to areas known to
be migrant routes

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/02/19/16b15989-2e32-4aef-847b-b8b444a2468c/thumbnail/640x360g2/a60793a0730b4d941ffe910d7d8c2d21/n-korea-

ap-17046196133744.jpg#)

#### Kim Jong Un's murdered half-brother accused of being a CIA informant

Kim Jong Nam was killed when two women came up behind him at a Malaysian
airport, and rubbed chemicals over his face

3H ago

More in World

### Entertainment

More Entertainment

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/1cfed6ab-9794-4133-b445-703adf220cea/thumbnail/640x360/a6da79dead675371c1f3210d4c81808a/untitled-

collage-2.jpg#)

#### Kendall Jenner's alleged stalker deported back to Canada

John Ford was arrested for trespassing at Jenner's home twice; one time he was
found in her swimming pool

8H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/01/17/2599127e-7d5f-46bf-

abc2-d7c04b36e4ba/thumbnail/640x360/884cdbe6ce560968b03f73bad7faa8ae/star-

wars-the-force-awakens-depsvi-1.jpg#)

#### Highest-grossing movies of all time, ranked

What's the highest-grossing movie of all time? It might be one of your
favorites

Jun 4 27 photos

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/5aff9f32-c62a-43ec-

ae32-9413a64c06d0/thumbnail/640x360/eb54dbb7d8defe8a67b687f61fa6b8c6/screen-

shot-2019-06-11-at-10-00-44-am.png#)

#### Brand new full-length "Frozen II" trailer released

The new trailer, much like the earlier teaser, looks ominous, with Elsa in a
precarious situation

11H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/10/4eb0ed24-8648-4c56-9e6d-bbb76f1493cc/thumbnail/640x360/4808d50f2a35ade72d43177f460c39b5/gettyimages-601352064.jpg#)

#### Kim Kardashian West shares first close-up image of new baby

The photo shows little Psalm sleeping on a blanket

Jun 10

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/fd16e28f-6014-4cad-

ac36-51dfe1bfd690/thumbnail/640x360/ab2947ef95bfc869b0c7b3a4ae92cc49/0610-billyporter-1871081-640x360.jpg#)

#### Billy Porter wears curtain dress to Tonys

Pink tulle spilled out from underneath the embellished red dress, which was
custom made for Billy Porter for the Tony Awards. The outfit was crafted from
a curtain used in "Kinky Boots"

Jun 10 01:12

More in Entertainment

### Technology

More Technology

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/23/f5c15d92-a9c9-4e6d-9482-d804fae1f153/thumbnail/640x360/0c331a88003977fe89c1fe682ce6e8fa/gettyimages-512015968.jpg#)

#### Facebook will pay users for info on their app usage

A new app, called Study, is the social network's third attempt to get users to
knowingly share this personal data

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/04/0a28f2a1-489f-4f32-891f-62d118a599d1/thumbnail/640x360/4eb9a25a288c84b22dd08ac66e1f5b78/rts256q3.jpg#)

#### Elon Musk: Buying gasoline car like "riding a horse and using a flip

phone"

Can Tesla ever be consistently profitable? Musk insisted to shareholders that
public policy is on the company's side

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/edc7eb68-b715-44d1-bec6-2672faa2bc1f/thumbnail/640x360/036a415e5f0b361e7d0dd22afa22874e/anne-

frank-letters-digitize-02.jpg#)

#### Letters from Anne Frank's father to be digitized

An antiques dealer and artist who struck up a correspondence with Otto Frank
is making a donation to the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C.

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2014/01/20/b9925afd-0dd6-4926-95b9-a294803fd87e/thumbnail/640x360/1241c773b7d9b1d3d04461ffd27a0761/1209156-amazon_logo.jpg#)

#### Amazon tops Apple and Google as world's most valuable brand

Ecommerce giant tops ranking for the first time, with tech players dominating
the list

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/f7d977e4-b705-4e3d-a079-ce78db8b12d6/thumbnail/640x360/24c4766fcb6f22a9b45d34ada9757a2e/sprint-

gettyimages-154162440.jpg#)

#### 10 states file suit to block T-Mobile merger with Sprint

Deal to combine two of the largest wireless carriers would cost subscribers at
least $4.5 billion per year, states claim

7H ago

More in Technology

### Science

More Science

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/10/09/a70bf942-65b2-4a3f-b390-3c3771143675/thumbnail/640x360g2/11152eac7d34c36ac17adae98b3904f5/istock-524154682.jpg#)

#### Study: Nitrates in drinking water linked to cancers

Environmental Working Group says the chemicals could be to blame for over
12,000 cases of cancer in the U.S. each year

6H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/06/23/f02e2f90-01fe-4bd8-9c56-790177f1cc0a/thumbnail/640x360/688af4ccff93ad6d3a7ecfa6b8cc7428/coral-

rock-full-of-life-mauricio-handler-620.jpg#)

#### Study: One-sixth of marine life at risk from climate change

The study argues losses could be offset by a reduction in carbon pollution

8H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/8d98a7f7-6868-45aa-

bf1d-b4324d48aafb/thumbnail/640x360/384c839396bc797fc87f8cd2d3b4dc47/plastic-

gettyimages-941859784.jpg#)

#### Canada to ban single-use plastics as early as 2021

Inspired by an earlier EU move, Canada's government may ban items like plastic
bags, water bottles, straws and earbuds

9H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/09bafbbb-

bfdf-4624-bb9a-8419cccd80be/thumbnail/640x360/a17c255a6a449127cf37a92e40506e9f/zombie-

snake.jpg#)

#### "Zombie snake" found in U.S. can roll over and play dead

To deter predators, the snake goes belly up and opens its mouth to "play
dead," but it's all just a very dramatic act

9H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/11/45b75684-3c9f-42e9-a4c4-8342a45cb1f4/thumbnail/640x360g8/adafb8b89b64fa48c75df5c19347f5fc/041119-moon.jpg#)

#### Unknown mass larger than Hawaii discovered on moon

Scientist think it could be leftover metal from a previous asteroid strike

11H ago

More in Science

### Health

More Health

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/12/cf1b3896-0396-48b9-9a01-1bc2bfb9ad7d/thumbnail/640x360/8686cb5071e18b61877b7011c99069cb/ap-00050102235.jpg#)

#### Jail on lockdown due to mumps outbreak

Jail officials said the outbreak involves inmates in the general population
and not ICE detainees

13M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/05/12/224eb2d4-610f-4faa-947e-701fe18a9b25/thumbnail/640x360/121409b83fba1fd04c2a0b3eb7fc2c7b/ap-17132571185428.jpg#)

#### Uganda confirms first Ebola case outside outbreak in Congo

A child in Uganda has tested positive for Ebola in the first cross-border case
of the deadly virus since an outbreak started in neighboring Congo last year

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/10/09/a70bf942-65b2-4a3f-b390-3c3771143675/thumbnail/640x360g2/11152eac7d34c36ac17adae98b3904f5/istock-524154682.jpg#)

#### Study: Nitrates in drinking water linked to cancers

Environmental Working Group says the chemicals could be to blame for over
12,000 cases of cancer in the U.S. each year

6H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/0ed8455d-87a2-49ca-

ae22-df5c003165ba/thumbnail/640x360/484556e8c9b4a1996f1adb5e71d4dc33/0611-ctm-

elderhood-aronson-1871308-640x360.jpg#)

#### "Elderhood" author on why older people are happier

We should "look at the final third of life with the same concern, curiosity,
creativity, and rigor as we view the first two-thirds," Dr. Louise Aronson
writes

8H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/71df1ce4-b4ee-4586-bdd9-6e8e6499bac5/thumbnail/640x360/8637a2ebdf07cd7dbc7ec05e79190041/ap-19162542641934.jpg#)

#### Jon Stewart to House: "You should be ashamed of yourselves"

"Accountability appears to not be something that occurs in this chamber,"
Stewart admonished at hearing on 9/11 responders bill

1H ago

More in Health

### MoneyWatch

More MoneyWatch

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/23/f5c15d92-a9c9-4e6d-9482-d804fae1f153/thumbnail/640x360/0c331a88003977fe89c1fe682ce6e8fa/gettyimages-512015968.jpg#)

#### Facebook will pay users for info on their app usage

A new app, called Study, is the social network's third attempt to get users to
knowingly share this personal data

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/04/0a28f2a1-489f-4f32-891f-62d118a599d1/thumbnail/640x360/4eb9a25a288c84b22dd08ac66e1f5b78/rts256q3.jpg#)

#### Elon Musk: Buying gasoline car like "riding a horse and using a flip

phone"

Can Tesla ever be consistently profitable? Musk insisted to shareholders that
public policy is on the company's side

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/03/07/644cf87c-aa94-4f87-bd40-23b19e960de9/thumbnail/640x360/e546206c2b7eb998a069783b5e5ac98d/0307-social-

mcdonalds-1516698-640x360.jpg#)

#### Senators tell McDonald's: Franchisees need harassment policies

Lawmakers say the fast-food chain must do more to protect workers at more than
14,000 locations across U.S.

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/03/29/c3477bfd-b200-41e2-a945-f28ff27acc56/thumbnail/640x360/fa92dac886751d317334310a099d7165/rifle.jpg#)

#### Gun seller United Sporting goes bust, partly blaming Trump's election

The 85-year-old company anticipated that increased weapons sales would follow
a victory by Hillary Clinton in 2016

6H ago

More in MoneyWatch

### Crime

More Crime

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/74e7f78b-f5de-4d1d-8a78-a201253b7f96/thumbnail/640x360/fb33f3f43169a071436b9ed9b277573b/centralfivethumb-1871705-640x360.jpg#)

#### Crime

#### Central Park Five prosecutor disputes series

Just weeks after the release of the Netflix miniseries about five teenagers
accused of rape in 1989, the investigating prosecutor went on the attack. In
an op-ed, Linda Fairstein said "When They See Us" is full of "falsehoods."
Michelle Miller reports.

1H ago 02:00

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/02/19/16b15989-2e32-4aef-847b-b8b444a2468c/thumbnail/640x360g2/a60793a0730b4d941ffe910d7d8c2d21/n-korea-

ap-17046196133744.jpg#)

#### Kim Jong Un's murdered half-brother accused of being a CIA informant

Kim Jong Nam was killed when two women came up behind him at a Malaysian
airport, and rubbed chemicals over his face

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/7df587bc-4304-4f99-a115-4b93d021c02b/thumbnail/640x360/5dc217fc946c64a3dcabe934b7587c86/calf-

being-kicked-1559784575892-jpg-7357159-ver1-0-1280-720.jpg#)

#### 3 charged in connection with Fair Oaks Farms animal abuse video

Officials said other persons of interest are being interviewed​; the
investigation is still considered active

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/9b84ce4a-98dc-41a3-a577-c53382acaabc/thumbnail/640x360/9221ce9373c9d3836f6363a6aba16641/ap-19140701756996.jpg#)

#### Judge declares mistrial on 8 charges against Kellen Winslow Jr.

The judge also denied a defense motion to dismiss the undecided allegations
involving the alleged rapes of a hitchhiker and an unconscious teen

6H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/5747521a-2115-47dc-a64e-69626603871d/thumbnail/640x360/6d81c64bf11df61455b8003f70b56d36/gettyimages-520447856.jpg#)

#### David Ortiz has more surgery in Boston after shooting

Ortiz, 43, is expected to stay in intensive care for at least 48 hours

8H ago

More in Crime

### Space

More Space

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/11/45b75684-3c9f-42e9-a4c4-8342a45cb1f4/thumbnail/640x360g8/adafb8b89b64fa48c75df5c19347f5fc/041119-moon.jpg#)

#### Unknown mass larger than Hawaii discovered on moon

Scientist think it could be leftover metal from a previous asteroid strike

11H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/07/17/2168b564-9b66-426d-af23-038e963562d1/thumbnail/640x360/57e8d5318ce9acddcf6075a2e12f431f/071718-jupiter.jpg#)

#### Tonight is the best night of 2019 to see Jupiter

NASA has a message for space lovers this month: Look up

Jun 10

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/12/11/824fa766-8267-43d9-8bd5-b1c23ae5c56c/thumbnail/640x360g2/fbeb1dbe65e725e3cac49192cb60558c/121117-trump.jpg#)

#### Trump criticizes NASA moon plans he approved

In a tweet, the president disparaged NASA's moon mission plan that his
administration had endorsed

Jun 7

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/ca120298-21fb-475e-b67b-d18d0777e5c0/thumbnail/640x360/dbe3eb37c29ce04f1f0efb45996208f9/cbsn-

fusion-space-watch-nasa-to-allow-private-citizens-on-the-international-space-

station-thumbnail-1869451-640x360.jpg#)

#### NASA to allow private astronauts on space station

NASA's plan could make way for visits by private-sector astronauts to the
International Space Station as early as next year

Jun 7

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/ca120298-21fb-475e-b67b-d18d0777e5c0/thumbnail/640x360/dbe3eb37c29ce04f1f0efb45996208f9/cbsn-

fusion-space-watch-nasa-to-allow-private-citizens-on-the-international-space-

station-thumbnail-1869451-640x360.jpg#)

#### NASA opening access to space station

CBS News space consultant Bill Harwood joins CBSN to discuss NASA's
announcement that commercial astronauts will be allowed to travel to the
International Space Station starting next year.

Jun 7 06:04

More in Space

### Latest Galleries

More Latest Galleries

![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/09/e5016bf3-eff3-43ad-

bd9c-b6aad1d9e5fd/thumbnail/640x360/66bdfd2317fc3070b93a56b16cd43890/lucyliugetty.jpg#)

#### Tony Awards 2019: Red carpet looks from your favorite stars

See Broadway stars walk the red carpet at Radio City Music Hall in New York
City at the 73rd Annual Tony Awards

Jun 9 39 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/b1931ab7-67f9-4d03-9a69-36ff03cecb38/thumbnail/640x360/7356be26a26595445c830fe1c8e271f3/closs-

evidence-bed.jpg#)

#### Jayme Closs case: Recently released evidence photos

At Jake Patterson's sentencing hearing, prosecutors showed a select few
evidence photos to the court and asked that Patterson be sentenced to life in
prison for the murders of Jayme Closs' parents and the 13-year-old's
kidnapping

Jun 8 14 photos

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/03/48c4a063-e100-40c8-93a9-c6480d17316e/thumbnail/640x360/d759c2d8afb8a5aeb85d0e5c0e97084b/summer-

music-2019-garbage-face-the-music-benefit-riviera-theatre-chicago-

il-5202019-b48a7818.jpg#)

#### Summer music 2019

It's summertime - time for music at festivals and venues across the country

Jun 8 35 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/e36c9c2a-fc87-4a2f-9fa4-dbde11783386/thumbnail/640x360/1f543e6018f690a5349c2ae23a6c462d/my-

post-14.png#)

#### 11 photos of former NICU babies show how far they've come

These babies proudly hold photos of their former selves to celebrate their
amazing progress since graduating from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit

Jun 5 11 photos

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/12/12/153393e7-6b65-4524-b6ca-04849c595c03/thumbnail/640x360/1f9df4f8ccdc2e8d9c174fcd344415b5/huisentruit5.jpg#)

#### Evidence photos in the disappearance of Jodi Huisentruit

Jodi Huisentruit, the morning news anchor at Iowa's KIMT-TV was reported
missing on June 27, 1995. Mason City Police are still at work trying to solve
this case 23 years later.

Jun 1 26 photos

More in Latest Galleries

### Popular

More Popular

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/12/8f5d6718-ce44-45c7-807c-4e41f6efd0e9/thumbnail/640x360/5751a1925e801914216a47bf8e2af84d/0530-rnb-

full-1871753-640x360.jpg#)

#### Popular

#### 6/11/19: Red and Blue

House to vote on holding Barr & McGahn in contempt; Amtrak to introduce new
Acela trains in 2021

1H ago 45:53

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/12/df5ea78f-9d41-4edf-9264-b414c9f2ae04/thumbnail/640x360/35004dc596b3872792210026aa28331c/0611-cbsn-

womensoccerwin-cqjcrj-1871786-640x360.jpg#)

#### Record-setting win for the USWNT

The United States women's national team opened its World Cup campaign with a
tournament-record 13-0 win over Thailand on Tuesday. Roger Gonzalez of CBS
Sports, joined CBSN to discuss USWNT's impressive performance, and the team's
battle for equal pay.

updated 7M ago 06:47

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/673bdc9c-64b5-4c2a-b98e-2ef3b1667e95/thumbnail/640x360/8b81443dc93ff9a3b6b61d0e18f28e00/0611-cbsn-

bigtechwash-1871735-640x360.jpg#)

#### Congress holds first hearing on big tech

Congress held its first hearing Tuesday into the investigation into big tech,
and focused on the impact these companies are having on the news industry.
Natalie Brand joins CBSN with more on what these small publishing companies
are fighting for.

1H ago 07:16

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/b4b6c015-f918-41da-8e29-2e9290b47e5e/thumbnail/640x360/953942204576082b966a8163119ba5b0/0611-en-

homelesstoharvard-miller-1871720-640x360.jpg#)

#### Teen speaks about journey to Harvard

One teen's journey to college took an unexpected path. Athena Capo-Battaglia
was living in a homeless shelter with her mom when she found out she earned a
full ride to Harvard University. Michelle Miller has her story.

2H ago 02:12

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/74e7f78b-f5de-4d1d-8a78-a201253b7f96/thumbnail/640x360/fb33f3f43169a071436b9ed9b277573b/centralfivethumb-1871705-640x360.jpg#)

#### Central Park Five prosecutor disputes series

Just weeks after the release of the Netflix miniseries about five teenagers
accused of rape in 1989, the investigating prosecutor went on the attack. In
an op-ed, Linda Fairstein said "When They See Us" is full of "falsehoods."
Michelle Miller reports.

1H ago 02:00

More in Popular

Copyright (C) 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved.

    
        * Privacy Policy
    * Ad Choice
    * Terms of Use
    * Mobile User Agreement
    * About
    * Advertise
    * Closed Captioning
    * CBS News Store
    * Site Map
    * Contact Us
    * Help
    *     *     *     *
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

