

Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

    
        * Tech
    * Finance
    * Politics
    * Strategy
    * Life
    * All
    

##### Tech

    
          * Tech Insider
      * Media
      * Science
      * Transportation
    

##### Finance

    
          * Finance
      * Markets Insider
      * Retail
      * Your Money
    

##### Politics

    
          * Politics
      * Military & Defense
    

##### Strategy

    
          * Strategy
      * Advertising
      * Careers
    

##### Life

    
          * Life
      * Coupons
      * Entertainment
      * Insider Picks
      * Sports
    

##### Featured

    
          * Better Capitalism
      * Embracing Disruption
      * Insider TV
    

##### Subscribe

    
          * BI Intelligence
      * BI Prime
    

##### About BI

    
          * About
      * Careers
      * Contact Us
      * Advertise
      * Contributors FAQ
      * Corporate
      * Corrections Policy
    

##### Follow BI

    
          * Newsletters
      * Events
      * RSS
      * Facebook
      * Twitter
      * Instagram
      * YouTube
      * LinkedIn
    

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

    
        * BUSINESS INSIDER
    * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
    * BI INTELLIGENCE
    

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

    
        * BI Prime
    * Intelligence
    

Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

Edition

International Editions:

    
        * United States US
    

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

    
        * International INTL
    * Deutschland DE
    * Australia AUS
    * France FR
    * India IN
    * Italy IT
    * Japan JP
    * Malaysia MY
    * Netherlands NL
    * Nordic SE
    * Poland PL
    * Singapore SG
    * South Africa ZA
    * Spain ES
    

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click
to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating
different international options."

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

    
        * BUSINESS INSIDER
    * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
    * BI INTELLIGENCE
    
    * Tech Enterprise  Science  advertising  Media  Transportation  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
    * Finance Markets Insider  Retail  Your Money  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
    * Politics Military & Defense  News  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
    * Strategy Careers  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
    * Life Entertainment  Travel  Sports  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
    * All
    * Coupons Target  Walmart  EBay  Nike  Container Store
    

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

    
        * BUSINESS INSIDER
    * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
    * BI INTELLIGENCE
    

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera. * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights
reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

    
        * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
    * Sitemap
    * Disclaimer
    * Commerce Policy
    * Coupons
    * Made in NYC
    * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
    

Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

# As the government shutdown over Trump's border wall rages, a journey along

the entire 1,933-mile US-Mexico border shows the monumental task of securing
it

Michelle Mark, Skye Gould and Andy Kiersz

Jan. 12, 2019, 8:05 PM

Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It symobilizes
a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the ability to send
an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn
icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon Two
crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or
dismiss a notification.

![border wall map full

border](https://amp.businessinsider.com/images/5aeb834119ee862a008b4833-750-353.png)
Securing the US-Mexico border is a daunting task. Skye Gould/Andy
Kiersz/Business Insider

List icon A bulleted list of stacked lines. Double angles pointing left Two
angles facing left, which often indicate, "return to the beginning." Double
angles pointing right Two angles facing right, which often indicate, "advance
to the end."

    
        * The US government is currently shut down because President Donald Trump is demanding billions of dollars to build a wall along the US-Mexico border, and Congress won't fund it. 
    * Of the 1,933 miles along the border, 1,279 miles is unfenced. 
    * Most of the barrier that currently exists, and that the Trump administration has built, isn't the high concrete wall Trump talked about on the campaign trail, and instead resembles a fence.
    

From western California to eastern Texas, across four US states and 24
counties, the 1,933-mile US-Mexico border criss-crosses arid desert, rugged
mountains, and winding rivers.

For 654 of those miles, fencing separates the two countries from each other.

The 7.3 million people who live in the border counties on each side of the
line have watched for years as security grew tighter and illegal crossings
tapered off.

In just the last 12 years, the US government built the barriers, deployed
troops, and started using advanced surveillance technology -- all in an effort
to tame and control some of the wildest and remotest land in the United
States.

In an effort to make good on campaign promises to "build that wall," President
Donald Trump has refused to back down on his demand that Congress allocate
$5.7 billion for the project, plunging the government into a weeks-long
shutdown after Senate Democrats refused to back a spending bill with the wall
funding.

Democrats, who now control the House of Representatives, have long opposed
Trump's wall and placed the blame for the shutdown on Trump.

The shutdown comes amid controversy over US immigration and border policies,
after two young migrant children died in Border Patrol custody last month. The
deaths also come on the heels of outrage over the Trump administration's
family separation policy over the summer, which split thousands of children
from their parents.

With public outrage has growing toward the government's immigration policies,
it's worth taking a look at the complexity of the borderlands to understand
the daunting task of securing them.

From the Pacific Ocean in the west to the Gulf of Mexico in the east, here's
what the entire US-Mexico border looks like.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 1/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## California has stood more defiantly than any other state against Trump's

immigration agenda and his long-promised wall. Yet the Golden State's southern
boundary is one of the most thoroughly fortified along the entire US-Mexico
border.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 2/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Roughly 105 miles of the 140-mile border California shares with Mexico are

walled off by pedestrian fencing or vehicle barriers, beginning on the west
coast with a tall, metal fence that juts into the Pacific Ocean.

Getty Images/John Moore

_Source: GAO analysis of Customs and Border Protection data_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 3/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Though some Trump critics have seized upon his deployment of the National

Guard in California, the San Diego coastline already hosts around 55 guardsman
who assist in "counterdrug missions" and conduct surveillance support.

Reuters/Mike Blake

_Source: USA Today_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 4/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Just a few yards inland from the coast, a large metal door is cut into the

fencing that holds a special significance to the American and Mexican families
who live near the border.

Google Maps

_Sources: The Los Angeles Times, The San Diego Union-Tribune_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 5/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## It's called the "Door of Hope," and it opens into California's Friendship

Park. US officials used to work with Border Angels, a local nonprofit, to host
door-opening events for families separated by the fence to greet and hug one
another.

Brian Houston, who lives in San Diego, kisses his new bride Evelia Reyes, who
lives in Mexico with her daughter Alexis, while Border Patrol agents look on
November 18, 2017. Getty Images/Sandy Huffaker

Door openings have been a recurring event since 2013, allowing families
separated by the border to briefly reunite. Last November, there was even a
controversial marriage ceremony.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 6/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## But Border Patrol announced this year the door will remain closed.

Getty Images/John Moore

The chief of the San Diego Border Patrol sector announced in January that the
door will now be used "for maintenance purposes only," and some suspect that
the unexpected cross-border wedding had something to do with it.

The American groom, Brian Houston, had been convicted for drug smuggling and
couldn't cross into Tijuana to wed his Mexican bride. Yet when Border Patrol
conducted a federal background check on him to participate in the late-2017
ceremony, no red flags came up.

So when news surfaced of Houston's conviction, US officials were livid.

"The agents are upset, feel like they were taken advantage of, feel like they
were duped," said Joshua Wilson, vice president and spokesman for the National
Border Patrol Council Local 1613. "Turns out we provided armed security for a
cartel wedding."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 7/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The closing of the "Door of Hope" was just the latest move in a years-long

trend of permanently sealing up gaps along the California-Tijuana border. One
of the most extreme examples is Smuggler's Gulch, pictured here in 2003.

Associated Press/Denis Poroy

For roughly 100 years, the open canyon was a glut of illegal activity. Scores
of immigrants would cross into the US every night, darting around Border
Patrol agents who were usually outnumbered, and whose radio equipment didn't
work in the ravine.

The canyon served as the perfect running route for smugglers in the 1880s
after the US opened the San Ysidro port of entry just a few miles east. To
avoid paying duties or risk interference from customs officials, people
smuggled everything from cattle, horses, and sheep, to opium, booze, cigars,
and lace undergarments.

Even a century later, the gulch was still ridden with crime. Migrants
illegally crossing the border there were forced to either pay tolls for safe
passage, or endure being robbed, assaulted, or even raped.

But finally, in the early 21st century, the US government had had enough.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 8/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## More than one century, $60 million, and 2 million cubic yards of dirt

later, this is what Smuggler's Gulch looks like now.

Flickr/Romel Jacinto

The canyon, which had spanned roughly 800 feet at its base, is now filled with
a pile of dirt about 180 feet high, and several layers of fencing that span
the top.

Smuggler's Gulch was filled in 2009, the result of a 2005 Bush administration
effort that eventually waived countless state laws and environmental
regulations. Local environmentalists were outraged by the filling, citing the
threatened species, such as jaguar and Sonoran pronghorn, that used to tread
through the area.

But the Bush administration, spurred on by the 9/11 attacks, argued that the
gulch posed a national-security risk, and could potentially allow terrorists
to pass through.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 9/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Just across the border from San Diego, in neighboring Tijuana, is where

passersby can catch a glimpse of the early stages of Trump's long-promised
border wall.

Prototypes seen from the Mexican side of the border in Tijuana, Mexico on
January 27, 2018. Reuters/Jorge Duenes

_Source: Business Insider_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 10/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Eight prototypes were erected near the Otay Mesa point of entry, and

recently underwent a bevy of tactical tests against climbers, diggers, and
breaching equipment.

President Donald Trump reviews border wall prototypes, Tuesday, March 13,
2018, in San Diego. Associated Press/Evan Vucci

Four of the prototypes are concrete and four were built with "other
materials." Several have tubing or metal plates at the top to deter climbers,
and some have the "see through" component Trump requested in the event that
Border Patrol officers are hit with massive "sacks of drugs" catapulted over
the wall.

Though Trump originally said he intended to choose the "best" prototype out of
the eight options, CBP officials have said it's more likely that features from
different prototypes will be mixed and matched with each other, and depend on
the terrain and logistics of specific areas. The thousands of miles of border
is remarkably varied, after all.

Despite the mockery of Trump's "sacks of drugs" comment, the "see-through"
component was "the most important factor" in protecting CBP agents' safety,
Commissioner Kevin McAleenan told a Congressional committee recently.

"If we're going to have a fence or wall right on the border," McAleenan said,
"our agents need to see through it for security."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 11/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## While much of California's southern border is secured by fencing or vehicle

barriers, two main stretches of land have remained somewhat unscathed. One,
the Otay Mountain Wilderness, includes a 3,500-foot mountain peak known for
its steep climb and abundance of tarantulas.

Getty Images/David McNew

Though parts of the Otay Mountain Wilderness remain clear, much of it is
currently intersected by a 3.6-mile steel fence that was constructed in 2008
and cost $57.7 million-- one of the most expensive sectors of barrier along
the entire US-Mexico border.

Despite Border Patrol officials claiming as late as 2006 that no such fencing
would be needed in the Otay Mountain Wilderness, the Bush administration
abruptly reversed course, waiving dozens of environmental laws to construct
the fence.

Local humanitarian groups appeared baffled by the government's reasoning.

"It seems to me, if someone is able to climb the mountains in the Otay
Wilderness, a 15-foot wall will not make a difference," Pedro Rios of San
Diego's American Friends Service Committee said in 2010.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 12/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The Jacumba Mountain Wilderness also occupies a large stretch of bare

borderlands known for their brutal conditions for migrants. Though Border
Patrol agents monitor the area on horseback, the area is vast and remote, and
migrants often die before help arrives.

Getty Images/John McNew

_Source: The Desert Sun_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 13/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Unlike some of the more remote corners of the southern California border,

the sister cities of Calexico and Mexicali are densely populated, inextricably
linked, and happen to lie directly atop the US-Mexico border.

Associated Press/Gregory Bull

Though Calexico on the US side and Mexicali on the Mexico side are separated
by a tall, metal border fence, they share much of their population, culture,
history, and economy.

Calexico is mostly populated by Hispanic people, and often sees Mexican
residents commute to the US side for work each day. Meanwhile, Mexicali sees a
significant influx of American tourists and patients seeking cheaper
healthcare services.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 14/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Like California, Arizona is also covered almost entirely by some form of

manmade barrier.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 15/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## For instance, San Luis, Arizona, is walled off from San Luis Rio Colorado

in Mexico by heavily fortified barricades, including a triple-layered fence in
certain parts.

Google Earth; Skye Gould/Business Insider

Like the closely knit relationship between Calexico and Mexicali, San Luis
shares much of its population and economy with the neighboring San Luis Rio
Colorado.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 16/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Throughout much of the Sonoran Desert, which spans Arizona's southern

border, the barriers consist solely of short fence posts that prevent vehicles
from crossing, but that people can easily step over.

Associated Press/Guillermo Arias

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 17/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The small barriers intersect much of the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife

Refuge and the Tohono O'Odham Nation Reservation, which are known for their
extreme desert conditions and have seen growing numbers of migrant deaths in
recent years.

Getty Images/John Moore

Humane Borders, a local nonprofit that has been working alongside the Pima
County Office of the Medical Examiner, has been mapping the locations of
migrant deaths, many of which occur due to exposure or dehydration in the dry,
unbearably hot desert.

"Over the last few years, we have seen a trend of more crossing in the extreme
parts of the west desert," Dinah Bear, the board chair of the nonprofit Humane
Borders, told Business Insider.

Highs in the summer average 100 degrees Fahrenheit, with records reaching up
to 117 degrees Fahrenheit.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 18/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Most of the corpses found in Arizona in 2018 so far were discovered near

the Tohono O'Odham Nation Reservation.

Humane Borders

_Source: Humane Borders and the Pima County Office of the Medical Examiner_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 19/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Humane Borders manages dozens of water stations scattered across the

state's southern border near Tucson, where dehydrated and often desperate
migrants seek humanitarian aid, or even try to be rescued by Border Patrol
agents.

Getty Images/John Moore

Though the group still some migrants using its water stations, Bear said she's
observed a major decline in the number of people crossing the border.

Whereas it was common in the 1990s to see large groups of 20, 30, or even 40
migrants at a time, Bear said, Humane Borders volunteers typically only see
one or two people at a time these days.

"Most of the migrants now don't come from Mexico. They come from Central
America, which is much further," Bear said. "So by the time they get to the
border, they're already in pretty bad shape; they've just been traveling from
much further away."

Bear said it's now far more common for the nonprofit to find human remains
than to find living migrants.

"When we do see a migrant, on the very few occasions we do see migrants these
days, inevitably they ask us to call the Border Patrol, because they are in
really bad shape and they need help," she said.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 20/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Further to the east, rising up from Arizona's desert floor, is an

archipelago of mountainous borderlands called the Sky Islands, which sustain
thousands of different types of species that couldn't survive just miles away
in the Sonoran Desert.

Getty Images/John Moore

_Source: Scientific American_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 21/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## It's this part of Arizona that has the most to lose from the barrier

construction that's been speeding up in recent years. Border walls don't just
separate people — they separate plants and animals, too.

Getty Images/John Moore

Scientists and wildlife officials have been watching trends slowly unfold in
recent years as more and more border fencing has gone up.

Conservationists have observed only three jaguars that have wandered into
Arizona from Mexico since 2012, though they were commonplace in the state's
deserts decades ago.

Other large mammals such as mountain lions, bighorn sheep, and bears also
inhabit the Sky Islands and would likely face displacement or habitat
disruption if the government extends border fencing or construct new wall
around the area.

One University of Arizona wildlife biologist, Aaron Flesch, said an unbroken
border wall would likely entirely destroy the ongoing conservation efforts for
endangered cats.

"It would basically give us no avenue for recovery," he told Scientific
American.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 22/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## But just a few miles from the mountain range, border security has become a

top issue for Arizona's ranchers, who own private land along the state's
southern border. Though many dislike the idea of a massive border wall cutting
through their properties, some have long been calling on the federal
government to help them protect their land.

Associated Press/Astrid Galvan

Arizona rancher John Ladd is one such landowner who frequently speaks to the
media about the difficulties in securing his 16,000-acre ranch, which has been
in his family for 122 years.

Ladd has said he supports Trump's idea for a wall -- in certain places -- but
he also knows it won't be sufficient on its own in protecting his property.

He said he has frequently endured drug smugglers breaching the existing
18-foot steel fence on his land by using power tools, or even ramming their
vehicles through. He has also been frustrated by migrants and Border Patrol
agents alike, who he says saunter through his land at will.

"By God, it's time we get serious. And if it takes the military, then do it,"
he told The Tucson Sentinel upon learning of Trump's plan to deploy the
National Guard to the border.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 23/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## New Mexico has become a leading frontier in the Trump administration's

efforts to secure the border. Though its 180-mile border is currently sealed
mostly just by short vehicle barriers, construction is already underway on new
replacement fencing.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Sources: Business Insider, __Reveal from The Center for Investigative
Reporting and OpenStreetMap contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 24/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The replacement wall, authorized by the Trump administration, doesn't quite

match the stature or complexity of the eight border-wall prototypes built in
California. But officials have insisted that the bollard-style wall was the
same one Trump promised voters throughout his campaign.

Customs and Border Protection

Despite his persistence, Trump has run into numerous obstacles in constructing
his wall-- the most significant being Congress' reluctance to fund it.

Lawmakers in March shot down Trump's request to provide $25 billion for the
wall, much to his annoyance. Instead, Congress supplied only $1.6 billion for
border security and fencing similar to what already exists along the border.

By December, Trump asked for an additional $5 billion to build more wall.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 25/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Construction on the new wall wrapped up in November 2018 and cost $73.3

million — all for just one 20-mile stretch of border territory.

Customs and Border Protection/Mani Albrecht

Officials said in April 2018 that the wall would be 18 feet, including a
5-foot anti-climbing plate at the top. The concrete, filled with rebar, delves
6 feet into the ground with an additional 2 feet of concrete positioned below.

Despite skepticism from reporters during the groundbreaking event last month,
Border Patrol officials insisted that the bollard-style fencing was, indeed,
"the president's border wall."

_Source: KOAT_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 26/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## New Mexico was also among the first to accept Trump's funding for a

National Guard deployment to the border, and authorized a total of 250, though
the state's Republican governor has since cut that number down to 150.

Members of the Georgia National Guard man an Entry Identification Team station
along the border with Mexico near Deming, N.M., Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2006.
Associated Press/Ric Feld

So far, around 80 troops have already been deployed in the state, and their
tasks will mostly consist of helping federal law-enforcement officials with
aerial and surveillance support, as well as road and vehicle maintenance.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 27/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Texas is the state with by far the longest stretch of land bordering Mexico

— yet 91% of its border has no man-made barrier at all.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 28/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Just 115 miles of the state's 1,241 miles are fenced. The city of El Paso

lies along the longest stretch of fencing.

Reuters/Tomas Bravo

_Source: Texas Monthly_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 29/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The length of the Texas' border travels along the Rio Grande River,

creating a jagged, twisting natural barrier that creates logistical problems
both for border-crossers and the US authorities that patrol the area.

Google Earth; Skye Gould/Business Insider

A host of laws and regulations -- from international treaties to flood-zone
requirements -- make wall-construction along the Texas-Mexico border a
daunting task.

All those obstacles mean that when fencing does get constructed, it usually
ends up being placed far inland, cutting across private property. And Texas
landowners haven't taken too kindly in the past to government officials
attempting to co-opt their land.

"We do have to go, unfortunately, to court proceedings in some cases," CBP
Commissioner Kevin McAleenan told a Congressional committee in April.

The complexities of the cases go far beyond pricing disputes with the
landowners, and often devolve into tedious court battles over who even owns
the land, and how to tell, McAleenan said.

"Some of the deeds go back to Spanish land grants and are very complex to
really figure out who owns the land," he said. "So that's a multi-stage
process; we try to do it in a collaborative and open, consultative manner."

He added that CBP intends to work on major real-estate planning this year to
pave the way for future border-wall construction.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 30/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The challenges and dangers inherent in patrolling the Texas border came to

a head late last year after the death of Border Patrol agent Rogelio Martinez
near Van Horn, Texas, some 30 miles inland.

Google Earth

Martinez, 36, died November 18 shortly after first responders found him and
his partner badly injured near a drainage culvert along Interstate 10 in Van
Horn, Texas. Authorities said both men suffered traumatic head injuries, and
that Martinez's partner has no memory of the incident.

Top Republicans -- including President Donald Trump, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas,
and the state's Gov. Greg Abbot -- immediately seized on Martinez's death as
evidence that the US-Mexico border is insufficiently secured. They called his
death an "attack" or an "ambush."

"Border Patrol Officer killed at Southern Border, another badly hurt," Trump
tweeted November 19. "We will seek out and bring to justice those responsible.
We will, and must, build the Wall!"

Yet, the FBI and local authorities have said they found no evidence to suggest
the men were attacked. Instead, Culberson County Sheriff Oscar Carrillo has
said it appears far more likely that Martinez and his partner fell into the
culvert accidentally, perhaps after being side-swiped by a tractor-trailer.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 31/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## One of the wildest areas of Texas, which holds some of the most treasured

conservation areas on the continent, is Big Bend National Park, which lies in
the jagged U-bend in the middle of the Texas-Mexico border.

Getty Images/John Moore

The massive, 1,125-square-mile park currently contains no manmade barriers,
and is home to several highly precarious ecosystems that have undergone
intense conservation efforts in recent years.

But as one of the largest chunks of land in Texas owned by the federal
government rather than private landowners, it's considered a prime spot for
Trump's wall to go.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 32/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## The park contains river, mountain, and desert ecosystems that sustain

fragile populations of black bears and other large mammals, which are slowly
recovering from an over-hunting epidemic that began back in the 1950s.

Tourists on rafts emerge from Heath Canyon, carved by the Rio Grande through
Big Bend National Park, Texas on March 25, 2011. Associated Press/Michael
Graczyk

A wall, or any type of manmade barrier, could wreck decades of work to
preserve the natural landscape and protect the hundreds of species that live
within the park, conservationists say.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 33/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Tourists who come for the scenery in Big Bend often also pay a visit to

Boquillas Del Carmen, a tiny Mexican village that lies across the Rio Grande
and is accessible only by boat.

Associated Press/Christopher Sherman

The village is home to just 140 people, who largely subsist on a tourist
economy, selling handcrafted artwork and trinkets to Americans who venture
across the river.

Tourists are typically charged $5 for a ride across the US-Mexico border in a
rowboat, and then they take a pickup truck or a donkey for the one-mile
journey into town. Visitors check in with Mexican customs at a small white
trailer before entering Boquillas Del Carmen.

The residents of Boquillas have long feared that Trump's wall could cut off
the flow of tourists, who essentially provide their only income.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 34/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Southeastern Texas is one of the Trump administration's highest priorities

along the entire US-Mexico border.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 35/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Some Texans have been waiting so long for the government to secure the

border, they've taken matters into their own hands. Throughout Texas, as well
as the other border states, armed civilians have formed volunteer groups to
patrol the borderlands and either detain or report suspected illegal border-
crossers to Border Patrol.

Civilian border watchers scout a ranch near Indio, Texas on Sept. 12, 2006.
Associated Press/Eric Gay

One such group is the Texas Border Volunteers, who began in 2006 as an
offshoot of the then-popular Minutemen patrol groups.

TBV spokesman Jim Gibson told Business Insider that the group has observed a
massive downturn in border-crossing traffic in recent years. They attribute
the change less to Trump's tough-talk on border security, and more to the
enhanced technology that Border Patrol agents and state authorities now use.

For TBV, which patrols private lands some 70 miles inland near Falfurrias, the
heightened technology means that Border Patrol is "responding quicker" to
migrant traffic, which "never gets a chance to make it [to] where we're at."

Gibson said the technology, combined with increased manpower of the Border
Patrol and National Guard troops, will ultimately make more of a difference in
securing the border than any physical wall could.

"This is my view: The physical barrier is only one aspect of what's going to
be required to fix the problem," Gibson said. "Until our legislatures start to
deal with issues like employment, social services, birthright citizenship, and
all the other magnets that attract people here in the first place, they'll
find a way to get here."

He continued: "Let's be realistic. Some people envision this wall as a solid
barrier that runs from one end of the border to the other. That's never going
to happen."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 36/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Though Border Patrol agents are always nearby — there's even a checkpoint

near the group in Falfurrias — the group says they're able to assist the
agents by spotting potential migrants and smugglers as they make their way
through private property.

Rancher Lavoyger Durham checks a 55-gallon he keeps filled with water for
migrants who find themselves on his ranch, near Falfurrias, Texas on Aug. 23,
2013\. Associated Press/Eric Gay

Gibson said TBV volunteers have to abide by several rules before they can
join. The first is that they have to have a concealed handgun license, another
is that they can only carry handguns -- absolutely no long guns, which could
unnecessarily intimidate both migrants and landowners, and could result in a
serious injury.

But the most important rule for volunteers is that they can never apprehend
people themselves. Instead, they radio the location of suspected migrants to
Border Patrol agents, and only approach the migrants if they appear to be in
desperate need of help.

Gibson said some volunteers were once caught tying up migrants while they
waited for Border Patrol to arrive -- and those volunteers were dismissed from
the group immediately.

"Incidents like that is what can cause not only us to get kicked off the
properties, but for law-enforcement to say, 'Screw you, we're not working with
you," Gibson said.

The group takes their work seriously. And while Gibson said he personally
holds no animosity towards migrants seeking a better life in the US, he and
others in the group believe crossing the border unlawfully is a simple matter
of right and wrong.

"The border's a problem, and this is an opportunity for us to be proactive and
do something that might help," Gibson said. "Now, we're not a silver bullet --
we're not solving everything -- but it's a chance for us to do something
productive, helping out law enforcement, helping the land owners, and we take
a lot of satisfaction in that."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 37/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## As the Trump administration continues to demand that Congress fund the

border wall, areas such as the Bentsen-Rio Grande Valley State Park are
growing increasingly concerned about the effects a large concrete barrier
would have on their landscapes.

Google Earth

The Bentsen-Rio Grande Valley State Park has already been flagged as a
location the Trump administration intends to wall off.

According to documents obtained by the Texas Observer, the US Army Corps of
Engineers has already plotted out a map showing 15 different segments where
the Trump administration plans to erect roughly 33 miles of wall.

In the Bentsen-Rio park's case, the planned wall would bisect the 797-acre
nature preserve.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 38/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## But the neighboring Santa Ana Wildlife Refuge has managed to escape the

same fate — in a $1.6 trillion spending package Congress approved earlier this
year, the lawmakers explicitly said Santa Ana would be exempt from any new
border-wall construction.

Associated Press/Eric Gay

The US Army Corps of Engineers initially flagged the three-mile wildlife
refuge as one of the easiest spots to erect a border wall, since the land is
already owned by the federal government.

But Congress listened to conservationists concerns about destroying a large
chunk of natural land for the sake of a border wall.

The exemption shows the highly fraught political process behind regulating the
wall's construction.

While environmentalists pursue whatever victories they can, they have
complained of the arbitrariness of lawmakers' decisions on what land is deemed
worthy of conservation, and what isn't.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 39/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Perhaps the most notorious segment of the entire US-Mexico border is the

Rio Grande Valley, which in recent years has become a hotspot for migrants and
drug smugglers. National Guard troops deployed there at Trump's request.

Getty Images/John Moore

Though overall border-crossing arrests have been plummeting for years under
both the Obama and Trump administrations, the Rio Grande Valley is where much
of the illegal activity take places along the border.

CBP Commissioner Kevin McAleenan told Congress recently that the valley has
become by far the agency's highest priority.

"That's where we've seen 50% of traffic crossing our border. Both an increase
in family units and children, but also hard narcotics … an increase in
hardened criminals and smugglers," McAleenan said.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 40/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## An ongoing problem with any border barriers are weak spots — even in the

fenced-off parts of the Texas border, the barriers are dotted with major gaps
that undermine the entire structure.

Google Earth; Skye Gould/Business Insider

_Source: Google Earth_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 41/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Perhaps the best example of the economic impact of border barriers can be

seen at the Fort Brown Memorial Golf Course near Brownsville, Texas, which
sits in what is essentially a border dead-zone, caught between Mexico and the
US.

Google Earth; Skye Gould/Business Insider

The golf course was popular among Mexican-Americans for decades, but in 2006
found itself in a tight spot after Congress passed the Secure Fences Act.

When the Homeland Security Department eventually began constructing the border
fencing several years later, they chose a spot on the levee, leaving the
course trapped outside the fence, on the Mexican side.

The move had a direct impact on the business, and after roughly 50 years of
operation, the golf course shut its doors for the last time in 2015.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 42/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Putting a border wall on every one of the 1,279 unfenced miles of the

1,933-mile border is easier said than done.

Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors; Skye Gould/Andy Kiersz/Business Insider

_Source: Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting and OpenStreetMap
contributors_

Triangle icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an
expandable section, or sometimes playable media. Previous 1/ Next Triangle
icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an expandable
section, or sometimes playable media.

### SEE ALSO: The 8-year-old migrant boy who died on Christmas Eve was held

in US custody for nearly a week — against Border Patrol's own rules

### DON'T MISS: The Trump administration just released new photos of 'the

president's border wall' — and it looks more like a fence

More: Features BI Graphics Border Wall US-Mexico border

    
        * California
    * Arizona
    * New Mexico
    * Texas
    * Donald Trump
    * National Guard
    * Politics Slideshow
    * Government Shutdown 2018
    

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options.

### Popular

#### FedEx no longer will fly your Amazon packages — and now pressure is

mounting on the company as it gears up its in-house air-freight network

### Popular

#### Delta sent a private plane to pick up 41 students after a canceled

American Airlines flight left them stranded in Oklahoma City

### Popular

#### Alex Morgan comforted a crying Thai player after Team USA's 13-0

smackdown of Thailand in its first match of the World Cup

### Popular

#### Costco employees reveal how much they really make

### Popular

#### People are defending Nike after a journalist slammed the sportswear

brand for an 'immense, gargantuan' plus-size mannequin

Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an
open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play button
in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

Also check out: * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

    
        * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
    * Sitemap
    * Disclaimer
    * Commerce Policy
    * Coupons
    * Made in NYC
    * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
    

Edition

International Editions:

    
        * United States US
    

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

    
        * International INTL
    * Deutschland DE
    * Australia AUS
    * France FR
    * India IN
    * Italy IT
    * Japan JP
    * Malaysia MY
    * Netherlands NL
    * Nordic SE
    * Poland PL
    * Singapore SG
    * South Africa ZA
    * Spain ES
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

