

Giffords Law Center To Prevent Gun Violence

Facebook Twitter Instagram

Search Icon

Sign Up Donate

__Menu

    
        * ![giffords-law-center-menu-logo](https://lawcenter.giffords.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/giffords-law-center-menu-logo.svg)
    * Search
      *       * __Close
    * Gun Laws
    
      *         * Policy Areas
          *             * BACKGROUND CHECKS
              * Universal Background Checks
              * NICS & Reporting Procedures
              * Background Check Procedures
              * Mental Health Reporting
              * Interstate & Online Gun Sales
            * WHO CAN HAVE A GUN
              * Categories of Prohibited People
              * Domestic Violence & Firearms
              * Extreme Risk Protection Orders
              * Terrorist Watchlist
              * Minimum Age
              * Disarming Prohibited People
            * GUN SALES
              * Gun Dealers
              * Maintaining Records
              * Waiting Periods
              * Gun Shows
          *             * OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
              * Licensing
              * Registration
              * Reporting Lost & Stolen Firearms
            * CHILD & CONSUMER SAFETY
              * Child Access Prevention
              * Safe Storage
              * Smart Guns
              * Design Safety Standards
              * Non-powder & Toy Guns
            * GUNS IN PUBLIC
              * Concealed Carry
              * Open Carry
              * “Stand Your Ground” Laws
              * Guns in Schools
              * Location Restrictions
          *             * HARDWARE & AMMUNITION
              * Assault Weapons
              * Large Capacity Magazines
              * Ammunition Regulation
              * Ghost Guns
              * Machine Guns & 50-Caliber
              * Silencers
            * CRIME GUNS
              * Trafficking & Straw Purchasing
              * Bulk Gun Purchases
              * Microstamping & Ballistics
            * OTHER LAWS & POLICIES
              * Gun Industry Immunity
              * Preemption of Local Laws
              * Intervention Strategies
          *  __Close
        * The Second Amendment
          *             * Second Amendment Basics
            * The Supreme Court & the Second Amendment
            * The _Heller_ Decision and What It Means
            * Understanding _McDonald v. Chicago_
            * Post- _Heller_ Litigation Summary
            * Second Amendment Courtwatch
            * Amicus Briefs
          *  __Close
        * Federal Law
          *             * BACKGROUND CHECKS
              * Universal Background Checks
              * NICS & Reporting Procedures
              * Background Check Procedures
              * Mental Health Reporting
              * Interstate & Online Gun Sales
            * WHO CAN HAVE A GUN
              * Categories of Prohibited People
              * Domestic Violence & Firearms
              * Extreme Risk Protection Orders
              * Terrorist Watchlist
              * Minimum Age
              * Disarming Prohibited People
            * GUN SALES
              * Gun Dealers
              * Maintaining Records
              * Waiting Periods
              * Gun Shows
          *             * OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
              * Licensing
              * Registration
              * Reporting Lost & Stolen Firearms
            * CHILD & CONSUMER SAFETY
              * Child Access Prevention
              * Safe Storage
              * Smart Guns
              * Design Safety Standards
              * Non-powder & Toy Guns
            * GUNS IN PUBLIC
              * Concealed Carry
              * Open Carry
              * “Stand Your Ground” Laws
              * Guns in Schools
              * Location Restrictions
          *             * HARDWARE & AMMUNITION
              * Assault Weapons
              * Large Capacity Magazines
              * Ammunition Regulation
              * Ghost Guns
              * Machine Guns & 50-Caliber
              * Silencers
            * CRIME GUNS
              * Trafficking & Straw Purchasing
              * Bulk Gun Purchases
              * Microstamping & Ballistics
            * OTHER LAWS & POLICIES
              * Gun Industry Immunity
              * Preemption of Local Laws
              * Federal Powers
              * Key Federal Regulation Acts
              * Tiahrt Amendments
          *  __Close
        * State Law
          *             * Alabama
            * Alaska
            * Arizona
            * Arkansas
            * California
            * Colorado
            * Connecticut
            * Delaware
            * Florida
            * Georgia
            * Hawaii
            * Idaho
            * Illinois
            * Indiana
            * Iowa
            * Kansas
            * Kentucky
            * Louisiana
            * Maine
          *             * Maryland
            * Massachusetts
            * Michigan
            * Minnesota
            * Mississippi
            * Missouri
            * Montana
            * Nebraska
            * Nevada
            * New Hampshire
            * New Jersey
            * New Mexico
            * New York
            * North Carolina
            * North Dakota
            * Ohio
            * Oklahoma
            * Oregon
            * Pennsylvania
          *             * Rhode Island
            * South Carolina
            * South Dakota
            * Tennessee
            * Texas
            * Utah
            * Vermont
            * Virginia
            * Washington
            * West Virginia
            * Wisconsin
            * Wyoming
            * District of Columbia
          *  __Close
    

__Close

    
        * Facts
    
      * The data speaks for itself—states with safer gun laws have fewer deadly shootings per capita than states with weak laws.
    
      *         * STATISTICS
        * POLLING
        * RESEARCH
    

__Close

    
        * Resources
    
      * Our attorneys maintain comprehensive information on firearms policy and produce leading-edge legislative analysis, like our annual Gun Law Scorecard.
    
      *         * TRENDWATCH
        * MODEL LAWS
        * GUN LAW SCORECARD
        * AMICUS BRIEFS
      *         * BLOG
        * PUBLICATIONS
        * FACTSHEETS
        * COST OF GUN VIOLENCE
    

__Close

    
        * Media
    
      * Have a media request for one of our legal experts? Drop us a line at [email protected].
    
    
    
      *         * MEDIA HOME
        * PRESS RELEASES
        * NEWS
      *  __Close
    
    * About
    
      * Giffords Law Center has 25 years of experience fighting for the laws, policies, and programs proven to save lives from gun violence.
    
      *         * MISSION
        * HISTORY
        * OUR TEAM
        * OUR BOARD
      *         * CONTACT US
        * PRO BONO PARTNERS
        * CAREERS & INTERNSHIPS
        * ANNUAL REPORTS
    

__Close

    
        * Take Action
    
      * Help us enact solutions to protect our communities from senseless gunfire. Join Giffords Law Center today.
    
      *         * JOIN
        * VOLUNTEER
        * ANNIVERSARY DINNER
      *         * GIVE
    

__Close

# Statistics on Gun Deaths & Injuries

In 2010, guns took the lives of 31,076 Americans in homicides, suicides and
unintentional shootings. This is the equivalent of more than 85 deaths **each
day** and more than three deaths **each hour**.1

73,505 Americans were treated in hospital emergency departments for non-fatal
gunshot wounds in 2010.2

Firearms were the third-leading cause of injury-related deaths nationwide in
2010, following poisoning and motor vehicle accidents.3

Between 1955 and 1975, the Vietnam War killed over 58,000 American soldiers –
less than the number of civilians killed with guns in the U.S. in an average
two-year period.4

In the first seven years of the U.S.-Iraq War, over 4,400 American soldiers
were killed. Almost as many civilians are killed with guns in the U.S.,
however, _every seven weeks_.5

**Homicide**

Guns were used in 11,078 homicides in the U.S. in 2010, comprising almost 35%
of all gun deaths, and over 68% of all homicides.6

On average, 33 gun homicides were committed each day for the years 2005-2010.7

Regions and states with higher rates of gun ownership have significantly
higher rates of homicide than states with lower rates of gun ownership.8

Where guns are prevalent, there are significantly more homicides, particularly
gun homicides.9

**Suicide**

Firearms were used in 19,392 suicides in the U.S. in 2010, constituting almost
62% of all gun deaths.10

Over 50% of all suicides are committed with a firearm.11

On average, 49 gun suicides were committed each day for the years 2005-2010.12

White males, about 40% of the U.S. population, accounted for over 80% of
firearm suicides in 2010.13

A study of California handgun purchasers found that in the first year after
the purchase of a handgun, suicide was the leading cause of death among the
purchasers.14

Firearms were used in nearly 44% of suicide deaths among persons under age 25
in 2010.15

More than 75% of guns used in suicide attempts and unintentional injuries of
0-19 year-olds were stored in the residence of the victim, a relative, or a
friend.16

The risk of suicide increases in homes where guns are kept loaded and/or
unlocked.17

**Unintentional Deaths and Injuries**

In 2010, unintentional firearm injuries caused the deaths of 606 people.18

From 2005-2010, almost 3,800 people in the U.S. died from unintentional
shootings.19

Over 1,300 victims of unintentional shootings for the period 2005–2010 were
under 25 years of age.20

People of all age groups are significantly more likely to die from
unintentional firearm injuries when they live in states with more guns,
relative to states with fewer guns. On average, states with the highest gun
levels had nine times the rate of unintentional firearms deaths compared to
states with the lowest gun levels.21

A federal government study of unintentional shootings found that 8% of such
shooting deaths resulted from shots fired by children under the age of six.22

The U.S. General Accounting Office has estimated that 31% of unintentional
deaths caused by firearms might be prevented by the addition of two devices: a
child-proof safety lock (8%) and a loading indicator (23%).23

##### Notes

    
        1. Nat’l Ctr. for Injury Prevention & Control, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, _Web-Based Injury Statistics Query & Reporting System (WISQARS) Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, for National, Regional, and States_ (Dec. 2012), http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/dataRestriction_inj.html (hereinafter _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010_. Note: Users must agree to data use restrictions on the CDC site prior to accessing data). ⤴︎
    2. Nat’l Ctr. for Injury Prevention & Control, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, _Web-Based Injury Statistics Query & Reporting System (WISQARS) Nonfatal Injury Reports_, at http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html (last visited Nov. 20, 2012) (hereinafter _WISQARS Nonfatal Injury Reports_ ). ⤴︎
    3. Nat’l Ctr. for Injury Prevention and Control, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, _Web-Based Injury Statistics Query & Reporting System (WISQARS) Leading Causes of Death Reports, 1999-2010, for National, Regional, and States (RESTRICTED)_, at http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/leading_causes_death.html (last visited Nov. 30, 2012). ⤴︎
    4. U.S. Department of Defense, Statistical Information Analysis Division, Personnel & Military Casualty Statistics, _U.S. Military Casualties in Southeast Asia: Vietnam Conflict – Casualty Summary As of May 16, 2008_ , at http://siadapp.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/vietnam.pdf (last visited Feb. 10, 2012); _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    5. U.S. Department of Defense, _Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) U.S. Casualty Status, Fatalities as of: March 12, 2012, 10 a.m. EST_ , at http://www.defense.gov/news/casualty.pdf (last visited Feb. 10, 2012); _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    6.  _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    7.  _Id_. ⤴︎
    8. Matthew Miller, Deborah Azrael & David Hemenway, _Rates of Household Firearm Ownership and Homicide Across US Regions and States, 1988-1997_ , 92 Am. J. Pub. Health 1988 (2002). ⤴︎
    9. David Hemenway, _Private Guns, Public Health_ 65 (2004). ⤴︎
    10.  _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    11.  _Id_. ⤴︎
    12.  _Id_. ⤴︎
    13.  _Id._ ⤴︎
    14. Garen J. Wintemute et al., _Mortality Among Recent Purchasers of Handguns_ , 341 New Eng. J. Med. 1583, 1585 (Nov. 18, 1999). ⤴︎
    15.  _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    16. David C. Grossman, Donald T. Reay & Stephanie A. Baker, _Self-inflicted & Unintentional Firearm Injuries Among Children & Adolescents: The Source of the Firearm_, 153 Archives Pediatric & Adolescent Med. 875 (Aug. 1999), at http://archpedi.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/short/153/8/875. ⤴︎
    17. Matthew Miller & David Hemenway, _The Relationship Between Firearms and Suicide: A Review of the Literature_ , 4 Aggression & Violent Behavior 59, 62-65 (1999) (summarizing the findings of multiple studies). ⤴︎
    18.  _WISQARS Injury Mortality Reports, 1999-2010, supra_ note 1. ⤴︎
    19.  _Id_. ⤴︎
    20.  _Id_. ⤴︎
    21. Matthew Miller, Deborah Azrael & David Hemenway, _Firearm Availability and Unintentional Firearm Deaths_ , 33 Accident Analysis & Prevention 477 (July 2001). ⤴︎
    22. U.S. General Accounting Office, _Accidental Shootings: Many Deaths and Injuries Caused by Firearms Could Be Prevented_ 17 (Mar. 1991), at http://161.203.16.4/d20t9/143619.pdf. ⤴︎
    23.  _Id_. A loading indicator, also known as a “chamber load indicator,” is a safety device that indicates at a glance whether a firearm is loaded and whether a round remains in the chamber. ⤴︎
    

## Join Our Fight Against Gun Violence

$25$50$100OtherDonate

Questions? [email protected]

Press Request? [email protected]

![](https://i2.wp.com/lawcenter.giffords.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/18.01-SCORE-Website-assets_homepage-

tile-b.jpg?fit=1292%2C1042&ssl=1)![](https://i2.wp.com/lawcenter.giffords.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/19.04-WEB-UGVIII-A-Case-Study-in-

Hope_Sidebar.jpg?fit=1000%2C806&ssl=1)

## Sign Up For Updates

## POLICY AREAS

    
        * **Background Checks**
    * Universal Background Checks
    * NICS & Reporting Procedures
    * Background Check Procedures
    * Mental Health Reporting
    * Interstate & Online Gun Sales
    
    * **Who Can Have a Gun**
    * Categories of Prohibited People
    * Domestic Violence & Firearms
    * Extreme Risk Protection Orders
    * Terrorist Watchlist
    * Minimum Age to Purchase & Possess
    * Disarming Prohibited People
    
    * **Gun Sales**
    * Gun Dealers
    * Maintaining Records of Gun Sales
    * Waiting Periods
    * Sales of Multiple Guns
    * Gun Shows
    
    * **Owner Responsibilities**
    * Licensing
    * Registration
    * Reporting Lost & Stolen Firearms
    
    * **Child & Consumer Safety**
    * Child Access Prevention
    * Safe Storage
    * Smart Guns
    * Design Safety Standards
    * Non-powder & Toy Guns
    
    * **Guns in Public**
    * Concealed Carry
    * Open Carry
    * “Stand Your Ground” Laws
    * Guns in Schools
    * Location Restrictions
    
    * **Hardware & Ammunition**
    * Assault Weapons
    * Large Capacity Magazines
    * Ammunition Regulation
    * Ghost Guns
    * Machine Guns & 50-Caliber
    * Silencers
    
    * **Crime Guns**
    * Trafficking & Straw Purchasing
    * Bulk Gun Purchases
    * Microstamping & Ballistics
    
    * **Other Laws**
    * Gun Industry Immunity
    * Preemption of Local Laws
    * Intervention Strategies
    

## STATES

    
        * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    
    * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
    * District of Columbia
    

## TAKE ACTION

    
        * Join
    * Volunteer
    * Anniversary Dinner
    * Events
    * Give
    

## ABOUT

    
        * Mission
    * History
    * Our Team
    * Our Board
    * Contact Us
    * Pro Bono Partners
    * Careers & Internships
    * Annual Reports
    

Facebook Twitter Instagram

Giffords Law Center To Prevent Gun Violence

Copyright 2018 Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence. All Rights
Reserved. Legal Disclaimer.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1632614240311608&ev=PixelInitialized)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

