

![Political Asylum USA: Asylum Immigration Status in United

States](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/02/logo_transparent41.png) Political Asylum USA: Asylum
Immigration Status in United States

**+1 (800) 560-1768 - Asylum Hotline**  
Our multi-lingual Immigration experts are waiting for your call to start your
Asylum application. Or, visit your local site:  
![Asylum in USA](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/US.png)![在美国避难](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/CN.png)![Asile aux Etats-

Unis](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/FR.png)![Убежище в

США](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/RU.png)![Asilo Politico

EUA](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/BR.png)![Притулок в

США](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/UA.png)

I want asylum in USA!

    
        * About Us
    * Qualifying For Asylum
      * Humanitarian
      * LGBT
      * Political Opinion
      * Religion
      * Social Group
    * US Asylum Process
      * Asylum Interview
      * Immigration Judge
      * Immigration Lawyer
      * Interpreter
      * Types of Asylum Decisions
      * USCIS Asylum Officer
    * Green Card
      * EB-5
      * Humanitarian Visa
      * Same-Sex Marriage
    * Refugees
    * Countries
      * Bhutanese Refugees
      * Chinese Asylum
      * Colombians Asylum
      * Cuba Refugees
      * Mexican Asylum
      * Nepal Asylum
      * Russian Asylum
      * Syrian Asylum
      * Tibet Refugees
    * Resources
      * Benefits & Responsibilities of Asylees
      * How to Immigrate to USA
      * Seeking Asylum in USA
      * Where to File I-589
      * How to Complete Form I-589?
      * How To Appeal
      * Seeking Asylum At The U.S.- Mexico Border
      * The Benefits of Applying for Asylum in New York
      * Employment of Asylum Seekers
      * Can Asylum Be Revoked?
      * Rights of Asylum Seekers
      * Refugees
      * Seeking Asylum
      * Verifying Status
      * Asylum Interview
      * Travel
    * Contact
    

# Cuba Refugees

The United States does not have much of a diplomatic relationship with Cuba.
In fact, the United States has had a trade embargo with Cuba for the last
fifty years. Because of this relationship, the United States is extra willing
to accept Cuban citizens who are politically opposed to the Cuban government.
Cuban citizens can apply for asylum, like any other country, but most Cubans
who are able to make it to the United States do not have to.

### Cuban Refugee Adjustment Act

The _Cuban Refugee Adjustment Act_ , as the name suggests, helps make it
easier for Cuban citizens to escape Cuba and get permanent residence in the
United States. Any Cuban citizen who has been inspected, admitted or paroled
into the United States can apply for a Green Card after living in the United
States for one year. The spouse and young children of Cuban citizens can use
this law to get a Green Card, even if they are not Cuban citizens themselves.
Someone who was born in Cuba but becomes a citizen elsewhere can get a Green
Card under this law.

Furthermore, a Cuban who has had a family based petition approved can be
paroled into the United States while he or she is waiting for a Green Card.
The United States government also runs a lottery that allows Cuban citizens to
migrate to the U.S.

### Asylum

If a Cuban citizen cannot manage to take advantage of the Cuban Refugee
Adjustment Act, he or she can still apply for asylum. There are many human
rights abuses in Cuba that would make people afraid to return to or remain in
Cuba.  
The U.S. State Department lists the principal human rights abuses in Cuba as
“abridgement of the right of citizens to change their government; government
threats, intimidation, mobs, harassment, and detentions to prevent citizens
from assembling peacefully.”

According to reports, it was common for government officials to detain people
for political reasons, and prisoners were often harassed and tortured. Free
speech is only allowed to the extent that is supports the government and
socialism; anyone who speaks out against either can be sent to jail. If people
assemble to protest, the government typically organizes mobs to attach
protestors. While the Cuban president’s daughter, Mariela Castro, has spoken
out in favor of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
people, activists report that discrimination against LGBT people is common.

If you are Cuban and you are interested in obtaining permanent residence in
the United States, New York Human Rights Committee may be able to help you.
Call us at +1 (800) 560-1768 today. We are available 24/7.

Asylum for Citizens of:

    
        * Bhutan
    * China
    * Colombia
    * Cuba
    * Mexico
    * Nepal
    * Russia
    * Syria
    * Tibet
    

Free Consultation

_Submit the form. Strictly confidential._

Testimonials

> Excellent service! They streamlined my application, and the legal support
was so efficient that the judge didn't even hesitate!

Jeremy (New York) Next

> The job was worth every single penny paid for it. Highly recommended.

Amare (Dallas) Next

Contact Us

Address

14 Wall Street, New York NY 10005, USA  
+1 (800) 560-1768 Map

Resources

    
        * Political Asylum
    * Humanitarian Asylum
    * Political Opinion
    * Religious Persecution
    * Sexual Orientation
    * Social Groups
    * HTML Sitemap
    * How to Complete Form I-589
    * Where to File I-589
    

Subscribe

Subscribe to our e-mail newsletter to receive updates.

![](https://www.politicalasylumusa.com/wp-content/themes/empire/images/ico-

social-rss.png)

Search Site

PoliticalAsylumUsa.com © 2013. All Rights Reserved.

    * not affiliated with any law firms

MENU

    
        * About Us
    * Qualifying For Asylum
      * Humanitarian
      * LGBT
      * Political Opinion
      * Religion
      * Social Group
    * US Asylum Process
      * Asylum Interview
      * Immigration Judge
      * Immigration Lawyer
      * Interpreter
      * Types of Asylum Decisions
      * USCIS Asylum Officer
    * Green Card
      * EB-5
      * Humanitarian Visa
      * Same-Sex Marriage
    * Refugees
    * Countries
      * Bhutanese Refugees
      * Chinese Asylum
      * Colombians Asylum
      * Cuba Refugees
      * Mexican Asylum
      * Nepal Asylum
      * Russian Asylum
      * Syrian Asylum
      * Tibet Refugees
    * Resources
      * Benefits & Responsibilities of Asylees
      * How to Immigrate to USA
      * Seeking Asylum in USA
      * Where to File I-589
      * How to Complete Form I-589?
      * How To Appeal
      * Seeking Asylum At The U.S.- Mexico Border
      * The Benefits of Applying for Asylum in New York
      * Employment of Asylum Seekers
      * Can Asylum Be Revoked?
      * Rights of Asylum Seekers
      * Refugees
      * Seeking Asylum
      * Verifying Status
      * Asylum Interview
      * Travel
    * Contact
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

