

Skip to main content

Search Brookings Search

    
        * About Us
    * Press Room
    * Experts
    * Events
    * The Brookings Press
    * Brookings Exec Ed
    * Support Brookings
    * Careers
    * Cart 0
    * Search
    

The Brookings Institution The Brookings Institution

# Do immigrants “steal” jobs from American workers?

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * LinkedIn
    * Print
    * SMS
    * Email
    * More
    *     * Reddit
    *     * Cities & Regions
    * Global Development
    * International Affairs
    * U.S. Economy
    * U.S. Politics & Government
    * More
    

Search Menu

0

![migrant farmworkers]()

Brookings Now

# Do immigrants “steal” jobs from American workers?

Brennan Hoban Thursday, August 24, 2017

Brookings Now

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * LinkedIn
    * Print
    * SMS
    * Email
    * More
    *     * Reddit
    * Throughout his campaign and into his presidency, President Trump has promised to implement new immigration policies that will help improve the U.S. economy and job market.
    

A motivating factor behind Trump’s proposed policies—including the
construction of a new U.S.-Mexico border wall, more border patrol agents, and
stricter deportation policies—is his belief that immigrants are stealing job
opportunities from American workers. As he said in July 2015, “They’re taking
our jobs. They’re taking our manufacturing jobs. They’re taking our money.
They’re killing us.”

But is that really the case? In new research, Brookings experts explore how
immigration affects the economy, and what Trump’s proposed policies could mean
for the future the U.S. workforce.

**Trump’s proposed policies aim to decrease immigration**

In one of his first proactive attempts to decrease the number of immigrants
illegally entering the U.S. and the nation’s workforce, Trump has vowed to
increase the number of U.S. Border Patrol Agents to an unprecedented 26,370.

![border patrol](https://i1.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/08/border-

patrol.png?w=768&crop=0%2C0px%2C100%2C9999px&ssl=1)

### Related

    
        * ![A Nigerian evacuee walks through a dust storm at a refugee camp made by UNHCR for civilians fleeing violence in Libya, near the border crossing of Ras Jdir March 3, 2011. REUTERS/Yannis Behrakis \(TUNISIA - Tags: CIVIL UNREST SOCIETY IMAGES OF THE DAY\) - GM1E73407LC01](https://i1.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/rtr2jejn1.jpg?w=135&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C7px%2C100%2C76px&ssl=1) Play Video
    

Brookings Now

#### Problems and solutions to the international migrant crisis

Chris McKenna and Brennan Hoban

Monday, December 18, 2017

    
        * ![Immigrant children now housed in a tent encampment under the new "zero tolerance" policy by the Trump administration are shown walking in single file at the facility near the Mexican border in Tornillo, Texas, U.S. June 19, 2018.        REUTERS/Mike Blake - RC187D98B970](https://i2.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/RTX6A1NS-e1533563611718.jpg?w=135&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C0px%2C100%2C76px&ssl=1)
    

Brookings Now

#### The state of US immigration policy and how to improve it

Brennan Hoban

Monday, August 6, 2018

    
        * ![Recruiters and job seekers are seen at a job fair in Golden, Colorado, June 7, 2017. REUTERS/Rick Wilking - RC12C341CF90](https://i1.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/rtx39htg-e1512156050485.jpg?w=135&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C0px%2C100%2C76px&ssl=1)
    

Brookings Now

#### 10 facts about American women in the workforce

Alison Burke

Tuesday, December 5, 2017

Trump has also proposed building a wall along the U.S. Mexico border in order
to prevent immigration into the U.S. This border wall has been a priority for
President Trump since his campaign. At a recent campaign rally in Arizona,
Trump threatened to shut down the government if Congress does not allocate
funding to building a border wall.

**Immigrants often fill the jobs Americans don’t want**

However, some argue that the work of these agents to protect against “job-
stealing” immigrants may be in vain. As Brookings Senior Fellow Vanda Felbab-
Brown explains in her new Brookings Essay, “The Wall,” immigrants may not
actually be “stealing” as many U.S. jobs as Trump thinks. As she put it, “the
impact of immigrant labor on the wages of native-born workers is low… However,
undocumented workers often work the unpleasant, back-breaking jobs that
native-born workers are not willing to do.”

Felbab-Brown explains that many of the jobs occupied by undocumented workers
in the United States are physically demanding jobs that Americans do not want,
such as gutting fish or work on farm fields. She argues, “fixing immigration
is not about mass deportations of people but about creating a legal visa
system for jobs Americans do not want. And it is about providing better
education opportunities, skills-development and retooling, and safety nets for
American workers. And to date, Trump hasn’t offered serious policy proposals
on many—if any—of these areas.”

**Prioritizing only highly-skilled immigrants isn’t necessary**

But what about _legal_ immigrants and high-skilled workers? Brookings Senior
Fellow William Frey takes issue with a proposal from President Trump to cut
quotas for legal immigration in half and to prioritize the entrance of those
with high skills. He argues that “these [proposals] fly in the face of census
statistics that show that current immigration levels are increasingly vital to
the growth of much of America, and that recent arrivals are more highly
skilled than ever before.”

### Author

B

## Brennan Hoban

### Office of Communications

As for prioritizing immigrants with high skill levels, Frey points out that
recent immigrants are already more highly educated than those of the past. In
fact, he explains that “college graduates are more prevalent among recent
immigrant adults than among all adults in 90 of the 100 largest metropolitan
areas.”

![billfrey immigration_fig2](https://i1.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/billfrey-

immigration_fig2.png?w=768&crop=0%2C0px%2C100%2C9999px&ssl=1)

**Immigration is tied to positive economic growth and innovation**

Frey also explains that immigration is especially important for areas that are
experiencing a decline in domestic migration and that U.S. immigration levels
are currently fueling most community demographic gains. These gains are
especially important as the nation’s population gets older and fertility
remains low.

Brookings Senior Fellow Dany Bahar also examined the positive link between
immigration and economic growth. Bahar explains that while immigrants
represent about 15 percent of the general U.S. workforce, they account for
around a quarter of entrepreneurs and a quarter of investors in the U.S. and
that over one third of new firms have at least one immigrants entrepreneur in
its initial leadership team.

Moreover, Bahar explains that the impact of immigration on the wages of
native-born workers is very small. “If anything,” he concludes, “negative
impacts occur for the most part on wages of prior immigrants with similar set
of skills.”

As Bahar mentions, “by cutting on immigration, the country will miss an
opportunity for new inventions and ventures that could generate the jobs that
the president is so committed to bring back. Thus, if the current
administration wants to create jobs and ‘make America great again,’ it should
consider enlisting more migrants.”

#### Related Topics

    
        * Immigration
    * Labor Policy & Unemployment
    

The Brookings Institution

    
        * Facebook Find us on Facebook
    * Twitter Find us on Twitter
    * YouTube Find us on YouTube
    * Podcast Listen to our Podcast
    * Browse Newsletters Browse Newsletters
    * RSS Subscribe to our RSS
    
    * Languages
    * Español
    * 中文
    * عربي
    
    * About Us
    * Research Programs
    * Find an Expert
    * Careers
    * Contact
    * Terms and Conditions
    * Brookings Privacy Policy
    * Copyright 2019 The Brookings Institution
    

## The Brookings Institution

Close

    
        * Trending
      * U.S. Economy
      * International Affairs
    * Topics
      * Cities & Regions
      * Global Development
      * International Affairs
      * U.S. Economy
      * U.S. Politics & Government
      * More
    * About Us
    * Press Room
    * Experts
    * Events
    * The Brookings Press
    * Brookings Exec Ed
    * Support Brookings
    * Careers
    * Cart 0
    

Get daily updates from Brookings

Enter Email

Close

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/mu-

plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

