

The Balance

Mexico's Economy Facts, Opportunities, and Challenges

Menu Search

Go

Go

    
        * Investing
      * Basics 
      * Stocks 
      * Real Estate 
      * Value Investing 
      * View All 
    * Credit & Debt
      * Building Credit 
      * Credit Card Basics 
      * Reducing Debt 
      * Reports & Scores 
      * View All 
    * Retirement Planning
      * Basics 
      * 401(k) Plans 
      * IRAs 
      * Social Security 
      * View All 
    * Banking & Loans
      * Basics 
      * Best Savings Account Rates 
      * Getting a Loan 
      * Online Banking 
      * View All
    

visit our other sites

World Economy

    
        * Asia
    * Europe
    

US Economy World Economy

# Mexico's Economy Facts, Opportunities, and Challenges

## More Americans Immigrate to Mexico Than Vice Versa

    
        * Share 
    * Pin 
    * Email
    

![Auto assembly line, Mexico City,

Mexico](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/YZ3cq6Gf9Kdb9hq-k0UnQCyhuX4=/300x200/filters:saturation\(0.2\):brightness\(10\):contrast\(5\):no_upscale\(\)/GettyImages-128421543-576db1f53df78cb62c6f347b.jpg)

••• Ed Lallo/Photolibrary/Getty Images

By Kimberly Amadeo

Updated January 22, 2019

Mexico is quickly becoming an emerging market heavy-weight. In 2017, its gross
domestic product was $2.4 trillion. This was much less than its primary
trading partner, the United States, with a GDP of $19.49 trillion. But it was
larger than its other North American Free Trade Agreement partner, Canada. Its
GDP was only $1.7 trillion. Mexico's geographic size is equivalent to Saudi
Arabia. But it supports five times as many people while exporting one-fourth
of the oil.

Mexico's 2017 GDP growth rate was 2.1 percent, about that of the United
States, but less than Canada's 3.0 percent growth. Mexico's growth has slowed
since 2016, when it was 2.3 percent. Its standard of living, as measured by
GDP per capita, was $19,900. That's less than half of its other NAFTA
partners.

### Mexico's Economy Depends on Exports

Mexico is the 12th largest exporter in the world. In 2017, the United States
received 79 percent of Mexico's exports. Trade with the United States and
Canada has tripled since NAFTA's signing in 1994. More than 90 percent of
Mexico's trade is under 12 free trade agreements. Mexico has agreements with
46 countries, more than any other nation. These trade agreements are a big
reason for Mexico's success.

Mexico manufactures and exports the same amount of goods as the rest of Latin
America combined. Foreign trade is a larger percentage of Mexico's economy
than any other large country. Mexico's No. 1 export is manufactured products.
It also exports silver, fruits, vegetables, coffee, and cotton.

Mexico is the world's eighth largest producer of oil, at almost 3 million
barrels per day. This is less than Canada, Iran, or Iraq but more than other
big exporters such as Kuwait, Brazil, or Nigeria.

Mexico imports machinery for metalworking and agriculture. It also imports
electrical equipment, automobile and aircraft parts, and steel mill products.
The chart below shows a breakdown of the top 10 exports:

### Why Mexico Is Attractive to Investors

Mexico's economy and culture are changing. Until 2012, Mexico's economy
underperformed Brazil's. Mexico is now a major manufacturing center for
electronics. That includes most of the flat-screen TVs sold in the United
States. It also makes medical devices and aerospace parts.

Mexico's trade agreements allow its manufacturers duty-free access to 60
percent of the world. That benefit attracts foreign factories.

International trade, which is exports plus imports, equals 77 percent of the
country's GDP. That's much higher than Brazil’s 23 percent or even China’s 48
percent. This emphasis on trade makes Mexico's companies globally competitive.
Gruma is the world's largest tortilla maker. Bimbo is the largest bread maker
since it acquired U.S. baker Sara Lee. Mexican companies have access to the
U.S. market. They also share a common language with the rest of Latin America.

Mexico grew from the ninth to the seventh largest auto manufacturer in the
world between 2010 and 2015. It's the fourth largest auto exporter. It
recently surpassed Japan as the second-largest U.S. auto parts exporter.

### Economic Influences

Part of the change includes a new president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. He
was elected on July 1, 2018 to a six-year term. He promised to end corruption,
reduce violence, and address Mexico’s poverty.

AMLO, as he is called, promised to review contracts for oil exploration
awarded to foreign firms. Mexico's oil industry needs foreign expertise and
investment. In the last 14 years, oil production has dropped from 3.5 million
to 1.9 million barrels per day. Its refineries are operating at 40 percent
capacity.

At the same time, AMLO wants to invest $9.4 billion in the state-owned sector.
He would build two new refineries and renovatef six existing ones. He would
award the state-owned oil monopoly, Pemex, $4 billion for exploration. He
believes it would boost production to 2.5 million a day within two years.

The former president, Enrique Peña Nieto, awarded 100 contracts to partly
privatize Mexico's oil industry. Peña Nieto also strengthened the automobile
industry by making it easier for foreign companies to build auto plants. His
Pact for Mexico was responsible for convincing Congress to pass 85 major
reforms. It tore down monopolies, reformed education, and revamped tax laws.
It even passed a new junk-food tax to combat Mexico’s diabetes epidemic.

Prior administrations resisted privatization. Pemex sent all its revenues to
the federal government. As a result, about one-third of the government’s
income is dependent on oil. Instead of investing in developing new fields, the
government had been treating Pemex like a cash cow, trying only to maximize
short-term profit. As a result, production fell 25 percent in the last 10
years. The CEO was replaced by the Mexican Congress in February 2016.

Mexico built up its infrastructure to enhance trade. That made Carlos Slim
Helu, a Mexican telecom tycoon, the world's richest man in 2007. He retained
that title until 2013 when Microsoft founder Bill Gates regained that
position.

Helu owns three companies: América Móvil, Telmex, and Grupo Financiero
Inbursa. They control 70 percent of mobile phones, 80 percent of home phone
lines, and 70 percent of broadband. This lack of competition hampers growth.
Mobile-phone penetration in Mexico is only 85 percent, about the same as Iraq.
A fast broadband connection costs double, the same as in Chile. Other near-
monopolies include Bimbo, which produces bread; Cemex, cement; and Televisa,
televisions.

Helu's position is threatened by Mexico's new policies of deregulating the
telecommunications industry. American company AT&T is entering the market,
thanks to lowered tariffs.

### Challenges to Mexico's Economy

The biggest challenge is getting rid of the drug cartels. President Peña Nieto
increased security spending from 1.5 percent to 5 percent of GDP, the level
that worked for Colombia.

Peña Nieto replaced President Felipe Calderón-Hinojosa. He had initiated a
controversial crackdown on organized crime and corrupt local police. It
created an all-out war. That increased violence including retaliation against
civilians by the cartels. Many Mexicans blamed Calderon for upsetting the
cartels and increasing violence.

Calderon had reason to be concerned. After Colombia's crackdown, many of its
cocaine operations simply moved to Mexico. Without stringent controls, the
cartels take over local governments. Calderon cracked down to improve Mexico's
economic competitiveness. He also took steps to provide better health care,
uphold legal institutions, and protect the environment.

Another challenge is the southern part of the country. It doesn't benefit from
the maquiladora program on the northern border. An accounting of NAFTA pros
and cons revealed that although 30 percent of Mexico’s labor is employed under
maquiladora companies, their working conditions in these companies have been
deemed substandard.

### Surprising Facts About Mexico and Immigration

Many Americans worry about illegal immigration from Mexico. The country is
actually gaining immigrants itself. The legal foreign-born population doubled
from 2000 to 2010. It's now one million total. Of these, 750,000 are
Americans. As a result, more Americans have immigrated to Mexico over the past
few years than vice-versa.

Continue Reading

+

    
        * ![Donald Trump near Mexico](//:0)
    

#### 6 Ways Trump Changed NAFTA

    
        * ![counting-yuan.jpg](//:0)
    

#### The Surprising Ways China Affects the U.S. Economy

    
        * ![Justin Trudeau](//:0)
    

#### Canada's Economy Is Why Justin Trudeau Is the New Prime Minister

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### How the Iran Nuclear Deal Affects You

    
        * ![coffee is cheaper thanks to NAFTA](//:0)
    

#### 6 Pros and Cons of NAFTA

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### 5 Reasons Why America's Manufacturing Is Growing Again

    
        * ![groceries-light.jpg](//:0)
    

#### 6 Hidden Benefits of NAFTA

    
        * ![Shinjuku district, Tokyo, Japan](//:0)
    

#### 7 Reason's Japan's Economy Is Stuck

    
        * ![Oil drilling](//:0)
    

#### How High Will Oil Prices Rise in 2019 and 2050?

    
        * ![Democratic Presidents Carter, Clinton and Obama](//:0)
    

#### How Have Democratic Presidents Affected the Economy?

    
        * ![Brazil](//:0)
    

#### How to Ruin an Emerging Market Success Story

    
        * ![2019 SOTU](//:0)
    

#### President Trump's 2019 SOTU Summary

    
        * ![President Donald Trump](//:0)
    

#### Donald Trump's Economic Plan and How It Is Changing the Economy

    
        * ![Coffee and coffee beans](//:0)
    

#### Fast Facts About the World's Largest Trade Agreement

    
        * ![Trump and Obama](//:0)
    

#### Is Trump or Obama Best for the Economy?

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### 6 Things NAFTA Does

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

    
        * Investing
    * Credit & Debt
    * Retirement Planning
    * Banking & Loans
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Careers
    * Contact
    * Editorial Guidelines
    

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * Lifewire
    * ThoughtCo
    * TripSavvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

