

Submit Search Search

FBI

More

    
        * Most Wanted
    * News
    * What We Investigate
    * Services
    * Resources
    * Submit a Tip
    * About
    * Contact Us
    * FBI Jobs
    1. Home
    2. Video
    * Facebook Icon
    * Email Icon
    * Twitter Icon
    * Youtube Icon
    * Flickr Icon
    * LinkedIn Icon
    * Instagram Icon
    * Search FBI Submit Search
    

![Federal Bureau of Investigation

Logo](https://www.fbi.gov/++theme++fbigov.theme/images/fbibannerseal.png)
FBIFederal Bureau of Investigation

# Crime on the Southwest Border

Video

Share on Twitter Twitter Share on Facebook Facebook Email Email

## Crime on the Southwest Border

The FBI partners with Mexican law enforcement and many federal, state, and
local agencies on task forces targeting drugs, violent crime and public
corruption on the border.

* * *

### Video Transcript

[sounds of revolving metal gate turning]

Narrator: The U.S. border with Mexico extends nearly 2,000 miles. And it's
along this expansive stretch of territory that drug cartels and their street
gang enforcers ply a dangerous and costly trade.

Drug trafficking. Human smuggling. Extortion. Murder. Corrupt public
officials. All these crimes represent a multi-billion dollar industry and they
pose a threat not only to communities on both sides of the border, but to our
national security as well.

Perkins: What we do have on the U.S. side of the border are kidnappings,
corruption issues, and the illegal drug trade that goes through. The cash
that's flowing south, the weapons that are flowing south, and the drugs that
are flowing north.

Narrator: To combat the drug trafficking organizations and other criminal
elements on the border, the FBI partners with Mexican law enforcement and many
federal, state, and local agencies on task forces targeting drugs, violent
crime and public corruption. The stakes are high Just one corrupt border guard
could potentially put the entire country at risk.

Kevin Perkins, assistant director, Criming Investigative Division: The problem
we have with the corrupt border guards, someone who's at that border
checkpoint, who can wave a truckload of whatever through-- that could be a
truckload of narcotics, it could be a truckload of illegal aliens, it could be
pieces to the next dirty bomb that comes into this country.

Narrator: The Bureau devotes significant resources to fighting crimes along
the border. We have 12 border corruption task forces in the region staffed
with apporximately 120 special agents. We have border liaison officers who
work one-on-one with their law enforcement counterparts in Mexico. Our agents
and analysts work on gang and violent crime squads gathering intelligence and
building cases against drug traffickers and a range of other crimes that
usually involve extreme violence.

Perkins: The thing that's most concerning to me is really the out-of-control
violence that is on the Mexican side of the border that we're seeing … And
it's not just 7,000 murders, it's the brutal violence, it's torture, it's the
complete and utter disregard for human life all based upon the greed and the
wealth that's coming from drug trafficking.

Keith Slotter, special agent in charge, San Diego: It's not just people being
killed, it's people being killed, mutilated, and dehumanized in a very
disturbing manner. There's a lot of people out there that their loved one just
disappeared one day and they have no idea whatever happened ... That's the way
they do business. Because they not only want to kill, they want to send a
message every time they kill someone.

Narrator: The epicenter of the violence is Juarez, Mexico, located just across
the border from El Paso. To stem the tide of violence associated with the
cartels we work closely with EPIC, the El Paso Intelligence Center, a multi-
agency operation run by the Drug Enforcement Administration.

David Cuthbertson, special agent in charge, El Paso: We work with all our
federal, state, and local law enforcement partners to really have a no-
tolerance for crime in El Paso as much as possible. We're an active
participant in EPIC and benefit from that every day.

Narrator: Despite the continuing violence, the head of our Criminal
Investigative Division sees signs of hope on the Southwest border. Working
with partners like the DEA and Customs & Border Protection, we've had many
successes in shutting down drug pipelines and putting corrupt border guards in
prison.

Perkins: I believe we're making a dent in it. We are putting a lot of
resources down there, we're focusing these resources on what we believe to be
the biggest targets, the most important targets. We work with our state and
local partners and other federal partners to enforce the various laws that
we're charged with along that border.

[Sounds of revolving gate]

### Video Download

    
        * Download Video File
    

### Recent Video

    
        * 06.04.2019 -- Wanted by the FBI: Eugene Palmer Added to Ten Most Wanted Fugitives List
    * 06.04.2019 -- My FBI Huntsville
    * 05.29.2019 -- Sextortion Targets Youth Online
    * 05.24.2019 -- FBI Hosts Wounded Warriors for First-Time Event
    * 05.17.2019 -- Wanted by the FBI: Charles Lee Hill
    * 05.08.2019 -- Wanted by the FBI: Arnoldo Jimenez Added to Ten Most Wanted Fugitives List
    * 05.03.2019 -- 2018 Director's Community Leadership Awards
    * 05.03.2019 -- Dolly Parton Thanks FBI and Director's Community Leadership Award Recipients
    * 04.30.2019 -- Download the myFBI Dashboard App Today
    * 04.29.2019 -- FBI Plea for 9/11 Responders to Register for Health Benefits
    * 04.24.2019 -- Seeking Information in Indiana Double-Murder Investigation
    * 04.15.2019 -- Seeking Information: Feb. 14, 2019, Bank Robbery, Las Vegas
    * 03.27.2019 -- FBI Boston Seeking Witnesses in Jassy Correia Kidnapping Case
    * 03.26.2019 -- FBI and Partners Target Darknet Opioid Traffickers
    * 03.20.2019 -- FBI Marks 20 Years of Training at 'Body Farm'
    * 03.20.2019 -- FBI Training at the 'Body Farm' (360º)
    * 03.20.2019 -- Training at Human Remains Recovery Course
    * 03.13.2019 -- Their Voices: Remembering 9/11
    * 03.13.2019 -- FBI Agents and Analysts Tour 9/11 Memorial & Museum
    * 03.11.2019 -- Portland Teen Academy
    

### FBI Weekly Newsletter

Subscribe to our email newsletter for news on the FBI, sent out every week.

Search

Subscribe

All FBI Email Updates All FBI Email Updates

### Connect & Subscribe

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * E-mail Updates
    * YouTube
    * iTunes
    * News Feeds
    

# Section Links

## Most Wanted

    
        * Ten Most Wanted
    * Fugitives
    * Terrorism
    * Kidnappings/Missing Persons
    * Seeking Information
    * Bank Robbers
    * ECAP
    * ViCAP
    

## News

    
        * Stories
    * Videos
    * Press Releases
    * Speeches
    * Testimony
    * Podcasts and Radio
    * Photos
    * Español
    * Apps
    

## What We Investigate

    
        * Terrorism
    * Counterintelligence
    * Cyber Crime
    * Public Corruption
    * Civil Rights
    * Organized Crime
    * White-Collar Crime
    * Violent Crime
    * WMD
    

## Services

    
        * CJIS
    * CIRG
    * Laboratory Services
    * Training Academy
    * Operational Technology
    * Information Management
    

## About

    
        * Mission & Priorities
    * Leadership & Structure
    * Partnerships
    * Community Outreach
    * FAQs
    

## Resources

    
        * Law Enforcement
    * Businesses
    * Victim Assistance
    * Reports and Publications
    

## Contact Us

    
        * Field Offices
    * FBI Headquarters
    * Overseas Offices
    

## FBI Jobs

## More

    
        * Submit a Tip
    * Crime Statistics
    * History
    * FOIPA
    * Scams & Safety
    * FBI Kids
    * FBI Tour
    
    * Accessibility
    * eRulemaking
    * Freedom of Information/Privacy Act
    * Legal Notices
    * Legal Policies and Disclaimers
    * Links
    * Privacy Policy
    * USA.gov
    * White House
    * No FEAR Act
    

FBI.gov is an official site of the U.S. government, U.S. Department of Justice

Search FBI Submit Search

    
        * Home
    * Most Wanted
    * News
    * What We Investigate
    * Services
    * Resources
    * Submit a Tip
    * About
    * Contact Us
    * FBI Jobs
    * Crime Statistics
    * Photos
    * Video
    * Outreach
    * History
    * FOIPA
    * Scams & Safety
    * FBI Kids
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

