

FaithWorld

## Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as "party of death"

By Reuters Staff

October 1, 2008

![Senator Joe Biden with Catholic priest Zhang Depu near Beijing, 10 Aug

2001/pool](http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/files/2008/10/biden-

priest.jpg)Vatican officials seldom single out political leaders who differ
with the Church on issues like abortion rights or embryonic stem cell
research. But now that the Vatican's highest court is led by an American, the
former St. Louis Archbishop Raymond Burke, we can expect things to get more
explicit in Vatican City -- at least when when it comes to U.S. politics.

Burke, who was named prefect of the Vatican's Supreme Court of the Apostolic
Signature in June, told the Italian Catholic newspaper _Avvenire_ that the
U.S. Democratic Party risked _" transforming itself definitively into a party
of death for its decisions on bioethical issues."_ He then attacked two of the
party's most high profile Catholics -- vice presidential candidate Joe Biden
and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi -- for misrepresenting Church teaching on
abortion.

He said Biden and Pelosi, _" while presenting themselves as good Catholics,
have presented Church doctrine on abortion in a false and tendentious way."_

![Nancy Pelosi kisses Pope Benedict’s ring during his U.S. visit, 16 April

2008/Larry

Downing](http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/files/2008/09/pelosi.jpg) Pelosi
drew U.S. bishops' scorn for saying in a television interview last month that
the Church itself had long debated when human life begins. Biden is a
practicing Catholic who also supports abortion rights and analysts have said
he could help woo wavering Catholics into Obama's fold. Both argue that they
cannot impose their religious views on others.

Burke said pro-life Democrats were _" rare"_ and that it saddened him that the
party that helped _ "our immigrant parents and grandparents"_ prosper in
America had changed so much over the years.

Burke made headlines as archbishop of St. Louis for his public attacks on
public figures who strayed from Catholic teaching. He suggested during the
2004 presidential campaign that Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, a
Catholic, should be denied communion because of his views on abortion. Several
bishops said at the time they would not give him communion and the media
staked out churches where he attended Mass to see if he received it.

_" Lately, I've noticed that other bishops are coming to this position,"_
Burke told _Avvenire_ , which is owned by the Italian bishops' conference.

![Archbishop Raymond Burke/Archdiocese of St.

Louis](http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/files/2008/10/burke.jpg) Cardinal
Joseph Ratzinger, now Pope Benedict XVI, wrote a letter in 2004 to American
bishops restating the Church position that a priest must refuse to distribute
communion to a Catholic politician who supported abortion rights. But Burke
lamented that the letter was never distributed.

Burke's criticism isn't limited to Democrats. Last year, he accused singer
Sheryl Crow of being _" a high profile proponent of the destruction of
innocent lives"_ for defending a woman's right to have an abortion and for
being a proponent of stem cell research. He resigned as head of a children's
medical charity that featured the singer for a benefit concert.

Pope Benedict has been encouraging Catholic bishops to speak out more openly
on public policy issues to make the Church's voice heard. Any bets on when
we'll hear from Burke next?

« Previous Post

Unanswered question about "suicide tourism" in Switzerland

Next Post »

Fed up with market crisis? Here's one broker who left it all behind

1,003 comments

We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion,
anecdotes, links and data. If you see a comment that you believe is irrelevant
or inappropriate, you can flag it to our editors by using the report abuse
links. Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters. For
more information on our comment policy, see
http://blogs.reuters.com/fulldisclosure/2010/09/27/toward-a-more-thoughtful-
conversation-on-stories/

Oct 1, 2008

11:29 am UTC

Oh, I see.

The Republican party's willingness to wage _nuclear_ warfare against Iran in
violation of Iran's legal right to pursue uranium enrichment for peaceful
purposes (and based upon the Zionist calumny that Ahmadinejad has stated that
the Israel 'should be removed from the map') signifies that the Republican
party is the party of LIFE.

Posted by Michael Cecil | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

1:00 pm UTC

What would the political landscape in America look like if religion was
totally eliminated from the discussions? Neither party is in a position to
cast the first stone, but when a bishop starts throwing them, and only at one
party, Houston, we have a problem!

Posted by Pat Bianculli | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

1:06 pm UTC

The article is about abortion, not Iran, Michael.

Posted by Dominic | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

1:14 pm UTC

Ah… so Burke isn't a hypocrite at all? He loves life in all its
manifestations. Or not.

And he's so inclusive because he hit out with his accusations against someone
other than a Democrat… he also accused some singer. Wow. That makes it all
Even Steven… yeah?

Posted by citizenbronte | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

2:52 pm UTC

Dominic,

The article is about the "Democrats as the 'party of death\'" (read the
title), AS IF the Republicans are the "party of life".

With regards to abortion:

A nuclear war with Iran (apparently, to the "Vatican official", the nuclear
incineration and/or slow agonizing death from radiation poisoning, starvation
and disease of millions of Muslim men, women, children, infants and fetuses is
not as bad as the abortion of hundreds of thousands of Christian fetuses in
the United States) will be the precursor to what may very well amount to the
abortion of the human _race_ , if things turn out as have been widely
predicted.

Said "Vatican official" appears to value the life of fetuses _more_ than the
lives of those who are slaughtered, tortured, and maimed by warfare (who often
suffer decades before dying-for example, those Muslims who were victims of
chemical warfare during the war between Iraq and Iran).

There does not appear to be any consistent "pro-life" ethic involved here,
suggesting a fundamental agreement with the Christo-fascist Crusade which the
United States is currently waging against the Muslims.

Posted by Michael Cecil | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

2:56 pm UTC

Michael: Even if you were correct about Iran - - which you are not (and
reliable world news sources, not just U.S. sources, differ completely with
your conclusions) - - you would still be wrong because the article is about
high-profile politicians who happen to be "Catholic" democrats who publicly on
TV and in other public venues misrepresented Catholic teaching on abortion for
the purpose of attempting to justify their positions on the topic, which
Archbishop Burke has every right, and in fact a duty, to correct. And by the
way, the Democratic Party in general is a pro-choice party - - i.e., ok to
abort a baby in the womb. Imagine if your mother had thought that way,
Michael? And, Pat, I agree with you that neither party is in a position to
throw the first stone but Archbishop Burke is by no means casting the first
stone because so- called "Catholic" politicians like Pelosi and Biden (and
there are a number of others) have for years been voting on the side of
abortion without a single word from the bishops. So the time has finally come
(better late than never) for some of the bishops to speak out. It's just
unfortunate that it took a public misrepresentation by these politicians of
the Church's position on abortion, rather than the terrible act itself, to
elicit a correction by the bishops - - but I say again better late than never!

Posted by Greg Castano | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

3:37 pm UTC

Aborted fetuses, those poor days old souls, are actually lucky. They never
will sin, therefore, God in his mercy brings them back into his heavenly fold.
God gave us free will with the knowledge that "HE" will judge us for our sins.
HE will judge, because he said not to judge unless we want to be judged by him
as harshly as we judge others. Murder is murder, whether a 3 day old soul or a
20 year old soul killed in war. If your against abortion, you better be doubly
against war. Warriors break the commandment "Thou shalt not kill" and they do
it, they hold the gun with intent to kill their misunderstood brother of their
own free will. How do you think they will be judged? We need to end all wars
and jihads before we think about abortion. our priorities are messed up and
backwards. When the world is no longer at war with itself, abortion will truly
no longer be needed because by then we will realize the true preciousness of
life.

Posted by C.D.Walker | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

3:55 pm UTC

Regardless of one's religious views on abortion, it is unethical to legislate
your religion on others.

What Biden said once was "I believe life begins at conception, however I don't
feel it is my duty to legislate my faith on others."

And it isn't. The religious zealots in this country and others are constantly
trying to shove their views and morals down everyone else's throat.  
We created a seperation of church and state for this very reason. People have
different beliefs and views and no one is "right" or "wrong". It's simply a
religious choice.  
One that should NEVER EVER be forced on anyone.

Another issue I have with these pro-life folks, is that they are often the
same folks who are strongly against socialized or governmental health care.
Which is a double standard.

These people seek to force unwanted births on folks, and then refuse to ensure
the newborns health with proper healthcare. It becomes the mother and fathers
responsibilty to provide proper health coverage.

But what happens when you're forcing those same mothers and fathers to have
children they can not afford? You're essentially forcing a life to be born
into poverty and hardship.

What's funny is I am an atheist. I have no religious affiliation at all.
Period. Yet I still abhor the idea of abortion. However even when my view is
not a religious formed view, it still does not give me the right to legislate
my beliefs on another individual.

Each person has a freedom of choice, and the decision a pregnant woman has to
struggle with about either having the baby or having an abortion, or giving it
up to adoption, or etc. that choice is hers and hers alone.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:04 pm UTC

The Holy See never gave a damn what the laity thought, that much was evident
with the way it handled the whole sex and abuse scandal, except when it was
convenient for them to issue more dogma and rhetorical mind control to the
faithful. They considered the abuse scandal "America's problem", including all
the lives they help shatter. The American Dioceses did no better by protecting
the violators in their ranks. Benevolence and tolerance, right? Crap. And to
have the unmitigated arrogance to announce their primacy over other religions.
They really need to practice what they preach and eliminate the patriarchy and
Byzantine trappings but most of all shut their self-righteous mouths and stay
out of politics, period.  
"Beware of piety, it seeks power".

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:17 pm UTC

Of course the Catholic church never killed anyone! Republicans will kill any
living being on this planet and do so at every opportunity. The hypocrisy of
the Catholic church is simply staggering. I'm not saying they should stop
breeding all together, but at least skip a generation.

Posted by Stanley Jones-Umberger | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:24 pm UTC

I think that it is safe to say that both main parties need to rise above the
dogma and doctrine -- from all sources -- that prevents the world from
developing into a more convivial place. We have vested a tremendous amount of
power in institutions and individuals that are doing nothing but trotting out
the same old ideologies. As a society, we have been on a downward slide for
too long. Let's expand our minds and contract the rhetoric.

Posted by Matt Holbert | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:24 pm UTC

Michael, in order to make your point, you need not misrepresent either the
Archbishop or the Church - - and you are doing both. There is nothing
"apparent" in what the archbishop stated that would lead one to believe that
death, starvation, radiation etc., as the result of war are not serious
matters. The discussion of the article is not a question of which is worse:
abortion or the results of war. If you would like to discuss that aspect, I'd
be glad to do that - - but let's stick to the article. The Church has stated
time and time again (and you should certainly know this if you're a Catholic
and follow what's been going on in the world and in the Church) that the
Church has always spoken out forcefully about the evils of an unjust war, and
the people responsible will have to answer to God. In fact, the Church speaks
out forcefully about any war, as you should know. So in an attempt to keep the
discussion on the topic as my previous posting suggested, comparing abortion
to war and suggesting that the this Archbishop values the lives of fetuses
more than the lives of those who are slaughtered in wars is totally
unjustified and as "wild" as your comments about Iran in your earlier posting.
If you want a discussion on abortion, I'd be glad to take it up with you but
please don't muddy the discussion with extraneous verbiage that reminds me of
politicians in both parties :). Look forward to your reply to my previous
posting!

Posted by Greg Castano | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:52 pm UTC

You must be informed that taking the life of an INNOCENT human being directly
from the womb is far different than wars, the death penalty, nukes, etc.

THINK for just one moment. If you cannot get out of the womb, can you be in a
war, commit a capital crime, or get vaporized by a nuke?

Once out, the rules change drastically because of man's fallen nature - I know
you don't believe this, so babies are at risk where you are concerned - got
it!

Adios,

Tommy

Posted by Tommy Jalisco | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

4:59 pm UTC

Thank you, Greg. What some folk fail to realize is that it is the duty of
clergy, ministers, and pastors to draw the line and confront hypocrites who
proclaim the faith but don't live it. It is not a Democrat versus Republican
issue - it's a human rights issue. People turn a blind eye to abortion because
it's "legal" genocide - you never see the faces of the victims.

Posted by Heidi Gouge | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:19 pm UTC

Dave,

Holy cr@p, you have to be kidding me. "These people…force unwanted births on
folks"????? Yeah, Catholics and Republicans are going around impregnating
people, sometimes via r@pe, sometimes via their magic powers of legislative
impregnation. What the h3ll are you smoking? Pregnancy is almost always the
result of two consenting adults making the conscious decision to a) not use
birth control, b) not pull out, c) put themselves in that situation in the
first place. Really, what percentage of people who get pregnant do you
actually believe didn't know that was a possibility beforehand?

But your follow up is priceless: "It becomes the mother and fathers
responsibilty to provide proper health coverage." It becomes their
responsibility the moment the pants come off. Who the h3ll should be
responsible for a pregnancy created by two other people? My God, the gall of
Catholics and Republicans to expect people not only to not kill babies they
created but then to expect those same people to provide for them? That's
crazy!

So, you don't think anyone's beliefs should be used to legislate anyone else's
actions, huh? I'm sure there are plenty of people who think murder, r@pe,
assault and theft are perfectly acceptable. I'd suggest you don't complain if
any of those happen to you because then you'd be imposing your beliefs on
someone else and as you stated, that's wrong.

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:21 pm UTC

If the Catholic Church owns property in the US (and they do) and if the
Church, centrally or at the parish level, chooses to state that the members
should vote for a particular candidate or party, then the Catholic Church as a
whole should no longer be exempt from taxes.

Posted by Tom Bellhouse | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:21 pm UTC

If it were up to these guys we would still follow scientific models where the
sun circles the Earth.

Thanks, but no thanks.

Posted by JD | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:24 pm UTC

The article singles out two top leaders in the Democratic party, Catholics, it
does not site Republicans because the ones who were involved in the discussion
were not Catholic, and therefore not subject to Church Law. The Statement was
issued by the Church, not one campaign or the other, go argue with the
Vatican.

Posted by Michele | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:31 pm UTC

Abortion isn't legal genocide and should never be compared to it.  
People have different views on the creation of life.

Some people believe life begins the very moment of conception, some like
myself feel that true life doesn't begin until you are born into the world.

Genocide is the deliberate and systematic extermination of a national, racial,
political, or cultural group.

I'm sorry but unborn fetuses don't fall under that definition of genocide. It
would be more accurately described as a medical act.

You might not agree with abortion, but to decry it as legalized genocide and
force millions of others to obey your point of view is ignorant.

People need to quit trying to legislate religious beliefs and views and keep
them to discussions with your church buddies.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

5:51 pm UTC

Greg,

You still don't get it.

I don't have ANY problem at all with the Archbishop 'correcting' the amoral
misrepresentations of Catholic teaching by the Democrat politicians. In fact,
I strongly agree with him and wonder what took him so long.

What I object to is the Archbishop's establishing of an absolute EQUIVALENCE
between a political party's position on abortion ALONE as determining whether
that party is a "party of life" or a "party of death": in favor of abortion=
"party of death"; against abortion= "party of life"-irrespective of the
party's positions which will likely lead to genocide as a result of war. [As
far as I have been able to determine, the only real difference between
Republicans and Democrats in the current election is the amount of TIME before
the occurrence of the nuclear war: If McCain, then sooner; if Obama, then
somewhat later (but probably only a few months). Their position vis-a-vis the
Israel and Iran, for example is fundamentally identical.]

Furthermore, why does the Archbishop choose to make such a comment about
abortion as, in some way, a _singular_ evil (although I certainly sympathize
with such a view), while failing to comment about the torture that has been
committed by agents of the U.S. government, the 'rendition' of prisoners by
the United States to countries that employ torture, or the slaughter of
civilians in Lebanon and Gaza (by the Israel), Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan?
Clearly, this "Vatican official" does not consider these subjects as being of
sufficient _importance_ to be able to characterize a party as being a "party
of death". (Look at the role of Condoleezza Rice, for example, in the use of
torture. And NO COMMENT from the Archbishop, as far as I know.)

He is, in fact, placing a _priority_ upon abortion as worse than ANY other
evil if he chooses that ONE criterion to characterize a party as a "party of
death".

I can't see how there can be any reasonable escape from this conclusion.

Now, with regards to Iran, I don't particularly _care_ (see my website) that
my conclusions are not echoed by the Zionist mainstream media.

By censoring the Truth about the Doctrine of "resurrection", the Zionist media
is doing EVERYTHING it can to incite WARFARE between the United States/the
Israel and Iran.

Posted by Michael Cecil | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

6:01 pm UTC

My head is spinning! Last Sunday our parish hosted a lecture on "Faithful
Citizenship" based on material published by the US Catholic Bishops that
enumerate a whole set of issues including not only abortion but torture,
genocide and fouling the planet upon which we all must survive-and clearly
states that "Catholics must NOT be 'single-issue' voters".

Now, this guy gets up in front of God and everybody, with the microphone of
ecclesial authority, and says this. Although the Church proudly proclaims its
devine origin, sometimes it stumbles on the human frailty of its practical
foundations. This would appear to be one of those times.

Posted by Art Marriott | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

6:02 pm UTC

Abortion is a personal decision. And as a X Catholic, I know, the Catholic
Church has never been comfortable with the concept of personal cholce and
responsibility.

Posted by Blogger | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

6:20 pm UTC

So, can someone remind me why the Catholic Church is still permitted to retain
its non-profit status, in the face of its blatant political activity?

Posted by Doug Zeh | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

6:54 pm UTC

In general abortion is an extremely gray area. In regards to Dave's post: If
the parents can't afford to have children, then maybe they should learn a
little more constraint in the bedroom, or look into other preventative
measures which would in the long run be cheaper. Of course, we could always
look to Mr. Swift's solution to the problem and start eating babies after they
are born. That should solve many of the world's starvation issues. Please
note: This comment is made in the same tone as the original proposal put forth
by Mr. Swift.

That being said, I will say that there are a couple of exceptions that should
be made when deciding on the legality of abortion. One being impregnated by
rape, another being health issues. Should a woman be raped and thereby
concieve a child, it is unreasonable to as her to bear the fruits of the
violation that was made against her. Also, should the life of a woman be
threatened by the fetus, and the removal thereby save her life, it should be
undertaken.

And I find it highly ironic that the security word that I had to type in to
post this was "love".

Posted by Jordan | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

7:22 pm UTC

So, can someone remind me why the Catholic Church is still permitted to retain
its non-profit status, in the face of its blatant political activity?

    * Posted by Doug Zeh 

Where in this article did you see anything about the church telling people how
to vote? It seems you don't believe in freedom of religion. You don't think
the church should be allowed to state its position on "Catholics" who support
abortion. Biden and Pelosi can vote however they want. Your implication that
that somehow means the Church has to welcome them, otherwise lose their tax-
exempt status shows just how asinine most liberal thinking is.

It's about the same as you claiming I've starved you because you're allergic
to everything in my pantry. I'm not forcing you to eat at my house, but if
you'd like to, you'll eat what I give you. Get it?

So should Obama's church lose its tax exempt status or do you only spew BS
like that when it's a republican issue?

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

7:29 pm UTC

Michael,  
The exact qoute was that the party risked "transforming itself definitively
into a party of death for its decisions on bioethical issues."  
Bioethical issues would range far more than just abortion.  
I think that the real issue for the bishop is the hypocrisy displayed by
prominient Democratic Catholics, in that they claim to be devout Catholics,
yet their policy dictates otherwise. It is unreasonable to believe that
whatever eithics guide a Politician, (if any), is not in some way influenced
by their personal religious choices. The bishop's declamation of the Democrat
Catholics has more to do with church politics than anything else.

Posted by Jordan | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

7:50 pm UTC

Church Views were distorted by individuals in high profile lifestyles(whom
entire countries hear). The Vatican corrected the erroneous views of church
doctrine, because those who distorted the Church standards were not likely to
give explanation if corrected. They surely wouldn't recant as loudly as they
gave their personal views. The church was wise to correct it personally and
solidly. Agree or disagree with it, they have a right to correct
misinformation that is aimed directly at them. "Every tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment THOU shalt condemn".

Posted by Karen A | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

7:57 pm UTC

Pro-life..yeah yeah yeah…but it's ok to support nazis, neofascists now a days,
and r@pe little boys behind the altar. Oh! by the way…what happened to all the
nuns who perform abortions in secret? I'm sure this is news to you.

I think many people are upset about these condescending comments by Mr. Burke
because we know that the Catholic Church has no moral authority to even talk
about these social issues.

Posted by mr frodo | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

8:21 pm UTC

Michael, I don’t intend to repeat myself, my position re your extravagant out-
of-the- ballpark postings is clear in my two previous postings. I do “get it”!
Insofar as your most recent posting, let me try to make it simple so that you
can “get it”. The article that started this conversation should stand on its
own. Here in plain view and in context is what the article stated about
Archbishop Burke (direct quotes from the article):  
1. U.S. Democratic Party risked “transforming itself definitively into a party of death for its decisions on bioethical issues.”  
2. He then attacked two of the party’s most high profile Catholics — vice presidential candidate Joe Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi — for misrepresenting Church teaching on abortion.  
3. He said Biden and Pelosi, “while presenting themselves as good Catholics, have presented Church doctrine on abortion in a false and tendentious way.”  
4. Burke said pro-life Democrats were “rare” and that it saddened him that the party that helped “our immigrant parents and grandparents” prosper in America had changed so much over the years.  
5. Burke’s criticism isn’t limited to Democrats. Last year, he accused singer Sheryl Crow of being “a high profile proponent of the destruction of innocent lives” for defending a woman’s right to have an abortion and for being a proponent of stem cell research. He resigned as head of a children’s medical charity that featured the singer for a benefit concert.  
Now, Michael, without introducing your abortion/war arguments, just control
yourself and let us know which of the 5 quotes above you don’t agree with - -
(and keep in mind it is this article that we are discussing)? It’s as simple
as that. As I indicated earlier, if you would like to discuss abortion vs.
war, I will be happy to accommodate you. But please don’t introduce and
misrepresent both the Archbishop and the Church’s statements and/or positions
on abortion vs. war which are not even in the article nor do they exist. Do
you get it?

Posted by Greg Castano | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

8:22 pm UTC

This is just a ridiculous abuse of religious power. This person isn't even IN
the United States of America. How does he get off bashing American
politicians? They never made an oath to preach the gospel of the Catholic
Church in their position of political authority. Please. This is just utter
ridiculousness.

Posted by ProudProtestant | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

8:23 pm UTC

I agree with the vatican the democrats are evil demons that steal cheat and
lie to get away with murder.

Posted by tammy | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

8:55 pm UTC

I agree with the vatican the democrats are evil demons that steal cheat and
lie to get away with murder.

    * Posted by tammy

Finally, someone who gets it.

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

9:01 pm UTC

Dear ProudProtestant,  
The bishop is from St. Louis, i.e.: a United States city.

And Tammy dear, take a look at the Catholic Church's own history. Try at about
1100 AD through the Reformation. Very interesting politics, with many a murder
and intrique, all bent on increasing the power and wealth of the Church. Not
to mention the Babalonian Captivity, as well as that little period in which
there were three popes all trying to wrest power from the others.

Posted by Jordan | Report as abusive

Oct 1, 2008

10:52 pm UTC

The Margaret Sanger project was indeed genocide. You need to do your research.
In case you haven't noticed, white people don't murder as many of their
offspring as other colors. See Planned Parenthood's own numbers - obvious!

Adios!

Posted by Tommy Jalisco | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

2:46 am UTC

Speaking of Sarah Palin, there are two questions I’d like to see put to Ms.
Palin during Thursday’s V.P. debate, or in her next interview (if she ever has
another).

Actually, Gibson or Couric (let’s forget Murdoch’s "hired-hand Hannity")
should have already asked these questions:

1.) Why did you as mayor of Wasilla force female rape-victims reporting the
crime to pay out of their own pocket for the forensic-kit and exam needed in
the work-up (see NYT 9/26/08)?

2.) Was your policy of requiring rape-victims to pay for their own forensic
exams a result of your publicly stated belief that even women who become
pregnant as a result of rape should be required to carry that pregnancy to
full term and birth?

I see no reason why Palin, as candidate for the office of Vice President of
the USA, and with a 1 in 3 chance of taking over as President in the next 4
years, should continue to be shielded from answering these questions publicly.

I'd also be interested in Archbishop Raymond Burke's position on these two
questions.

His intervention for the Republican Party in this election reminded me of
another Church figure, Cardinal Spellman, who in the early 1960's put pressure
on politicians to back the corrupt Diem Regime in South Vietnam with more
troops. That advice was followed, and ultimately resulted in the loss of tens
of thousands of American lives, and hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese lives.

How many lives will be lost when McCain bombs Iran, and with what will follow
that action?

Respect for life - really? Hardly.

Posted by fbla1805 | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:21 am UTC

I'm not even Catholic but i ssy right on here ..it's about time a staunch
approach is taken against the party that would like to see America brought to
its knees.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

9:44 am UTC

I'm sorry. Well not really. But if you believe that life truly begins at
birth, then you must think it's o.k. to kill a baby while the mother is in
labor right? Isn't that right Dave? Which is it? A fetus? Or a 7 pound, 8
ounce baby in the birth canal? It's o.k. to murder them?

If you want, we can nevermind religion for a moment. How about basic morality
that you may have been associated with (giving the benefit of the doubt here)
at an early age and now have obviously dismissed as irrational? I'm curious.

Posted by NorEEzta | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

9:50 am UTC

Not only are the Democrats the party of death and in bed with planned
parenthood, all you pro-choice Catholic Democrats need to look into the
history of planned parenthood and it's founder association with the KKK (she
spoke at a KKK rally) Don't take my word for it, read and educate youself
left-wing moonbats. Democrats crack me up as they try to paint Repubs as not
caring for the poor, yet they continue to condone infanticide of millions (15
million and counting since roe v wade)of innocent defenseless unborn babies.
Is there anything sicker than this?

Posted by Rick Garnett | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

11:26 am UTC

One only needs to read the comments posted here to have a clear understanding
of everything that is amiss in the world today. It is mindblowing that so many
people can actually compare the brutal slaughter of innocent children to any
kind of war. But, just for the sake of argument, lets go with that for a
moment. Using this logic, executing innocent children would still be wrong
because in the United States alone, there have been more deaths from executing
children (49 million plus) than from all of the world's wars combined! Which
just goes to show that it's not about what is right, and it never has been, it
is about men and women humping like animals in a free and unrestrained manner
- with no consequences for their sin.

Posted by Ray Bowman | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

12:10 pm UTC

Thank God somebody in the Catholic church is speaking up about this issue!
What they should do is publicly excommunicate every prochoice politician.

The Catholic church has the worst leadership of any organization I know of.
They need to stop being so timid and do their job and their main job is to
defend the faith. For a start reissue that letter written by pope Benedict.

Posted by John Biggins | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

1:01 pm UTC

Where's the call to take away the tax exempt status of say the Black Churches
when they express their political beliefs? The Catholic Church has just as
much right to preach to its members as any other organization has to preach to
its members. Has Tom Bellhouse, above, complained about the revolt of the
Pastors who are defying the IRS by exercising their Freedom of Speech? I don't
know what it is about the Catholic Church, but people will go absolutely
bonkers when the Church speaks up about anything. Like in the detective
programs on TV - the guilty ones are the ones who yell their innocence the
loudest. Hey, the pro choice would like to make everyone pro choice so what's
wrong with the pro lifers wanting to make everyone pro lifers?

Posted by George D | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

1:01 pm UTC

It speaks about the misinterpretation of catholic belief by some-one who
claims themselves as true catholics or representatives of catholics .There is
nothing wrong in archbishop Burke coming out strongly against these people,who
support stem cell research and abortion.

Posted by Paul Dominic | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

1:34 pm UTC

Ummmm anyone who says "the poor people who are forced to take care of this kid
they never wanted" don't seem to understand…IF YOU DON'T WANT A CHILD AND
CAN'T AFFORD TO TAKE CARE OF ONE, DON'T HAVE SEX!!!! How idiotic do you hav to
be? SEX=KID. Even with condoms, the pill, the nuva ring, pull and pray…you can
still have a kid. If you aren't ready for a kid, and cant afford to have a
kid, don't have sex. Simple. Short. Consise. The choice to have sex, comes
with the possible outcome of having a kid. Biology, learn it and live it.  
Morons…..

Posted by Nate | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

2:00 pm UTC

Mother Church has a problem with war too if you'd care to study the issue
prior to handing down your diatribes. This article simply focuses on the
abortion issue. Have you not heard of "Just War Theory" and the Church's
denunciation of the Bush Doctrine? The difference is that the abortion issue
touches upon the dogmatic whereas the just war issue touches upon the mere
personal philosophy of the Pope.

And really… Is there truly a comparison to be made between Radical
Antisemitism at the Nation-State level and the fate of an unborn child..? Who
needs more protection..? Why Iran of course (sic).

S

Posted by Sean | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

2:14 pm UTC

The article is about abortion not nuclear war. Well over a million have been
killed by abortion. If I'm not mistaken the demos dropped the bombs on
Japan(nuclear), started WWII, Korean, and Vietnam Wars. I know we didn't
actually start WWII, Korea, Or Vietnam but the demos seem to forget who was in
power. As a former demo I remember and if our current history books were
accurate we would all remember.

Posted by Frank Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

2:19 pm UTC

In reply to tommy when will the obama man actually have to answer questions.
The only questions he answers are softball questions from friendly newspeople.
Even O'Reily was kind to him-I guess you have to take his affirmative action
education into account. You don't get to yell racist at the world when the
going gets tough.

Posted by Frank Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

2:44 pm UTC

[…] Joe Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ? for misrepresenting Church
teaching on abortion. con't @ Reuters ========== So-called Catholic
politicians that vote pro-choice are not Catholics, but, rather, […]

Posted by Vatican official calls Democrats 'party of death' - Conservative
Republican Discussion Forums | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

3:41 pm UTC

The whole, then don't have kids debate is non-sensical and only applies to
those who were irresponsible in their lives.

It completely leaves out rape victims, instances where the birth could lead to
the death of the mother, and yes accidents DO happen and there in lies my
point.

If a woman and man choose to have sex, do so with protection, and yet still
end up pregnant it is an accident. Should they be forced to bear this child
that they had attempted to prevent from happening in the first place?  
Is it your or anyone else's choice what that woman decides to do in her life?

Is it not she and she alone who must deal with her decision and the
reprecussions of said decision?

Nate, acting like those who don't want kids should never have sex in the first
place is idiotic. That thinking will NEVER work. It's the whole abstinence
argument all over again. We are human, we enjoy sex and we will continue to
enjoy and have it and it will never be something that is ONLY for procreation.
It's admirable if you live that way, however it's ignorant to expect the
billions of other humans to follow your example.

I myself had a child very young that I was unprepared for and had no
intentions of having at the time. The condom broke and now he's 8. We made a
choice to live with our mistake. That was our choice to make though, and not
something I would have wanted forced on us.

Just as we chose to have the baby, another couple may choose to have an
abortion or to give the baby up for adoption. That is their right to make that
choice and no one should force any one decision on them.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

3:53 pm UTC

OK Dave,

So if I come over to your house and shoot you in the head, that's ok right -
because we wouldn't want to impose the 'religious' view that murder is not ok
on anyone.

Last time I checked most people I know were firmly in favor of having laws
against murder, and abortion is absolutely the physical act of murder of a
defenseless child.

Posted by Claudia | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

4:32 pm UTC

First, There are those who say you should not mix religion with politics or
you should not force your religious/political views on person. The irony in
this does not go unnoticed. Religion is the biggest contributing factor to
shaping a persons opinion. Allow me to repeat that, “Religion is the biggest
contributing factor to shaping a persons opinion.” Should I do as several
people state and refrain from voicing my religious beliefs then I also refrain
from voicing my opinion. I am also being asked not to vote, but yet if I don’t
vote then I would be told to shut-up because I did not vote; essentially
placing me in a Catch-22. The irony is that those who tell me to keep my
religion, or beliefs, to myself are the very ones forcing their belief, or
religion, on me. In other words you wish for me to remain silent while you
shout from the top of the hills your beliefs, because you fear opposition, to
lazy to take a stand, or possible fear your whole world will crumble if you
discover the information you have is unable to stand using logic.

Second, There seem to be a lot of people that are experts on Catholicism; but
hardly any who actually practice the faith. So many people here are up in arms
and spewing unintelligent, misinformed information about the Catholic Faith,
Christianities oldest denomination (read your history if you doubt this). The
Church holds that ALL life is precious, just like God does, and that everyone
is capable of redemption no matter how serious the sin is, just like God does.
My thoughts were like many of those who think they know Catholicism, and all
those thoughts were developed from people who were not Catholic or had some
kind of selfish grudge against the Church; but it was not until I met a
Catholic who really understood their faith and patiently explained it to me.
Through my process of converting and even to this day I experience a lot of
pain and suffering, but I have yet to find anything that is as comforting,
beautiful, and peaceful as what has been passed from our Lord to His Church.
Please, speak with an educated mind and not one that is derived from idiocy.

Third, Abortion is the action of taking a human life. If you can not see this
then it is because you chosen a selfish nature for sexual pleasure. Whether it
is for yourself or the couple that already has four kids and can not afford a
fifth one. The true is abortion is being used as a means of birth control so
people can have sex without worrying about the consequences of their action.
Besides the religious reasons, a person should abstain from sex if they are
unwilling to accept the responsibilities of raising a child. It is through
lust, that a person cultivates and feeds, a person becomes a slave to the
sexual impulses. You say kill the baby that is growing inside the woman
because you are unable to except the what you helped create; I say abstain
from sex so the choice does not need to be made. For those who say that life
does not begin until after birth I would love to sit down discuss why you have
chosen this position, to hear what you have to say and try to understand why
you think that way, for what how has the baby changed from the time before
birth to the time after birth?

Fourth, Should tax exemption be revoked from religious organization? No, It is
called the first amendment for it allows the freedom of speech and religion.
In the case described in this article the Church has performed the correct
action. The politicians that claim to be Catholic but continue to speak
publicly against the doctrines of the their faith should be corrected, and
efforts were made to correct them in private as well as general statements
made public by the Vatican regarding the Churches stance. These same people
that claim to be Catholic simple do so receive the votes of Catholics;
therefore, the Church has a duty to call out publicly those that are
misleading the faithful without recourse.

Remember if there is no God then how can person claim to be an atheist for an
atheist denies the existence of God, so God has to exist in order for an
atheist to deny His existence.

Posted by Ralph | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

4:41 pm UTC

It is so predictable to see people change the subject when abortion is the
issue. You wonder why they need to do that. My theory is that they vote for
"pro-choice" candidates and have a hard time rationalizing their vote with
their religious beliefs.

Posted by freeyourmind | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

4:42 pm UTC

[quote : start]  
My head is spinning! Last Sunday our parish hosted a lecture on “Faithful
Citizenship” based on material published by the US Catholic Bishops that
enumerate a whole set of issues including not only abortion but torture,
genocide and fouling the planet upon which we all must survive–and clearly
states that “Catholics must NOT be ’single-issue’ voters”.

Now, this guy gets up in front of God and everybody, with the microphone of
ecclesial authority, and says this. Although the Church proudly proclaims its
devine origin, sometimes it stumbles on the human frailty of its practical
foundations. This would appear to be one of those times.

    * Posted by Art Marriott  
[quote : end]

Art,

You are mixing two subjects that should be kept separate, but when we vote we
are asked to view everything in priority; so legalizing abortion would take
precedence over legalizing the selling of sex.

The Archbishop is actually doing his duty by addressing those who publicly
proclaim to be Catholic but speaking out publicly against the teachings of the
Church. Your comment makes the statement that when one official speaks out
against a contradiction to the doctrines of out faith they should address all
of them at the same time. This is a ridiculous claim and not feasible for as
soon as a person started talking everyone would run.
![:\)](http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/wp-includes/images/smilies/simple-

smile.png)

Posted by Ralph | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

4:43 pm UTC

Reading all these comments I forgot we were talking about gov't sanctioned
killing of unborn kids. I think they use a vacuum cleaner to suck them out
piece by piece, and then throw them in the garbage.

Just do not know how anyone would think this was a good idea, but hey were all
different.

Posted by Qerq | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:10 pm UTC

If you believe life begins at conception then the unborn have US
constitutional rights.

Posted by JJ | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:18 pm UTC

Wonderful article, prayer does work!!! My faith is far more important than
partisan political doctrine from the left.

Posted by Navychef | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:21 pm UTC

Abortion is murder for convenience sake, there can be no other interpretation,
not in God's or Man's eyes. Margarette Sanger established Planned Parenthood
as a means of practicing eugenics in America. Her goal was to reduce the
number of African-Americans, which she considered a degenerate race. Abortion
equates with genocide, in principle and practice. The "right to choose" (to
murder one's fetus) was also seen as a the means for women to partake in
casual sex without consequences. This "right" was mistakenly thought to
elevate a woman's sexual status to equal that of men - who can have sex
without concern of pregnancy. However, the psychological damage of "abortion
guilt" was not accounted for. That guilt, preys on a woman's subconscious, and
results in the emotional reaction we see to pro-life advocates, such as Sarah
Palin, et al. Naturally, this condition also transfers to certain
irresponsible and infantile libertine men who desire promiscuous sex without
commitment. Abortion allows these men to transfer all prophylactic and birth
control responsibility to the woman. Abortion is but another degradation
heaped upon women for the benefit of the immoral or emotionally disturbed
class.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:22 pm UTC

Michael,

How many fetuses have vowed to exterminate 5 million people as Iran's leader
has?

PREVENTING that extermination is not a nobel cause?

Posted by Deb | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:37 pm UTC

The party of death. Yes, but why do Democrats take a Pro-Abortion position? It
is puzzling. Even when a women's "choice" is Life for the innocent, they
oppose an demonize those that do. Democrats choose life for the guilty (no
death penalty) and life for the monsters (tyrants and dictators that provoke
war. Their position makes no sense to an individual. Of course, the individual
is not important unless it is supporting the state.

Posted by Marcus | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:40 pm UTC

You folks are WAY LATE in this summation! The Demonrats have been the death
party for over 50 years!!Not only just abortion,they gave away half of Europe
to the murderous communists! They gave away Cuba to the murderous
communists,ditto Viet Nam,almost Nicaragua,Haiti,they chose Mao over Chang ka
Shek-the agrarian farmer,kiss Hugo Chavez'rasberries,etc ad nauseum.The
Dimbulb-o-rats consider LIFE EXACTLY like the Chinese do!

Posted by mike e. cooney | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:41 pm UTC

I'm glad Archbishop Burke is forcefully enunciating Church doctrine on
bioethical issues. Too many Catholic legislators are claiming that their
informed Catholic consciences allow them to be for abortion, embryonic stem
cell research, and euthanasia. They've not been challenged until now, perhaps
because none of them have publicly enunciated the false reasoning which led
them to their conclusion. The misrepresentation of Saint Augustine's views by
Pelosi and Biden were, I think, the last straws. To have high ranking Catholic
politicians misstating Catholic theology as put forth by a Doctor of the
Church just begged for correction.

I'm glad it's come. These people need to get a copy of the Bible and the
Catechism of the Catholic Church, and sit down (preferably with a study group
at their local parish) and begin to truly understand the faith of their
fathers.

Posted by unclesmrgol | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:43 pm UTC

EXCELLENT. Now, when will the excommunications start???

Posted by chiefpayne | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

5:49 pm UTC

Pregnancy is always a possible consequence of sex when a woman is of
childbearing age. Even if you favor abortion, why should that right be
absolute? How can anyone justify a late abortion? Yet, the pro-choicers were
vehemently opposed to the Partial Birth Abortion ban. How also can anyone
morally justify abortions because a child will be born with Down Syndrome or
other birth defects? What does that have to do with a woman's right to choose?
The woman in such cases presumably chose to carry a "perfect" child to term.
Does the right to choose extend to a woman's right to choose to have a child
without birth defects (or the wrong sex, which happens in China and India)?

Posted by Arriane | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

6:11 pm UTC

Anyone who presents themselves as ardent Catholics and then tries to
misrepresent Church teachings to justify  
their position is the worst kind of hypocrite. The Democrat party is host to
several prominent such people,  
Pelosi, Biden, Kennedy, Kerry, the Cuomos, father and son.  
Itis unfotunate that they value their power more than their souls and defy the
verdict that they should not receive the Eucharist.  
They think that smarter than the Pope and the Bishops and they can do as they
please. However, they would do well to mind the words of Jesus Himself, who
said to Peter  
"whose sins you bind on earth shall be bound also in Heaven"

Posted by Mervyn J Fonseca | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

6:13 pm UTC

The Pope, as herder of the flock of followers has not only the right, but the
obligation to make sure the church followers are not violating the teachings
of Jesus Christ as Son of God. He is not addressing or forcing non church
members to abide by the church laws. Pelosi, Biden and Kennedy profess to be
church members of the Catholic Faith.

The Bishops serve are arms of the Pope. Therefore any person who professes to
believe in God and is a member of the church must follow the teachings of the
church or face refusal of the church sacraments. It just so happens that it is
the Democrat Party with Ms Pelosi and Mr Biden who are blaspheming the church
by false statements. So yes the Democrat party is the party of Death in
America, with over 40,000,000 babies, yes that is correct, over 40 million
babies murdered under the disguise of Choice in the last ten years. Yes, 7
babies killed a second, mostly by middle class whites and thousands per year
were 3rd and 4th abortions. So bad that the DNC sued with ACLU to stop record
keeping of the just lazy birth control methods. And then the DNC makes such a
fuss about deaths defending the freedoms of America!! What most people do not
know is the abortion doctor performs the operation for 200 dollars and then
sells the aborted babies to Embroy Stem Cell research labs for upwards of
2,000 dollars. Abortion on Demand is a Business of Death supported by the
Democrat Party of Death in United States of America.

Posted by Tiger500 | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

6:17 pm UTC

Really, the country is facing multi-generational issues on many fronts - The
Church should teach as is its right and obligation but not weigh into politics
over the heads of its lay faithful who have the duty and obligation to make
prudential judgements in the secular political world. There are so many ways
to preach but the finest is done with the life of the preacher. Unfortunately
the Church has lost a lot of credibility because of the many scandals that
they allowed to happen. So let the Bishops do their work in building up the
Church and if they do their job, the laity will build a polity according to
just principles.

As far a criticizing Nancy Pelosi who raised her children before becoming a
politician. Or Joseph Biden, who is a family man himself. Anyone who has lived
in the disfunctional American Catholic church for the past 45 years and should
be applauded for staying in and not criticized for living their life according
to their conscience.

Maybe the Bishops should listen to ST. Francis of Assisi who told his brothers
to 'Preach the Gospel always, and when necessary use words' - with emphasis on
teaching by their lives not their words.

Posted by john | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

6:50 pm UTC

This is an article on abortion-not on "choice". Any thinking person believes
that Hitler's murder of 6 million innocent Jews was a monstrous crime against
humanity. There have been over 44 million murders-abortions-of innocent
babies-not "fetusus"-in the U.S.A. in the last 40 years. How many more murders
will it take until "thinking" liberals believe that too many have died for
convenience's sake?

The religious position is correct-regardless of one's belief in God or not.
And any Christian who stands before God on the final day will have a very hard
time explaining their support of abortion-and their voting for candidates who
support and / or this horror.

I will not vote for a candidate who supports abortion-I am afraid of Hell.

Rocketman El Paso, Tx, U.S.A.

Posted by John Bibb | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

6:53 pm UTC

Biden's statement that he would not legislate his religious views on others is
simple-minded bunk. Simply stated, the laws against murder are based upon
moral foundations. This is no less true of the law against abortion. The
active, intentional, or negligent killing of another human being is wrong.
Period. And, that is not imposing any one religion on another person. It is
the essence of providing for the peace of society and the security of each
person. The kid in the womb of a mother is not a blob of flesh subject to whim
and fancy, but a human being with rights.

Posted by CharlieK | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

7:03 pm UTC

The Catholic church has never expected that 1 billion human beings are all
going to be perfectly abstinant and follow the teachings of Jesus. That is why
the church has the sacrament of penance. People are going to sin and the
church knows this and make no excuses for it. But the teachings of Jesus are
what they are. It is hypocritical, when a public official makes a point to let
the public know that he is a member of the Catholic (meaning 'universal')
church, but somehow doesn't feel like their beliefs extend to the entire human
population; then, what do they really believe? And why are they bothering to
label themselves as Catholic?

Posted by M4rk3r | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

7:05 pm UTC

Roe vs Wade decriminalized abortion for the Doctor, never made it OK for the
Mother to Murder her baby. The Christian church teaches life starts at the
moment of conception. No ands, ifs, or buts about it. Aborting the baby is
murder, goes against thou shall not kill. I nor anyone else will say Joe Biden
or Ms Pelosi are doomed to hell. Just that they are trying to tell the sheep
that the Catholic Church DOES NOT TEACH LIFE BEGINS AT MOMENT OF CONCEPTION.
This is blasphemy and must be dealt with. One does not have to say Democrat
Party of Death,  
one only has to say Party of Death. Then one asks, what Party condones
Abortion? Dah. is not Independents, is not Green, is not Republicans, etc,
only one left is Democrat. Look at their party platform. Listen to Cathy
Couric asking Sarah Palin? One does not have to be a rocket scientist to
figure out which Party is the party of Death!! Does not just apply to babies
either. How about the little gal on life support in Florida the Republicans
could not get Democrat support to stop the Court ordered execution? You
remember Schiavo feeding tube removal in 2005? But at the same time Democrats
with try to stay the jury ordered execution of a multi person murderer, don't
make logical sense at all.  
I will never forget Gore lawyer at the Florida Supreme Court arguing "Who is
listening to the voices of the Hanging Chats", and I thought "who is listening
to the voices of the little baby about to be killed by abortion on demand". 40
million babies aborted in ten years is just crazy. And is in America founded
for LIFE, LIBERTY AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. Is a Farce.

Posted by Tiger500 | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

7:57 pm UTC

If you take a political job such as senator, governor, representative, mayor,
president, vice president, ANY appointed spot, you are agreeing to represent
the people who elected you and not your church or your religious views.

The seperation of church and state was created for a few reasons. One was to
allow freedom of religion and a state sponsored religion would be in direct
contrast with freedom of religion.

It is quite fine for the church to spread it's beliefs and values. That's part
of the religious freedom we ALL enjoy.

However it is a seperate issue entirely when politicians begin legislating
their religious doctrines on an entire society of people. By accepting office,
these politicians are affirming that they will seperate their religion from
their civic duties.

Whether you like it or not abortion is wholly a religious/moral debate, and
not everyone is in agreeance.

You have the freedom of choice to not ever take part in the practice you deem
un-holy and evil, so you've already made your decisions. But don't get all
savior and believe you need to make abortions illegal. Let God judge those
people that choose to make that choice, since it's a sin and all and only God
can judge.

And what's funny is how the Church is so against abortions because they are
supremely pro-life. What's so hysterical about that is that the Church is
responsible for more death over the last few thousand years than any other
institution.

Look up all the religious wars that have claimed millions of lives. From the
Crusades to modern day, war and death created in the name of God, Allah, and
other religions haven taken a huge toll on human life.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:03 pm UTC

[…] Reuters.com […]

Posted by ScoopThis.Org » Vatican official calls Democrats “the party of
death”! | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:05 pm UTC

Michael Cecil your just like the standard punched out cookie dough liberial..
when you cant defend a position just on its own merits you have to go into the
atmosphere and pull down some well spun correlation. the fact is that liberial
as a fact will fight visously to save the life of a violent killer… but
applaud the right to end the life of infant that has no voice. they end the
life so that they wont have to be responsible for thier actions… the one that
will be responsible for that action is ironically the one that had no voice
for their action… you and those who believe like you are not progressive… but
canine

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:19 pm UTC

Scientists know when life begins in the womb so that's no longer an excuse.  
At this very moment, babies are being partially delivered, having their brains
suctioned out, heads crushed, and being delivered dead. Many of them would be
fully funtional babies and could grow up to be wonderful people.  
In this country, abortions are done in which babies are born alive and left to
die. Ask any nurse who works where abortions are performed.  
You are voting for a man who has voted to support all of this without a blink.  
Give this more than a thought if you are able.

Religious people, including priests and pastors, have every right - check the
Constitution - to discuss religious beliefs wherever they wish. You just don't
like what they are saying. My pastor can't MAKE me vote for anyone, but he has
a right to talk about elections issues and the positions that he believes in.
Otherwise, you are removing his rights. Is that okay with you too?  
The people who wrote the Constituion knew that religion was very necessary to
society. Check their letters - there is lots of history out there about their
beliefs.

Posted by Dee | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:30 pm UTC

this whole system of the world smells of death  
but how dare the vatican talk any way what about the  
sixty eight million jews they put to death  
and there evil venom doctrine that poisens peoples minds  
to believe a lie and be damned by it.

Posted by Denver Morgan | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:32 pm UTC

I guess he's just upset because the more abortions, the less toddles there are
for him to molest.

Posted by Lola | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:46 pm UTC

Democrats who are Roman Catholic and approve of gay marriage and abortion are
really not Christian in the opinion of the Roman Catholic Church.

They have chosen a political party over their own beliefs and greed. They will
regret it when their time comes.

Posted by Lelande | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

8:49 pm UTC

I was raised Roman Catholic and the Church has every right to say one party is
the "party of death." However, if they want to press it as an election issue
and thereby support one party over another, they should lose their tax exempt
status.

Posted by Frank | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

9:24 pm UTC

Liberals try to sidetrack the truth with idiotic sidebars about war. What
Bishop Burkd is referring to the doctrine of the Catholic church with respest
to when life begins. We hold that life begins at conception, something which
Joe Biden states that he believes also. Pelosi has no idea what she is taling
about, trying to refer to St. Augustine. Where is her degree in theology. This
truth has existed in the faith for 2000 years. If you cannot respect life at
it most elemental, what good are all your so-called programs. Also, I think it
shows a degree of arrogance to want to kill a child, while you so smugly enjoy
your own existence. Whether you will admit it or not, Barack Obama fought the
bill that would aid those children born as a result of a botched abortion. He
promotes infanticide, not a very messianic stance to take.

Also, you need to speak to those children who find out that their sibling(s)
was aborted. They wonder, why not me?

It is NOT the woman's body. She is carrying a body within. These arguments are
a case of misguided compassion. The situation of Down's Syndrome children was
brought to light in an episode of Quincyt ME, A doctor allowed a Down's
Syndrome child to die in this episode, and Dr. Quincy discovered that it was
an abvious case of murder. In this episode there were children with that
syndrome, acting and it was brought to light that they are not only trainable,
but educable as well. Life goes on had a Down's Child who was mainstremed in
school and played a character named Corky Thatcher. These children are loving,
and good-natured and have a RIGHT TO LIFE!! Trouble is that feminists don't
want to be bothered. Don't want that less thsn perfect child. Baby Louise, the
test tube baby blew a big part of Roe V. Wade, because she proved that the
fertilized egg could be viable in a test tube as opposed to the womb. That was
a huge point in R V W., fetal viability. It is easy to be smug when your
parent chose your life.

And, just for your information the Vatican spoke out against the Iraq war.

Posted by dana | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

9:31 pm UTC

[…] So says former St. Louis Archbisop Raymond Burke, now with the Vatican:
Burke, who was named prefect of the Vatican’s Supreme Court of the Apostolic
Signature in June, told the Italian Catholic newspaper Avvenire that the U.S.
Democratic Party risked “transforming itself definitively into a party of
death for its decisions on bioethical issues.” He then attacked two of the
party’s most high profile Catholics — vice presidential candidate Joe Biden
and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi — for misrepresenting Church teaching on
abortion. […]

Posted by The Mud Pit » Democrats Are The "Party of Death"? | Report as
abusive

Oct 2, 2008

9:59 pm UTC

Part of the scandals of the Church arose out of the 60s and being told by the
APA (American Psycholigical Association) that behaviors could be
rehabilitated. Why do you think that we are still fighting against sexual
predators. Just look at the issues with Vermont not passing Jessica's law.

Plus let us put abortion into a more recognizable perspective. Take the
Kennedy family for example. Their sister Rosemary was born simple, I hate the
word retarded. Her father had her lobotomized and made things much worse. Yet,
she did give joy to her family in her simplicity. What if Rose Kennedy took
the option to abort her, knowing how her daughter would suffer.  
Segue to John F. Kennedy. His Addison's disease was kept a secret. We now have
ways to identify the gene that identifies the disease. If Joe and Rose Kennedy
knew, and that the disease would elaborate at the age of 13 in John Kennedy,
they might have chosen to abort him, so that he would not have to suffer. And,
lastly Ted Kennedy, the ninth child. What if Rose said to Joe, "We already
have 8 kids and I don't want another baby, I am getting too old, don't want
morning sickness, don't want to get fat again. Then, where would we be?

Abortion is just a matter of women, relegating their children to the nature of
a product. The abortion result is referred to as the products of conception,
no Janey, Tiffany, Dave, but a product. And they are referred to as
"Therapeutic abortions". How is saline burning a child, therapeutic? And for
whom? Or, shredding the curretage through curretage? The neural tube is
developed in the 1th week. I gurantee you that the child feels pain. Plus
partial-birth abortion. The child is delivered breach, feet first, which is a
way that many woman died in childbirth in the past. Then the child in removed
and the brain is crushed. Pleasant, huh.

Women need to grow up and afford their children the same rights that they
fought for. That screeching argument that it is my body is idiotic. The whole
thing in a nutshell is that they do not WANT the child. The sexual revolution
of the 60s had led to irresponsible adults. we went from a mere 5 STDs to a
whopping 28! For those of you: that is sexually transmitted diseases. How
about teaching your children some personal responsibility? How about the baby
boomers getting off the acid and acting more mature.

After 9/11, people went back to Church because they found solace in their
faith. Maybe we need to act like every day is 9/11, because you never know
when you are going to need God.

Posted by tick | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

10:28 pm UTC

This is my problem with organized religion. You must accept dogma or you
really aren't a real or practicing member of that faith. Given the Catechism
of the Catholic church is about two inches thick (last I saw it) that is a lot
to swallow while suspending your own mental processes.

When are we going to quit letting everyone else (church, government,
commercials with lots of boobies etc., corporations, political parties) do all
of our thinking for us?

Personally I think the people singled out should simply quit the Church. Much
cleaner and more honest.

Posted by Bob D. | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

10:45 pm UTC

If people can start leaving unwanted babies at church doors knowing they'll be
taken in and fed, go for it.

You think you can force Mommy and Daddy to take good care of a child if they
do not wish to do so?

Unfortunatly, more cases that not, what will happen is that the child will be
murdered by their parents after a while anyway.

No? What parent could do that? Children are killed by parents every day…
Homicide is one of the leading causes of death of children under age four.

So make them give birth and give them the choice to sin first.

Posted by Jus'saying | Report as abusive

Oct 2, 2008

10:49 pm UTC

Homicide is one of the leading causes of death of children under age four.

Posted by Jus'saying | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:04 pm UTC

John Adams said it best

"Our Constitution was made only for a religious and moral people. It is wholly
inadequate for the government of any other."

It is both a good thing and a sad thing that the Catholic Church speaks alone
on moral ssues when there is a deafening silence from all other quarters.
Killing a child because you cannot enact enough self control or have such a
lax moral compass is beyond discusting. People in the country want to scream
about freedom but are silent and resentful of the tradeoff that must occour,
responsibility.

Posted by Andrew | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:27 pm UTC

[…] then there was more: Burke, who was named prefect of the Vatican’s Supreme
Court of the Apostolic Signature in June, […]

Posted by How About Some Real Aggiornamento? « Mary Victrix | Report as
abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:36 pm UTC

Same argument was used to justify slavery.

The "I'm personally against it, but I can't impose my views on those who do"
is getting old - centuries old.

Posted by Gladys | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:40 pm UTC

At least they dont choose child molesters and rapists over their victims.

At best he is nothing more than a hypocrite.

Posted by Vince | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:41 pm UTC

So, how about this: let's actually implement Catholic social teaching across
the board and not just on abortion ?

For libs this means no abortion, no gay rights

For cons this means no big military all over the world just one at home for
defense, no executions and tax rates plus government intervention in the
market like nobody's business in the name of social justice.

For all no sex outside of marriage, no contraceptives plus a return to the
office of the censor and the guardian of the public morals to make sure that
all media and arts pass moral muster. In addition, say bye bye to sunday
shopping. You will be searched for porn and contraceptives on the way into the
country, mass will be televised at least once a week, catholic church figures
will be major celebrities and appear on the serious talk shows, and the
angelus will be on thrice daily at the appropriate times. Why we might even
estabilish facilities where the wayward women could work off their sins in
this life….

How many of you want to sign up for all of this because this is what it means
to live in a fully Catholic country ?

If we are to implement Catholic social teaching, let's implement it wholesale
or leave it out totally.

Posted by borderjumper | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:42 pm UTC

Nice, lots of 'intellectuals' on this thread. The absurdity of comments from
both sides is pretty high. I'm glad the average 'internet messenger' doesn't
represent the views of average Americans.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:43 pm UTC

Interesting… Somehow the Vatican is able to overlook the party that lied us
and our allies into a senseless war that killed tens of thousands of innocent
Iraqis and thousands of Americans and coalition troops… Yet it's the Democrats
that they choose to demonize.

Posted by Frank | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:44 pm UTC

The anti-Catholic lies in these posts are appalling-especially in regard to
the Holocaust. If they bothered to read books, like historian, Rabbi David
Dalin's book on Pope PiusXII and how the Church SAVED thousands of Jews from
the Nazi's. But I guess it's easier to check scan those Jack Chikk tracts anti
Catholic websites for their sources.

Posted by Veronica | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:50 pm UTC

I never thought I'd live to see the day when the RCC actually started
censuring American Catholic politicians for ignoring RCC doctrine. It looks
like our new Pope Benedict has the spine that I kept thinking that the last
one would find. I'm Lutheran, not Catholic, but good on him all the same. It's
about time the RCC started cleaning house. It will be better for it.

Posted by plaasjaapie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:50 pm UTC

Why doesn't the one true cult excommunicate these politicians then? Are they
leaders of the one true fairy tale cowards?

Posted by Tito | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:55 pm UTC

Nothing angers a Democrat more than someone exposing their true views on an
issue…

Two incredibly difficult and morally challenging issues: abortion and embryo
research.

In response, what do you get from Democrats? A mantra (It's just a choice…It's
just a choice…It's just a choice…)

When you crush a 7 month-old baby's skull and then use a vaccuum to pull his
body out of his mother's womb, that's not a "choice."

When you leave a helpless infant who has just survived an abortion lying in a
linen closet, slowly dying, alone and unloved, that's not a "choice."

In our hearts we all know what it is.

It's pure evil.

And it's THE DEFINING POSITION of the left's choice for president: Barack
Obama.

Posted by stickety | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:55 pm UTC

Nice to see the hopelessly partisan bigots are out in force.

Abortion is prohibited clearly by the Roman Catholic Church's teachings on
human life. Support for at-will abortion is seen as a clear moral violation
without room for differing opinions on the life or value of an unborn child.
It is an issue restricted exclusively to Faith and Morals.

War is not. The invasion of Afghanistan was not protested by the Vatican. The
Holy See did venture forth a geo-political opinion that war against Saddam
Hussein did not meet the criteria of a just war. It was not, however, judged
to be a clear moral violation and Catholics are understood to have differing
opinions on the Geo-Political realities leading up to operation Iraqi Freedom
(rather than Faith and Morals).

As long as the Democratic Party puts Abortion-at-Will as a plank on its
platform it will have to deal with the scorn of the Roman Catholic Church and
the Church's rebukes against politicians who claim to be Catholic and then
misrepresent Church Teachings on Abortion or vote contrary to the moral stance
of the Church on Abortion.

Posted by Marty Lund | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:55 pm UTC

I look at it as one less dem in the world.

Posted by Jim-Chicago | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:56 pm UTC

Sometimes I wonder why I am not Catholic. Their leaders take stands on issues
that some protestants would not touch. I respect them for standing up for
Church doctrine.

Posted by Robert | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:56 pm UTC

I think it is a shame that such hateful speech is tolerated. I cannot wait
until we can put these people, and the Republicant's into internment camps for
re-education when Obama wins next month.  
Our country will be perfect when will elminate the ones who spread hate, and
try to undermine our values from abroad.

Posted by Big Gay Frank | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:57 pm UTC

Abortion will go down in history as a crime against humanity, worse than any
other. To destory a human in it's own motehr's womb is the height of terror.

Posted by Doc | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:57 pm UTC

Peaceful purposes Mike? I have some beachfront property for sale in Colorado,
interested?

Posted by pjc | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:59 pm UTC

Is it so hard to either keep it in your pants, keep it out of your pants, put
on a sheath, or pop a pill - instead of killing a kid? What the hell is the
matter with people? Why not just kill anybody cause you are lazy? WTF people!

Posted by Eddie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:59 pm UTC

Wow, there are some great responses in here, especially for a link from the
drudge report. I never thought I'd here about "Corky" again. My favorite
episode was when he was a rapper and he sang, "Fight The Power," by Public
Enemy. Corky rules

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:00 am UTC

Catholic Leadership is asleep at the altar. 35 YEARS of this outright friend
of satan feed, and now they dibble babble, "Scussey, scussey pweaze. Um,
maybe, if it would be all right with you all, could we probably, suggest we
might ask that you think about maybe not or maybe so, auh, well, its just that
Catholics aren't supportive of abortion, and maybe, you as a strong Catholic
politician who votes in favor of every murder stateside and beyond in the womb
war, shhhhhh, did I say …..? well, just think about it."

Yeah, we got 'cha, C-Leadership. JOKE!!! Thanks for NOTHING! Lord Have Mercy
on Us ALL. Over It!

Posted by Gera Schmidt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:01 am UTC

Thank God for ArchBishop Burke!!! It is wonderful to see  
a Bishop speak out and defend Church teaching - especially to defend Our Lord
in the Eucharist. We are seeing now that more and more Cardinals, Bishops,
etc. are speaking out because of the courageous stand of this Bishop, one of
the heroes of out time!

Posted by Lydia T. Silva | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:01 am UTC

I am always amazed by those who say it is wrong or unethical to legislate
ones' religous views on others, and then equate that with being opposed to
legalized abortion. Abortion is not a religious issue, any more than burglary,
assault and battery, or perjury are religious issues. Yes, the Bible teaches
"Thou shalt not lie" and "Though shalt not steal." But that doesn't mean that
theft and perjury should be legal - beause we don't want to "legislate" our
"religious views" on others.

Abortion involves the taking of a human life. This is not a matter fo faith,
but of scientific fact. just what, if not a human being, is the offspring of
two human beings, created by procreation? It is not a "fetus" - it is a human
being. It simply makes us feel less guilty calling unborn life a "fetus" - and
it also helps that we do not actually see the child. That is precisely why
those who support legalized abortion are so angry when photos of an abortion
are publicized.

If a human being is legally declared dead when there is the absence of
brainwaves and a heartbeat, why is a human being - who is growing and
replicating cells - and has a heartbeat and brainwaves, not considered a human
being simply because the child is in a mother's womb?

When someone has sexual intercourse, they are inviting life to start and take
hold. To allow the unborn child to be killed, because the child represents an
inconvenience to those who sought the gratification of sex, is the epitome of
evil. It is akin to child sacrifice at the alter of hedonism. We want to
engage in sex without consequences. So, we call a living child a "fetus" and
pretend it's really just a "religious" issue. Being against abortion is no
different than being against any other form of murder. By making murder
illegal, we are not imposing a religious view on society - we are protecting
innocent life. The same is true on the abortion question.

So, when someone like Biden says they are "personally opposed to abortion," it
begs the question - "why?" If it truly represents the taking of human life,
then you should not simply be against it "personally," you should adamantly
demand that your government protect the innocent life.

Again, this isn't a religious issue. It is a matter of fact and logic. And the
phrase "abortion is murder" is not an article of faith - but simply a
statement of fact.

Posted by David | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:02 am UTC

He's only pointing out was is obvious to a lot of people.

It's impossible to be anything other than a hypocrite when you are anti-war,
anti-death penalty but pro-abortion.

All of the world's wars, plus all of it's executions, in a year don't even add
up to the number of kids that we murder in this country alone.

Republicans are also hypocrites when they support the aforementioned policies
but they're not even close to the amount of blood that the Democrats are
swimming in.

…the fact that Democrats "celebrate" this and call it a "right" is all the
more disturbing.

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:04 am UTC

For those catholics out there….YOU CAN'T BE BOTH A CATHOLIC AND PRO CHOICE….If
you want to be pro-choice, leave the catholic church

Posted by Lisa Hutson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:04 am UTC

Hey Michael Cecil, at least Republicans allow everybody a chance to be born,
grow up, and then become a terrorist before wiping them off the face of the
earth.

Democrats prefer murder in the womb, where you can't hear the baby screaming.
As long as you can't HEAR the screams, its not really a baby at all.

Posted by sh | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:09 am UTC

Well it is about time these robed wonders show they have balls.. and not to
little boys

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:10 am UTC

So many things to address. Many people think taking religion out of society
would bring peace. Look at Pol Pot, Stalin, Idi Amin. If you look at your own
personal life, you do not live up to the standards you profess. You have lied,
cheated, protected yourself for your own aims. This is what is known as "sin".
The catholic church is absolutely in it's rights to point out that those who
support abortion, support murder.  
As far as a church losing it's "tax status", read the first admendment and you
will see that Congress cannot interfere with the church. Also, the church
answers to God. If you find that hard to swallow I would encourage you to look
into the history of our country and see how many of the founders were
ministers, held seminary degrees, that the Bible was used as a text book in
schools, that the universities were based on the Bible.  
To become more informed, I would encourage you to read the works of David
Barton, historian. Or, check out www.wallbuilders.com

Posted by Terry Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:11 am UTC

good for him. i am glad to see someone speaking out about the Democrats. the
party has changed.

Posted by mbviews | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:11 am UTC

I hope the democrats take a lesson from this. They are full of hate, greed and
operate out of spite.

I know many democrats and republicans and I believe republican moral standards
are by far more spiritual.

Posted by EMC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:12 am UTC

Amendment 1 of The United States Constitution states:  
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of people peacably to assemble, and to petition the
government for a redress of grievances.

* * *

Nowhere in the United States Constitution is the mention of "separation of
church and state". That phrase and "freedom of religion". are in the
Federalist's Papers. Nowhere is it stated "freedom from religion'.

Please tell me how Bill Clinton, John Kerry, Hillary, Jesse Jackson, Al
Sharpton, Barack Obama can go into black churches and preach their politics,
but a priest cannot condemn Catholic politicians who violate the tenets of the
Church, yet want to partake in the sacraments.

Murder of the unborn my be legal, but is still murder. Abortion is an act that
haunts a woman for life.

Posted by HW Simon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:13 am UTC

The Church's position on abortion is clear, and abortion is a non-negotiable
issue to practicing Catholics who follow Church doctrine. Democrats can't have
it both ways. They are either pro life, in which case I as a Catholic can vote
for them, or they are pro abortion, in which case I absolutely cannot vote for
them. Either way is fine. What they can't do is restate Catholic doctrine in
an effort to convince people to vote for them. I understand that rubs some
people the wrong way. Those people shouldn't be Catholic. Again, no problem.

Posted by Stevie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:13 am UTC

For those that are saying that if a politician helps to legislate a pro-life
law that would be like imposing their religious beliefs onto others,

Do you feel the same way about other laws legislated by politicians such as
laws against murder? Is that imposing their religious beliefs also?

Posted by Paul Christenson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:13 am UTC

So, the Democratic party believes in killing kids before they come out and the
Republican party believes in killing kids after they come out, ie the bombing
of Iraq's kids. And if the U.S. can go in and kill a million Iraqis, what is
your problem with Iran nuking a million Americans? Your hypocrisy is
astonishing to me. Why don't we just stop killing altogether. As it is, we
Americans are so without conscience, that we should just keep our mouth shut
about the immorality of other nations.

Posted by Scandalon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:14 am UTC

to cd walker, nice try but you still don't quite have the understanding to
make your argument….your reference to "thou shall not kill" is a
misunderstanding you have of biblical translations. the better translation
that would help you is that the literal meaning is "you shall not murder".
although no caring person would condone "murder" or "killing", they are in
fact two different things. to remove the fetus from the womb with a vacuum
cleaner would be "murder". to kill or be killed in war is "killing". some
simple minded people have a problem distinguishing from the two, i hope this
helps you understand why your argument doesn't make sense.

Posted by virg | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:14 am UTC

Bishop Burke - should stick to 'Bishoping" - and STAY out of politics….any man
who has allegedly ignored the sexual scandals of priests - sets no example in
any way, shape or form - to set himself up and pontificate on the political
situation in the United States.

Posted by Nancy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:14 am UTC

frank, there are a LOT of organizations that should lose tax-exempt status by
your definition. in the case of sierra club they just set up several
subsidiaries under different status, like sierra club foundation, so they can
'legally' lobby the heck out of congress. so the church could just follow that
model. anyways, who cares about the political system. democrats are a monopoly
of news, views, and politics in the u.s. and there adherents are more dogmatic
than any 'religion' on the planet. they will vote for comedians for senate,
anything democrat voters will pull the lever for anyone with a d.

Posted by mbviews | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:14 am UTC

Should the Democrat Party force the removal of the tax-exempt status of the
American Catholic Church, as they have been threatening for decades, because
the Church condemns the slaughter of innocent human life in the womb, I shall
be happy to make up the difference. So I say to the Democrat Party: BRING IT
ON.

Posted by Jay | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:16 am UTC

This is why I don't go to church anymore

Posted by bant | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:16 am UTC

I am confused. Almost all of the responders are trying to argue from a bad
position. Burke did not say the Democratic  
Party is the "party of death"but they "RISKED transforming themselves". So if
we are going to have a debate, let us be sure that we are on the same page.

Posted by Ervin Foulk | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:17 am UTC

Yes, indeed. The Republican party represents life, as long as the body is a US
citizen. If you happen to be an Iraqi citizen, then your life is deemed
'acceptable collateral damage'.

Posted by Eric | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:18 am UTC

Using the commandment "Thou shalt not kill," as a means of stereotyping every
soldier in combat as a murderer is not legitimate. Just war theory by St.
Thomas Aquinas clarifies what is in reality a very sensitive issue. Our
fighting against terrorism began as a just war, and at this point, it would be
morally irresponsible for the United States to up and leave. The situation
left in our wake would be far more dangerous than the even extremely dangerous
situation that existed when we entered Afghanistan and Iraq.

But also, I do not deny that the idea of abortion in cases of rape is very
sensitive as well. What the Church does recognize though is that there are
alternatives to killing a child because it is inconvienent or even against
one's own will. Even in the case of rape, the moral justification for having
an abortion is very weak and does not carry much water.

Posted by Michael | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:21 am UTC

For those of you who can't understand why the Catholic Church would take the
stance on abortion that they do, maybe you should read your Bible and
expressly Luke 17:2 and Ephesians 2:1-3 for a better understanding on the
Catholic opinion on other life issues. Maybe if we spent more time reading the
Bible and less time listening to the media opine and whine, we as a country
facing financial doom would be living in better times. Humble yourselves
America!

Posted by Marie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:23 am UTC

For all the indignant liberals who are whining about the position of the
Catholic Church, vis a vis it's own members, NOONE cares what you think. a)
it's none of your business. 2) your tortured "logic" that purportedly points
out contradictions in Catholic positions illustrates your ignorance of
Catholic teaching as well as 3) the haphazard way you call upon logic and
principles when it suits you, and ignore them when it doesn't. 4) your moral
equivalency is important only to you and simply underscores your absence of
judgement. 5) your moral relevancy simply reflects your LACK of VALUES. and 6)
you consistently argue about the right to choose to kill unborn children; save
your breath and just explain your position to God when the time comes.

Posted by Marcy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:23 am UTC

There has never been a Constitutional separation of church and state. Only a
requirement that congress shall pass no law establishing a state religion, in
fact it requires a free expression thereof.  
If the dems want to think they can be good Catholics and still vote for
abbortion, they are only fooling themselves.  
I don't see how any Good Catholic could vote for a democrat any more than why
95% of blacks vote for them when the dems were the ones that fought against
their civil rights, but the dems are the ones that give the hand outs to keep
them dependent on government support and not being able to make it on their
own.

Posted by Geoduck | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:23 am UTC

Kudos to Archbishop Burke for speaking out on this fundamental moral issue.
Catholics in public office who publicly put themselves in opposition to clear
church doctrine are not Catholics in good standing and should be barred from
the sacraments. It is a simple matter of church discipline. If such persons
persist in their public positions contrary to the faith, they should simply
leave the church. No big deal; the church can get along without them!

Posted by Bill Brown | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:24 am UTC

ITS ABOUT TIME SOMEONE SPOKE UP TO THESE POLITITIONS

Posted by John Barone | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:24 am UTC

this makes my blood boil. i'll answer simply citing a well-argued piece in the
national catholic reporter by a civil and canon lawyer, arguing that a pro-
life perspective gives insufficient breadth for judging how to vote in this
election. the bishops themselves have pointed out the importance of weighing a
candidate's positions on just war and torture in addition to abortion. obama
has opposed torture and the iraq war, mccain has supported them. extremists
like burke distort the argument made by his own colleagues in favor of an out-
of-kilter exclusivity of focus on abortion-an issue on which obama disagrees
with the church in supporting choice, but on which he agrees on issues such as
finding ways to decrease the number of abortions. so much for simply citing
the article. when will the right wing in the church hierarchy stop trying to
bludgeon the rest of the world with humanae vitae, and recognize that it
serves as an obstacle to useful dialogue and progress?

Posted by peter lynch | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:26 am UTC

i'm tired of it. the reason stem cell research goes somewhere is because
pluripotent cells are human! :: that is why we scientists see their potential.
get over it: existence precedes essence. the only difference between this and
slavery is you could see the effects of slavery…. you don't know them so then
they are not there…okay democrats…will give you what you want…abort your
kids.. i'm tired of it!  
i'm tired of stupidity reigning over this country… end your potential…help
global warming etc, etc, etc…

Posted by hook | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:26 am UTC

Greg…. The argument is that the Dems are being targeted by a group that at one
time supported the Nazi Party. Thats right The Vatican Supported the Nazi's. I
suppose you will undoubtedly say its not true but then again thats all you do
is say "no they didn't" about everything. If the republicans can wage war
where ever they want and kill people in the name of "security" then they are
the true abortionists. Killing people that are fully coherent and not
undeveloped fetuses the have not truly known life. They Kill the fully concise
in the name of God. They are the ones that will be in hell if there is one.
Have fun in hell greg!

Posted by rich caporiccio | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:29 am UTC

I thought it was the Islamists that learned at Hitler's knee to be Fascists?
How many children did Khomeni send into the mine fields in Iran-Iraq war? How
women are buried alive or stoned in Iran each year for trivial "crimes"?

Posted by moi61537 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:29 am UTC

I WOULD LOVE TO PUT ALL THESE ABORTION LOVERS, TO BE PUT IN THE OFFICE WHERE
THEY PULL THE BABY OUT IN PIECES. SOME ALIVE SOME DEAD. PUT THEM IN THERE AND
WATCH THERE FACES. MAYBE LET THEM HOLD A PICTURE OF THERE GRAND CHILDREN .
ESPECIALLY WHEN PEOPLE HAVE TO WAIT 10 YEARS TO ADOPT.  
WOW! JUST THINK OF ALL THE LIBERALS THAT WOULD BE AROUND.  
IT IS SO EASY TO TALK THE TALK, AND NOT WATCH WHAT REALLY GOES ON.

Posted by Michael C | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:29 am UTC

Biden is a liar and I cannot stand Cafeteria Catholics. Abortion is 100% evil
and he doesn't even have the guts to stand with his own faith.

Posted by San | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:33 am UTC

Raymond Burke is a loon, and as a Catholic it disgusts me to see the Church
getting involved in politics like this. For one, people like Burke don't seem
to make a big deal about deaths in unnecessary wars like Iraq. For two, they
shouldn't bring up political parties and who their congregations should be
voting for. Otherwise, they should lose their tax exempt status.

Posted by bigphilly | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:36 am UTC

Michael, you are so far off base I don't know where to start. First of all,
there has been no suggestion that the US should wage nuclear war with Iran.
Secondly, you equivocate the taking of innocent life to that of legal self
defense and warfare. What crime do unborn children commit that deserves the
death penalty? The democrat party has the blood of millions of children on
it's hands.

Posted by Russell | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:36 am UTC

B careful Dems, the Cath-hurch also supports your open border views, so while
your going off the handle on this statement from the Church, don't make them
to mad, they have tons of power that was all on your side until your religion
hating-yet-pandering-to Liberal "Leaders?" started abusing the issue.

That'swhat happens when you pretend to be the "Party of All, yet none."

they are all about the illegal alien aid, which meets your Socialist America
agenda, yet they disagree with you on abortion……with friends like Democrats,
who needs enemies???

Posted by tom | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:40 am UTC

The Democrats do not have the high moral ground when it comes to war.

Anyone who gives the impression that Obama will NOT commit our armed forces to
a conflict is either a liar or very foolish. If Obama is president, there will
be plenty of scenarios where his advisors will lead him into a conflict that
would prove unpopular.

Besides, what is your beef with the Catholic Church politically? Are you a
buffoon? The US Catholic Church is riddled with social justice hypocrisy which
you should just love. 47 years and I know more devout liberal democrats in the
church than conservatives. Get a grip. My beef with the church is in regards
to this social justice crap which very literally uses the threat or actual use
of violence by law enforcement to take property from one citizen and give it
to another. For the US Church it is hypocrisy, for the Democrats is further
proof of moral bankruptcy.

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:43 am UTC

Dave, old man. You are conflating multiple issues and have obviously been
listening to the worst anti-Christian publicists.

First, there is nothing in orthodox Christianity or church canons, or even the
Gospels, that says go out and commit unprovoked violence. Much as many leaders
and individuals have abused religion for their own ends, that hardly nullifies
any truth or benefits of the institution. That is like claiming the terrible
behavior of Congress or the Clintons somehow refutes the institution of
democracy and the Presidency.

Second, the Crusades were a pinprick inresponse to hundreds of years of
Islamic expnasion (over formerly Christian and peaceful territories) and
direct attacks against Europe. If anything, they were a rather anemic
response. Even Islamic extremists have stopped dragging that one out. Third,
as you seem to want to put much of the problem at the doorsteop of "the
Church", the religious wars of Europe right after the Reformation involved
Catholics and Protestants. And many of those battles were fueled as much by
poitically ambitious rulers as anything. And last we checked, "the Church" had
very little to do with Islam and submission to Allah.

Last, the wars and genocide in the name of secular-atheist ideologies in the
19th and 20th centuries make the numerical death toll from anything else pale
by comparison (Stalin, Lenin, Pol Pot, Nazism,…). So by your logic, we should
silence all secular movements. Your argument is self-refuting.

Good day!  
"What’s so hysterical about that is that the Church is responsible for more
death over the last few thousand years than any other institution.

Look up all the religious wars that have claimed millions of lives. From the
Crusades to modern day, war and death created in the name of God, Allah, and
other religions haven taken a huge toll on human life"

Posted by james | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:43 am UTC

SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE IS NOT IN THE CONSITITUION. READ IT. IT SAYS
THE GOVERNMENT WILL NOT FORCE A CERTAIN RELIGION ON YOU. OBAMA IS NOT A
CHRISTIAN. THE CHURCH IS BASED ON BLACK MARKSIS LISTEN TO THE REV WRIGHT HE
USES THE LORDS NAME IN VEIN. THAT IS ONE OF THE TEN COMANMENTS. HE ALSO
TEACHES HATE. IVE BEEN TO ALL KINDS OF CHRISTIAN CHURCHS
(CATHOLIC,BAPTIST,PENNA COSTEL,PRES.,LUTHERN,)I HAVE NERVER HEARD THE LORDS
NAME USED IN VEIN. ABORTION IS MURDER.

Posted by DIANA | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:43 am UTC

How is it that any "church" gets a tax deduction when they blatantly stick
their nose into the country's politics? The Catholic Church needs to lose
their tax free status just as should Immans at Islamic Mosques, or Rabbis at
Synagogues, etc. that rant about their political opinions.

Posted by David G. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:47 am UTC

LETS NOT FORGET WAR IS ALSO EVIL! THE REPUBLICANS TOOK US INTO THIS ILLEGAL
TRILLION DOLLAR WAR/DEATH MACHINE AND CRASHED THE ECONOMY. THEY ARE CAUSING
MORE PROBLEMS THAT ABORTION. BUT THEY WILL GET YOUR VOTE FOR THAT REASON
ALONE. LEMMINGS ALL OF YOU REPS.

Posted by rich caporiccio | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:47 am UTC

They are a death cult,no doubt about it,and they get elected on the backs of
dead soldiers,dead infants,natural disasters,and who knew the stock market
crash(Which They Created) would be A boon for them? hmmm..

As for Churches,is you do not start asserting yourself,you'll be run outa
town..Hollywood has launched an anti church film that could add to the death
cult Liberalism even more..YOU GUYS NEED TO BE LOUDER!

Posted by Kelly | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:47 am UTC

"more death over the last few thousand years"

And yes, it's been around 2,000. Forget your history, maybe get your millennia
straight?

Posted by james | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:48 am UTC

Please. Let's take the emotion out of the discussion and look at the facts and
the actual teachings of the church. There are so many misconceptions.

Good people can debate whether or not the War on Terror is just or the best
way to help the needy. Science shows the unborn child has a heart beat at 22
days - that is not debatable. With care and nurishment that unborn child will
make it. Just like you and I - if someone withheld our care and nurishment, we
to would die. Do our mothers have the right to end our lives because we may be
inconvienent?

All this stems from the relativism. Relativism just does not work. Choosing
your own morality does not work. What if some crazy dictator came to power and
decided based on his own ideals that all people of a certain ethincity or
faith were not fit to survive and subsequently exterminate them? Wait, that
happened, his name was Hilter. He dehumanized the Jews which allowed his
soldiers to commit the atrocities of WWII. The same is happening to our
unborn.

The right to life is guaranteed in the Declaration of Independence - remember
that old thing?

Posted by TZ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:48 am UTC

Ah, here come the drudgies, right on time!

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:48 am UTC

"Choose life - receive blessings. Choose death receive cursings." Holy Bible,
Old Testament. Wolverine

Posted by john ranallo | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:53 am UTC

It's time to stand up to the fascist theocracy of the Catholic Church. Just as
they imprisoned Galileo for speaking the truth, the Catholic church today
imposes itself on the secular world as though it is an authority. It's time
for Catholics to break away and challenge this autocratic, unAmerican pseudo
religion. How dare the Vatican call the democrats the party of death. The
blood of hundreds of thousands of innocents are on the Vatican and the pope
for their support for the true party of death: the neofascist neocon
Republican party.

Posted by Rick Street | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:53 am UTC

choose the McCain and go into foreclosure and loose your 401k!!!

Posted by rich caporiccio | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:54 am UTC

Yah, Its to bad the Democrats use to be a good party that really beleived in
helping people. Hell even my Grandpa switch over to the Republican party last
year and he's from Arkansas??? The liberals have destroyed that party. No
morals, anything anti-American is praised, spit on the Military, follow the
Communist Manufesto, Tax the middle class out of existence even though they
pay 88% of all of the taxes now??? Make government so hugh that it will take
away our freedoms and Liberty. This true if you follow a History book and can
read. Oh, and kill innocent babies. I know save the caribou, the ozone, but
human beings we just can't let that happen??? People's Republic of San Fran.
Pelosi has the worst Congress in History. I'd say the Democrats have
dishonored themsleves and our a disgrace to our founding fathers and what they
wanted. I have read it and it is true. How sad!

Posted by chris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:56 am UTC

Dave,

You and the others took the hook. Who said that saving the life of a child is
a religious issue? There are more laws in this country to protect the eggs of
Eagles than to protect the unborn. So, are the eagle protectors religious
wackos? The Bible says "do not steal", "Do not Murder", "Do Not Cheat" and our
society has chosen to put it in the laws should we abolish them also? Oddly
enough most of the teachings of the church are just plain common sense.

Posted by marshall | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:56 am UTC

Amen to Prefect Burke for standing up for Life and showing it for what it is:
EVIL!You dimwits who attempt to equate Iran w/abortion are locos!An innocent
baby killed in the womb(and sometimes out of the womb)has no resemblance to
our defending our own Country b/c WE were attacked on 911 or did
you,conveniently,forget that! DUH!Please try to use the brains the Good Lord
gave you or they may rot further from misuse and we wouldn't want that,would
we????

Posted by corina | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 am UTC

Anyone who votes democrap is a contract killer.

Posted by Wayne | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 am UTC

Non-sense. Probably in the back pocket of some rich Republican. I'm sorry but
the Catholic church is a joke. Lets not talk about the countless rapes and
"murders" they committed in their history. It is our law that it is legal.
"Obey the law of the land, for all u Catholics." I think the timing of this is
just too perfect. Support a democrat - support abortion? I don't usually say
anything but too many ignorant people posting on this.

And I like all the comments on people going to hell. Catholics think everyone
goes to hell but them. Some indigenous person who never heard of that
religion…oh he is going to hell. A good Christian…oh that person is going to
hell. You don't think you might be the one going to hell?

Posted by Dan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 am UTC

Finally,  
It is a breath of fresh air to see the Holy See finally publicly and
politically stand up for what it believes.

This new Pope and Raymond Burke, Rock.

Posted by Jason Youn | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 am UTC

Oh, we're quoting the Bible now? Which came first, man or animal?

Genesis 1:24-26  
Then God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures after their kind:
cattle and creeping things and beasts of the earth after their kind"; and it
was so.  
God made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and the cattle after their
kind, and everything that creeps on the ground after its kind; and God saw
that it was good.  
Genesis 2:19 Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness,
and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the
livestock, over all the earth, [a] and over all the creatures that move along
the ground."

19And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and
every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call
them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof.

And, why does Leviticus use a Polynesian word? (it's a rhetorical question,
please don't answer)

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 am UTC

To Dave, Michael Cecil, et al: Equivocating the article about abortion and the
theoretical nuking of Iran is not apples to apples at all. Abortion is a
decision to take a defenseless life when the child does not threaten the life
of the mother. The decision to nuke Iran will be based on saving the lives of
over 7,000,000 Israelis. While I am confident that the Almighty would not be
happy with either, everybody knows theres a difference.

Insofar at who is the party of death, the Republicans want to kill the bad
guys, Democrats push for the belief that there's nothing wrong with Abortion.
Since they're more concerned with saving the worst criminals from the death
penalty instead of the defenseless unborn, certainly not the party of the
living.

Posted by Tom Genin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:01 am UTC

The Demon-crats are evil. They created the holocaust through the millions of
babies aborted in our country. Democrats have pushed through legislation all
of the way through 9 months with the in human partial birth abortion. Demon-
crfats are sick and evil! Now Obama supports infanticide not even being
willing to back Born Alive Infant Protection Act. Obama is the Anti-Christ!  
This article is right on target!!!!!!!!!!!!

Posted by harold | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:05 am UTC

Thank God a leader in the Catholic Church is finally standing up for life!!

Posted by Lucy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:07 am UTC

What would the political landscape in America look like if religion was
totally eliminated from the discussions?>>

Dachau.

Posted by Richard L. Kent, Esq. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:08 am UTC

Thank God there is at least one Church that refuses to bow to corrupt
politicians and their hacks.

As for those who would like to silence the voice of the Catholic Church, be
assured that you have legions of comrades in Cuba, Venezuela, China, Iran, N.
Korea, Iraq, and Afghanistan (not to mention those fine folks in the KKK)

Posted by Ben | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:09 am UTC

I am a Catholic. I believe that life begins at conception. I believe that
anybody who claims to be a Catholic and does not believe that life begins at
conception is a "Counterfiet Catholic". The Catholic church in some instances
makes it easy for a person to vote pro choice due to the fact that they say
you don't have to be a one issue person. This tells me that the church is not
serious about abortion. They pay it lip service. All you have to do is follow
the money. Bottom line the church does not want to loose the money by taking a
solid stance. I guess some people look at it as getting rid of the child
before they grow up to be poor or disabled.I see videos of the nazi death
camps with bodies stacked one on another and think the only difference in this
scenario and abortion is the poor little children that are aborted don't take
up as much space. The culture in this country is becoming more and more a
culture of death.

Posted by deebuck | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:13 am UTC

The Dems are rapidly moving towards a fascist party.

Here are just a few of the positions they have taken recently that seriously
alarm me:

-> Prosecution of political dissidents ("Truth Squad").  
-> Religious intolerance disguised as separation of  
church and state.  
-> Legislative support of abortion factories. (Planned  
Parenthood)

And, last by not least

-> The Obama Jugend who are emerging in public schools mindlessly singing the "Obama song".

Posted by Pete | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:14 am UTC

The truth hurts sometimes…………..live with it libs.

Posted by bill brady | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:16 am UTC

Roman Catholic Democrats have a choice to make. It's the choice between a
child's life and death. To hear many Democrats talk about the issue, if a
child is still in the womb, she is fair game for abortion. Even worse, now
Sen. Obama has lent his support to infanticide by tacitly supporting the
denial of medical attention to a child if she survives the abortionist and
somehow manages to be born alive. Feminists, secular progressives and liberal
Democrats like Sen. Obama see no problem with taking a baby's innocent human
life for the sake of convenience. Roman Catholic Democrats have a choice to
make. Do they choose Obama and his philosophy of death, or do they listen to
their consciences and choose life for the unborn.

Posted by Patrick C. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:17 am UTC

He must have read Ramesh Ponnuru's awesome book The Party of Death. Take a
look and check it out too.

Posted by Jon S | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:18 am UTC

Using charity and discussing these issues with a clear unemotional mind always
is best. Using words like "fascist" really does not help (especially when it
is used incorrectly). Again, look at facts not your own perception of the
facts. It is funny how people who consider themselves "liberal" and "open
minded" often are only open to those who believe what they believe.

Although I am a devout Catholic, I can take the religious aspect out of the
discussion and look at what we are doing the weakest of the weak - the unborn.
They do not have a voice. Our job as humans is to stand-up for the weakest of
the weak - that is true kindness, charity and love for others.

Posted by TZ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:21 am UTC

Hello,  
The Catholic Archbishop taking to task Catholic Democratic lawmakers is
perfectly within his right. I was raised Catholic. The Archbishop is doing his
job. I notice many complaining that because he went after two Democratic
Catholics, his rights to free speech, and his church needed to loose their tax
exempt status. What RUBBISH. I still have to tolerate your views, so what is
the difference?

Since he went after the sacred cow of the liberal left, abortion, he is a
heretic for their "religion." I am a human that believes in life. I applaud
young people that do the right thing when an accident occurs. I pray for the
young people that choose otherwise.

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:23 am UTC

Russel, I think you might want to go back and re-read what I posted. If you
read more closely you would see I agree with you. I provide an argument
justifying warfare and further argue that abortion is morally inexcusable.

Posted by Michael | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:24 am UTC

Ahmadinejad and Iran only want power plants and not nukes? I know this is off
subject, but are you a raving lunatic? Ahmadinejad has publicly declared his
desire to destroy Israel and see America run into the ground. Half of the
country's government is made up of fundamentalist, extremist Muslims who hate
the west and everything that it stands for. Everyday, in many parts of the
world, these kind of mislead, uneducated, unfortunate fools strap suicide bomb
belts to their waists and run into crowds of people shouting God's praises all
the way, convinced that they are going straight to heaven after they blow
themselves and everyone else to pieces. If there is even the slightest
possibility that a person with this mindset could be in control of even ONE
nuclear weapon, everything that can be done MUST be done to stop them from
acquiring one. And if you think these kind of people do not live in Iran and
even run parts of the government, you need a reality check buddy. Just open up
the newspaper or search somewhere else on this website and you will see the
evidence. It scares me enough that Pakistan has nukes, but IRAN? Peaceful huh?
I bet there are quite a few soldiers in Iraq that were blown up by IEDs made
from materials exported from Iran that might disagree with you. Come back down
to Earth, I really do wish that we all could get along too, but even if
America just completely disappeared from the middle east and left them alone,
people with these kinds of ideologies would still want to kill everyone that
disagreed with them. Wake up.

Posted by John McG | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:24 am UTC

Fine let all the liberals and pro-choice abortion lovers have their Roe V.
Wade. Just change the law to state that if you want an abortion you have to
perform it. Don't force some doctor or nurse whose are bound by law to perform
it for you. You want abortion you kill your own child. I can't believe how
these abortion loving people are the same ones who won't eat meat, eggs, and
now want human breast milk used for ice cream because a cows milk should be
used for just the calves! They are also the same people that make the killing
of a pregnant woman a double homocide. You can't have it both ways unless the
mother does her own abortion, otherwise technically the doctor should be put
on trial for murder.

Posted by Marie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:28 am UTC

I still don't understand what babies did to be terminated but murderers did to
be saved. I'm not saying I'm in favor of capital punishment (that's not the
subject here). However it is ironic that liberals are so against capital
punishment but also pro-abortion.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:29 am UTC

FINALLY someone with a lick of sense has spoken up

Posted by SUZANNE S SOLOMON | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:31 am UTC

99.999% for pure convenience

Other .000whatever % as a red-herring rationale

Our justice/legal system doesn’t stop because of the possibility of the red-
herring of incarcerating an innocent person

Posted by Fannie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:32 am UTC

The one thing that confuses me is this. Nobody seems to have a full handle on
when, exactly, life begins. On both sides of the equation. So, if one is not
sure when life begins - is it not better to err on the side of caution?

We go to great lengths to allow PETA and other animal rights groups get vulgar
in order to advance a position. However, pro-life groups are positioned as
religious nuts - because of pro-choice?

Anybody want to lay money on how many members of PETA are pro-abortion?

Posted by matt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:33 am UTC

Way back Dave wrote the following:

"What Biden said once was “I believe life begins at conception, however I
don’t feel it is my duty to legislate my faith on others.”

Joe, Joe, Life beginning at conception is not a religious principle its a
scientific fact. It is no more a religious belief than the law of gravity. As
someone wisely put it, "Everyone who has purchased a condom knows when life
begins."

I would question the ethics of a man who claims to believe that life begins at
conception yet consistently votes opposite to these beliefs. Do we want him a
heartbeat from the top? Who could trust him?

Seems the good Archbishop has touched a nerve. Its a nerve that needs
touching. Time for Catholics to wake up and realize they are being used, as
Catholic immigrants have been used since their arrival in the US. Not that the
Republican party is any better.

Its about time that the Catholic hierarchy sood up for its teaching.

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:42 am UTC

Oh suuure. Lets see our conservative base will vote to go to war without the
proper 'research' or soundness in reason. Our conservaive base will want to
bring kids into this world as fast as possible but will kill em off with the
death penalty or perhaps will vote against safety nets which might save poeple
of mental stress and then physical disease and death, perhaps as a result… and
or duh..

Religion is the result of plenty of deaths too, worldwide..

Posted by phil | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:42 am UTC

The man has got it right! Democrats love death…

Posted by Graywolf | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:49 am UTC

Citizenbronte is ill-informed. Cardinal Burke does love life. He loves and
respects the life in the womb. Love the sinner but hate the sin.  
It is fortunate that Ms. Crow has borne no children and has safely ( for the
sake of the unborn) passed the age of fertility.

Posted by Bill Duffy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:56 am UTC

good for them. democrats need to he called out on their position of killing
babies! the democrats are the vessel for the angel of death to kill the
unborn. pure evil.

Posted by easy brown | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:05 am UTC

Gee isn't the catholic church the church of homosexual child mollesters. Seams
to me Pope your practices have destroyed a lot of lifes too

Posted by rikicad | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:09 am UTC

I love all these guys running around in their dresses convincing slow learners
that there is a sky fairy so you will hand over your money for ever lasting
life.  
AS POPE LEO SAID ' WE HAVE DONE QUITE WELL WITH THIS JESUS MYTH'.

Posted by BP | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:18 am UTC

How dare the Catholic religion criticizes the Democrats, shame on you after
all the pedophiles you have running a muck in the church, still today. You
have a lot of nerve after all the lives you have fractured to put it midley.
You are like the Republicans, you think that no rules apply to you, wake up!

Posted by Paula L | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:18 am UTC

"It is a poverty to decide that a child must die so that you may live as you
wish." - Mother Teresa

And abortion isn't just a religious issue - there are ATHIESTS who believe
it's wrong.

Slavery was also thought of at one point to be a personal choice. That didn't
make it right.

Abortion is the Slavery of our time.

GET OVER YOUR MORAL RELATIVISM!!!!!!!!!

Posted by thankGod | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:18 am UTC

[…] is for the Pope to come out and rally some more Christians against Biden
and his Saracen partner. FaithWorld ? Blog Archive ? Vatican official attacks
U.S. Democrats as "party of death" … Vatican officials seldom single out
political leaders who differ with the Church on issues like […]

Posted by Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as ?party of death? -
Sherdog Mixed Martial Arts Forums | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:20 am UTC

"If your against abortion, you better be doubly against war."

Not correct. Actually quite stupid comparison. Abortion is about killing the
UNARMED INNOCENT IN COLD BLOOD.

War can be about defending one's nation and one's family. War against Hitler
is justified. ABORTION CAN NEVER BE JUSTIFIED BECAUSE IT IS THE TAKING OF AN
UNARMED, INNOCENT LIFE IN COLD BLOOD.

Stop this silly "comparison" talk in this blog now and stay on topic which is
about the democrat party becoming the party of death, as pronounced by a high
ranking member of the Church of Life. THAT IS THE TOPIC. Stop this silly
distraction. Or are you too stupid to stay on topic?

Posted by bobsmith | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:20 am UTC

Raymond Burke speaks falsely in this matter. If he were a man of God, he would
be calling for donations to Catholic Relief for starving Haiti, but instead
uses his position to steer US catholic sheep to conservative politics.

In 2004 an Ohio priest reflected on the election (Bush vs Kerry) and similarly
urged his flock with this quote from his sermon: "Some catholics would dare to
think for themselves and risk eternal damnation instead of following the
teaching and education of the church." So we've had 4 more years of an evil,
stupid, lying administration-perfectly deserved by Moron America.

Political clergy have learned nothing since. It is not a matter of being left
or right or politically central. Christians, Jews, Muslims (and i presume some
Hindus and Buddhists) have deeply entwined their beliefs with political
positions, overtly on principle, covertly for greed of power and influence.
Moneylenders at the steps of the Temple!

Religions cannot help humanity. The leaders are lost in building the tribe and
dangling dreams of heaven.

This is the Age of Confoundment, where all the religion, education, and
prosperity of humanity counts for nothing.

Every time you sheep think you're cozy with God, I COMMAND you to think of the
suffering of Haiti, which foretells humanity's fate. You did nothing for them.

Posted by inquisitor | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:22 am UTC

[…] Read it. […]

Posted by Roman Catholic by Choice » Blog Archive » Trashing Abp. Burke |
Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:23 am UTC

If the Catholic church wants a voice in US politics, then the US Catholic
contingency can give up their tax exepmt status.

Not that I like Pelosi or Biden, they are right in saying they don't want to
impose their personal views on others.

I DO NOT like the idea of ignorant women using abortion as a birth control
method (oops I'm pregnant again, Ill just get an abortion…again), but I
believe that women should be able to make a decision to terminate a pregnancy
in cases of heath issues, severe birth defects, rape and incest.

What we really need in this country is better sex education; not failed
"abstinance only" programs. Teach kids about birth control methods AND the
consquences of sex instead of acting like if you don't tell kids about sex
they won't have sex.

Personally, I think all of the people who say all abortion should be banned
and say all babies should be wanted and loved, should line up to adopt all the
unwanted babies that come from unplanned and unwanted pregnancies… Put your
money where your mouth is.

Posted by BKD | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:26 am UTC

Abortion is the taking of innocent lives in cold blood.

War is the defense of one's nation and one's family. Abortion and the taking
of innocent life is NEVER justified; war such as against Hitler is easily
justified.

A proper analogy of abortion is Hitler's SS gunning down unarmed women and
children in Poland or Ukraine or Italy. That is analogous to abortion, so if
one wants to comapre abortion to anything, that is what you compare it to.

Posted by bobsmith | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:29 am UTC

God bless this great man for standing up for the values of the Catholic
Church. Abortion is the greatest evil being committed on earth.

Posted by Jeff Johnson, Collegeville | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:29 am UTC

This topic is about a head of the Church of Life saying the US Democrat party
has lost its way and is rapidly becoming the party of death. This is accurate,
based on the party's support for abortion, including partial birth abortion
which is actually infanticide. So let's stick to the article as a discussion
point.

Why do you disagree and think the Democrat party is NOT the party of death?

Posted by bobsmith | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:33 am UTC

The pope may talk like hes serious but he leaves the teeth out of the bite….he
had his opportunity when Kerry and Pelosi took communion..he could have easily
taken his position then by excommunicating them on the spot for supporting
abortion, homosexuality, man/animal stem cell cloning, etc. He did not. he
made a fatal error and this weakness is now exploited by the demons we have to
contend with..and the church is now weak and feeble and toothless. Murderers
should be punished by thier own murder for supporting murder. So I believe in
an eye for an eye.

Posted by howardhofelich | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:39 am UTC

I'm sorry, but don't say that one opposing abortion is one who's someone
imposing his religious views on someone else. The whole premise behind being
pro-life is that the baby in the womb is a living human being and aborting, or
taking the life of, that human is murder. What's religious in that?

Posted by Isaac | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:40 am UTC

As a Christian, Protestant, I hate abortion and loath the doctors of death who
make their fortunes off both scared, lost girls and greedy, uncaring women who
can't buy that nice car unless Doctor Vacuumababy does her a womb-cleaning.
These people who claim to be Catholic but also support abortion puzzle me, so
its interesting to see one of their prelates actually take a stand. I simply
presumed they were, in the main, hypocrites. As far as whether one's faith
should be discussed or disclosed as a matter of politics, I vote in the
affirmative. That is my opinion, as opposed to those with other opinions. May
I have my opinion? I want to know what politicians believe, to which faith
they subscribe,and to what degree they share my own views. Once again, that's
my opinion, the views of a simple Christian with no power and utterly void of
political mojo.

Posted by Lewis Field | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:41 am UTC

O-blame-a will silence the Catholic Church. There will be no religion…except
Rev Wrights version.

Cardinal Burke is awesome for speaking out! God bless all his works.

Posted by American Girl | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:42 am UTC

It's obvious to everyone that the Democrat party does not hold Christian
values, this should be taught to the public so that Christians, especially
Catholics, understand that they should hold their values when they vote. The
Church, and all religious leaders, need to teach the public of their
responsibility. The values of Christians are not in line with the Democrat
party and the Church needs to raise her voice and make this known. As
Christians we cannot continue to be apathetic and let puffed up speeches and
nominal Catholics sway our vote.

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:43 am UTC

Most of you people are incredibly stupid. Now we are a nation of old people,
really incredibly STUPID old people becasue now there are not enough smart
kids out there to provide support for all you old stupid people when you
retire..so who gets to support you? NO ONE> I think the time will come when
old people will get put to sleep becuase they did not make enough bright kids
to save them…they were stupid and aborted all the smart white kids (too
inconvenient to interfere with a career) and saved all the dumb ass kids…the
stupid parents didnt care about getting an abortion, but looked like it was a
great excuse to stay on food stamps and welfare. those stupid women destroyed
America…it was a HUGE mistake to make them entitled to vote. Man created his
greatest sin shen he created the birth control pill..now face old age all you
progressives..you are gonna die miserble deaths with no loving kids to bid you
farewell.

Posted by howardhofelich | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:44 am UTC

THOU shalt not kill the innocent…the way the 5th commandment is written in
Hebrew..

Posted by howardhofelich | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:45 am UTC

So many of you are missing the point that he is trying to say the the party
that calls itself the "Democratic" Party has changed.

Posted by Not the same | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:48 am UTC

Too many Democrats people out there don't know what they mean when they say
they are a democrat. If half of them knew what their so-called "democratic"
party all boiled down to, they would run and hide behind the republicans!!!

Posted by Don't you get it? | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:48 am UTC

I have to agree with the Vatican. The Democrats support of Gay Rights,
ABORTION, which is the murdering of life at its conception and other views
conflict with Biblical teachings and is indeed harmful to our nation and our
nation's vested interest in development of life styles with morales, versus
the Democrats who want to destroy decent morale behavior not just within the
US, but in some cases, the world. Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi, John Kerry and many
of the Kennedy families have forsaken the teachings of the Lord, yet call
themselves practicing Catholics. A true Catholic does not violate the
teachings of the Lord!

Posted by Vorenius | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:51 am UTC

Those that live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones. The church should get
it's own house in order before commenting on a secular society. Diddling
children has it's own downside.

Posted by steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:57 am UTC

Yes, the Democrats are the party of death and a lot of other bad stuff…greed,
totalitarianism, poverty of the soul, cultural amorality, Godlessness, etc.

Posted by Jack Brewer | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:00 am UTC

May God grant Archbishop Raymond Burke many happy, Holy, and blessed years!

Posted by Brian Biggerstaff | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:03 am UTC

First of all, if you are not a woman who has carried a child in your womb,
then you should not have a say. Period. You have NO idea what you are talking
about.

Not once, in either of my two pregnancies, was I in control of the human
inside me. NOT ONCE. Anyone who says it is a womans choice because it is HER
body is ignorant of the truth. They (my children) were not me, nor part of my
body, nor under my control. AND God knew them before he placed them in my
womb. Just like he knew you and loved you. You want a choice??? Choose a
condom! Choose abstinence! Murdering a child because you are not responsible
enough to have safe sex is pathetic, disgusting, and should NEVER have been
made legal.

But honestly, that is neither here nor there. Abortion within the first
trimester will never be illegal. What is important is to look to the moral
character of a man who whole-heartedly believes that it is ok to murder a
child who is perfectly capable of survival outside of the womb. A man who
would deny medical treatment to infants born alive. Children of God, left to
die in a trash can. If you support this, then you are guilty of murder too.
And may God have mercy on your soul.

As for war… I don't believe we have re-instated the draft. NO ONE is risking
their life for their country by force. They know the risk when they sign up
for the armed forces, and they are proud to take that risk. I have several
friends and family in Iraq and Afghanistan. Ask them who they are voting for
in November. You will only find a handful of democrats over there. The numbers
are staggering. The only ones whining about war are the ones sitting over here
on their asses hoping the goverment delivers their welfare check on time and
that their foody card has enough on it for pizza tomorrow. If you've never
carried a child, and would never risk your life for your country, then shut up
and go to bed. Your opinion doesn't count.

Posted by Shelly | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:05 am UTC

Though I am not a Catholic, I am impressed with the church's bravery in
speaking the truth. Those comments here trying to muddy the waters about Iran
and nuclear war are just missing the point and also hoping to divert attention
from the moral bankruptcy of the Democrat party. The facts are that the
Democrats place no value on the most innocent lives among us; the unborn. They
hide behind euphemism to put a presentable face to the horrors of infanticide,
calling it 'choice'.

This is one Protestant that truly wishes God's blessing on these men for
speaking the truth.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:06 am UTC

There is a difference between personal beliefs and the secular public policy
that governs a multicultural, multi-faith society. Get it straight: we believe
in separation of church and state. Quit trying to impose your religious
beliefs about "life begins at conception" with public policy.

Posted by Rick Street | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:06 am UTC

Nobody forces any politician or anyone else to be a member of the Catholic
Church. If you don't like the teachings and rules of the Church then join a
different one or none at all. But stop trying to make the Church bend to your
political agenda.  
Prof HMC

Posted by Prof. Helen McCaffrey | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:07 am UTC

You know, if my dog had puppies, and I put them in a sack and through them in
a lake, because I didn't want them or couldn't afford them or for whatever
reason, I would be arrested for cruelty to animals. But a woman can abort
(murder) her baby and the abortionist put a baby fighting for its life in a
trash can and leave it to die, and she or the abortionist is not arrested for
taking a human life.

Do you not see something wrong with this picture?

Posted by P. Evans | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:09 am UTC

.. words of wisdom from the the sponsors of the inqisition, witchburning, and
aboriginal genocide.

Posted by narf9 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:10 am UTC

Life begins at conception, no logical arguement can deny this. In the USA we
are guaranteed the right to life, yet we contradict this right with abortion.
Right to life or right to death? The choice should be clear, logically
speaking.

Posted by tothestars2 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:11 am UTC

The issue here is about abortion. It's time to stop looking at abortion as a
philosophical discussion and start admitting what it is. The church says life
begins at conception because biologically that is when the existence of a
human life does begin. It is the clearest most scientific fact. Egg and sperm
merge and life begins. If you don't "believe" that it is like saying you don't
believe 2+2=4, because that is not your belief. Americans need to be educated
about abortion. Let's start with visuals shall we. Google "abortion" images if
you can stomach it and have the courage to face the truth, the real
inconvenient truth. Like it or not, the democratic party supports this.

Posted by lookatit | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:12 am UTC

If you want to justify abortion other than the killing of an innocent human
life then tell me when life begins. Give me an answer that is irrefutable,
that doesn't change with time or technology. The only answer is conception. To
deny that is simply a non-answer. If you want to justify abortion as a
convenience, that it's simply not in the mother or fathers best selfish
interest then be honest and say that. It's amazing to me that the Democratic
party, the one that says its looking out for the little guy, leaves behind the
most vulnerable of all.

Posted by DEC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:13 am UTC

blah blah blah….they fail to recognize their irrelevance in modern society.  
One wonders what demons Burke must be battling that he needs to lash out at
others….

Posted by Karol Wojtyla | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:13 am UTC

To fbla: Do a little bit more research on your 3 questions for Sarah Palin,
instead of just swallowing what the Democratic humps put forward as their
analysis. Somehow they managed to warp the fact that Alaska requested
reimbursement from insurance companies of those that were insured for medical
procedures following rape to "Palin requires rape victims to pay for their own
tests". Come on, tell me you're not that obtuse (and no, I'm not a Republican,
before you accuse me of being a right wing fanatic).

Posted by Jackie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:14 am UTC

I sure hope this Vatican official makes the same judgement call on politicians
throughout the world who support abortion. European countries are more pro-
abortion than the US, for example.

Posted by steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:15 am UTC

Why would ANYONE listen to the catholic church on issues of 'morality'?  
…Billions in hush money for the molestation scandal, a profound ignorance
concerning the 'every three second' malarial death rate & 'every 4-7 second'
starvation death rate in children, (W.H.O. figures), pope john-paul2 giving a
'peace' medal to the scientist who created the 'neutron' W.M.D. subvarient,
astounding intolerance of noncatholics…  
A shallow concern for foetuses until birth, a worship of big business…  
I could be 'excomunicated' for visiting an abortion clinic, but I can fly a
nuclear-armed B-52 & recive the sacrements?  
…Why would ANYONE listen to the catholic church on the issue of 'morality'?

Posted by R.G. Frano, A.C.L.S. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:17 am UTC

Archbiship Burk was born and raised in Central Wisconsin and brings with him
grass roots midwestern values.

As Biship of the Lacross Diocese he was firm and fare. Biden and the other
Catholic Democrates be warned that He will Archbiship Burk will be very vocal
and express the positon of the Pope and in General All Catholics.

Former native of Central Wisconsin who played Kick the Ball with Burk as a
pre-teen in Stratford Wisconsin when visit friend and relatives who lived
there.

Posted by Bob | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:19 am UTC

The Catholic leader is correct.  
The Democrats have been taken over by mixed nuts and assorted fruits,
religious fanatics who are Humanist-indocrinated whether they understand the
source of their new, Christianity-replacing faith or not.  
Their founding scriptures, the Humanist Manifestos
(http://www.jcn.com/manifestos.html)dema nd death for old people and the
'right' of 'choice' to kill innocent unborn children.  
Their First Commandment is that there is no God, and their sacrament, the body
and blood of living human children, practiced 1.5 million times per year in
abortuaries. Very humane and 'enlightened,' eh?  
Whether it's 'Choice, Diversity, World Community, Equitable Redistribution Of
Wealth And Resources, Consenting Adults,' etc., all the Democrats ideas and
beliefs come from the Humanist belief system, not Christianity.  
Of COURSE they hate Catholics (I'm a Protestant, but I like Catholics and
their Biblical stance on Life), and of COURSE they believe their own religion
and it's liberal mantras are the superior ones.  
But they ARE just as religious as the Catholics!

Posted by Robert R. Larimer Jr | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:19 am UTC

Yea! Come on out, Vatican! Thanks be to God!

Posted by Mike Mundy, Houston, TX | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:21 am UTC

Good for the Vatican.

And for the record, the Vatican is opposed to the Iraq war, a doctrine of
preemption, etc, ya crazy rabid liberals! And how come you never hear of the
sex abuse in the San Francisco public school system?

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:22 am UTC

Thank goodness someone is speaking out about this.  
Life is Life. Murder is Murder.

Posted by Cory | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:23 am UTC

If there is a chance that that life does happen to begin at conception and If
by chance your eternal resting place, i.e. heaven or hell, is based on your
complicity in electing a person that not only tolerates abortion but actively
promotes it as a right, who do you turn to for advice? Nancy Pelosi? Barack
Obama? or perhaps the church that's been preaching the same evil of abortion
for 2000 years… You decide. But be sure you are right. Eternity is a very long
time.

Posted by Lifer | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:23 am UTC

The Church should stay out of expessing opinions of politics and scientific
technology. Recently, after some 450 years they have apoogized to Galileo for
having stated that Earth revolved around the sun. Religion has always been a
stumbling block for progress. As far as abortion is concerned church prelates
take vows of chastity (pity) they are provided everything and are not aware of
what it takes to support a family, put kids though school, pay all sort of
bills,etc. Cardinal Burke, get involved in Italian politics and give opinions
and see where they send you. It is best if you stay out of politics and
expressing your opinion on stem cell reserach, you really know nothing about
it and how many humans it would help.

Posted by Fernando E. Mercado | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:24 am UTC

I used to be pro-choice, until woman killed my child.

You that have such scorn for those that are not perfect enough for you - and
choose life - must not really cherish life at least as much as I do.

People aren't perfect, and when nations seek to destroy others, the resistance
to that is war. That is not an abortion issue. Get your proportions in order,
or quit grasping for straws.

Pointing out that pro-life proponents are not perfect - ergo can never be
wrong on the abortion issue - is ridiculous and illogical.

Nobody is perfect, and neither are you - therefore - the argument regarding
perfection of proponents of either side is wholly irrelevant.

It comes down to the value of human life.

There is nothing more valuable. Seems you don't get this idea.

Posted by The Man From Uncle | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:24 am UTC

43,000,000 babies killed all thanks to Democrats and Roe V Wade. Who, BTW, has
since admitted she lied, and is pro-life now. And even with the invention of
the ultra sound, and all that it shows, including a nearly fully developed
baby at 11 weeks, the Democrats STILL obssess about aborting live babies, then
support selling their body parts to ghouls who would research them. LETS BE
HONEST! It is not about CHOICE, or a womans reproductive rights. That's
nonsense. A woman if free to take the pill, wear the patch, or have an IUD.
It's about the money that the research brings the Universities aka DNC
Madrasses. I would like to see Nancy Pelosi take communion. Does she even go
to church?

Posted by Chardonnay | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:25 am UTC

You may use other arguements to justify abortion but here are the facts:

WORLDWIDE

Number of abortions per year: Approximately 42 Million  
Number of abortions per day: Approximately 115,000

WORLD WAR II

The total estimated human loss of life caused by World War II was roughly 72
million people.

In less than two years, the number of human lifes extinquished is greater than
all the people killed in WWII. This is a horrible fact and by the way, thank
your parents for not having an abortion or you wouldn't be reading this.

Posted by Bob Seward | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:29 am UTC

GOD BLESS Archbishop Burke!!! Finally someone in the Roman Catholic Church is
speaking the TRUTH about the Democrats in the United States!!

Posted by BROMEO | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:30 am UTC

Raymond Burke is making his home state of Wisconsin proud. I'm not even
Catholic, yet I have admired his stance on issues since he led the La Cross
Diocese.

How many Christians throw away their morals and vote for the worldly
democratic party. It's not o.k. to pick and choose what you believe in the
Catholic Church or any church, yet that is exactly what you need to do if you
are to vote for Obama, Biden, or any democrat.

Posted by jake | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:32 am UTC

The Church should stay out of expessing opinions of politics and scientific
technology. Recently, after some 450 years they have apologized to Galileo for
having stated that Earth revolved around the sun. Religion has always been a
stumbling block for progress. As far as abortion is concerned church prelates
take vows of chastity (pity) they are provided everything and are not aware of
what it takes to support a family, put kids though school, pay all sort of
bills,etc. Cardinal Burke, get involved in Italian politics and give opinions
and see where they send you. It is best if you stay out of politics and
expressing your opinion on stem cell reserach, you really know nothing about
it and how many humans it would help.

Posted by Fernando E. Mercado | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:32 am UTC

Don't use the "slippery slope" argument liberals. You need to keep on subject
not drop into personal attacks because of someone's faith.

Posted by Doug M. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:32 am UTC

People seems to shrink from moral absolutes as if moral absolutes were toxic.
There can be no moral absolute if there is not a final arbiter of right and
wrong. It is amazing to me how so many people have such poor biblical
scholarship. They think they know what the bible says, they view Christ as a
kind of Ghandi figure. Essentially they dictate what the bible says, they do
not allow it to speak for itself, if you will. No where does the bible in
either old or new testament prohibit killing. What is prohibited is
"murder"-the illegal taking of life. There is a hebrew and aramaic work for
"kill" and there is also a word for murder( illegal taking of life).
Throughout scripture the state is not prohibited from defending itself(to the
comment of warriors aiming rifles and "killing people) nor from authorities
use of lethal force to defend its citizens. What is however consistently
prohibited is the taking of innocent life, life that is unable to defend
itself. Words have meaning and killing and murder are quite simply not the
same-all murder is killing, BUT not all killing is murder.

Posted by Craig Blaine | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:37 am UTC

I believe it was January 1972 that the Democratic majority Supreme Court ruled
that a woman could have her child in her womb killed in the most horrible and
cruel manner possible. Then,6 months later this same Court(?) ruled that an ax
murderer/s could not be put to death in the most humane manner,because they
considered murderers above punishment of death that these same people
authorized for innocent babies. While there's always a possibility of my
eternity in hell,at least I will have reason to celebrate,because,surely these
people will be there,regardless if they do,or donot believe in its existence.

Posted by HaroldC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:42 am UTC

JD  
you wrote:  
"If it were up to these guys we would still follow scientific models where the
sun circles the Earth."

Try learning a little history. The concept directly challenged the widely
accepted model of the world that was held at the time. The Pope, and many
others in the church knew that the solar model was very likely but there were
political reasons that put them in a difficult position at the time. That is
to say, the old idea that there is "the truth and then there is God's truth"
meant that political upheavals could follow sudden redefinitions of the static
model of life and God's plan as explained by the church. For all its faults,
the confrontations with apostasy and the extremely close relationship between
the church and political centers of power, the church has been a powerful
force for scientific development. For instance, the kindly monk portrayed as
observing the differences in pea seeds and learning about the segregation of
"traits" (genes) was actually a scholar trained in chemistry, physics and
biology and was assigned to undertake studies on animal and plant improvements
by the Vatican. His seminal work (little joke or two there) was largely
ignored because he explained it in mathematical terms (quadratic equations,
etc.) and a lot of people at the time just didn't get it. But anyway, your
accusations about the Church as a force of ignorance only demonstrate you
traffic in the cheap, sleeazy "recieved" wisdom of tin-pot bigots, in just the
same way as the ass-end bigots who sieze on religious dogma try to explain
everything in those terms.  
BTW: I'm an agnostic, not a religious person as you might impune, simply
because rigidly doctrinare people think. I like to know what I am talking
about, rather than blathering abusive slogans and insolent rubbish.

Posted by Brendan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:42 am UTC

The Blog person, Phil Stewart, states:

* * *

Burke’s criticism isn’t limited to Democrats. Last year, he accused singer
Sheryl Crow of being “a high profile proponent of the destruction of innocent
lives” for defending a woman’s right to have an abortion"

* * *

Phil Stewart must be from somewhere other than the United States or from
Reuters!

The "criticism isn't limited to Democrats" - implying Sheryl Crow is not a
Democrat?

First of all she is a flaming democrat - and, for the uninformed outside of
the USA, Sheryl had a long-time ta-da-da-frolicky with little Bubba himself -
our former President.

Get informed you foreigners! Bill Cliton and Hillary were an embarrassment.

Posted by vonurbach | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:43 am UTC

My ex-husband (well-loved still) was abused by a Catholic priest. Spare me
your pro-life platitudes, you idiots who espouse this position. Try seeing the
other sid, for once. Catholic priests, bishops, archbishops, popes - these MEN
have no right at all to spout their ridiculous, pathetic views on the subject
of whether the Democrats are in their favor. Catholic or not, the people will
make up their own minds, which is as it should be.

Posted by Katherine | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:43 am UTC

Jordan: try early 1500s on the Reformation, it's a little more accurate than
1100. You're thinking of the Orthodox schism.

The Babylonian Captivity was about 600 BC, and involved the Hebrews.

I believe the Archbishop has spoken truly, and is not out of line. I would
like, in the interests of balance, for him to, at some point, address
Republican apathy in doing anything to stop wrongful bioethical practices
other than give lip service to it. I think it makes them a "party of death,"
too.

Posted by MikeB | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:47 am UTC

Gee Michael, and I thought this was a non-political article by the head of a
Church and his view of those that pretend to be Catholic.

Morals are a very slippery slope for the left when you consider Obama and his
votes for infanticide. Even partial birth abortion isn't enough to satiate the
liberal blood lust.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:47 am UTC

Wise and uncompromising words from a wise man.

I've noticed a few comments which resort to moral relativism with Republicans.
That's part of the problem, too.

Democrats are responsible for their own actions. God does not judge us in the
light of what an opposing political party did or did not do, He judges us in
the context of our own actions and inactions. When your day has come and
you're ready to enter eternity, will you tell God "but the Republicans are
just as bad!"

I think not.

Posted by Bill | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:49 am UTC

What Pelosi has said and done is very dangerous. Biden is trying to capture
votes by throwing his religion to the wind. Glad to see the Vatican finally
stepping up. We have already heard about how they feel about Bush and war.

Posted by Dee | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:50 am UTC

Apparently Democtrat Catholics only have to support certain parts of the
Bible. Any thing else would be above their pay grade. There is a reason Wall
Street's approval rating is one point higher than the Democrat controlled
Congress. Political hacks and left wing lunacy does not get the support of the
common American.

Posted by maverick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:53 am UTC

remove their tax exempt status NOW !!!

Posted by Seeuinoz | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:54 am UTC

To you Demo-homies who play this "respect" life equivocation game: fact~ since
Roe v.Wade~60,000,000 "legally" protected abortions. (Source: Guttmacher
Institute PLANNED PARENTHOOD…America's PM Murder Incorporated…statistical arm
and principal tax-for each-murder deduction)Defend that Civil Rights, non-  
smoking,Global Warming Metro-MSM lackeys.  
Arthur McVarish, Houston

Posted by Arthur F. McVarish | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:55 am UTC

Would it be so difficult for the church to excommunicate Democrats? It is a
centralized hierarchy after all. Why don't they just get on with it and stop
pussyfooting around?

Posted by Jim | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:55 am UTC

Just to the make a Biblical distinction for unbelievers. The commandment "Thou
shalt not kill" is given to individuals-not governments. War is an altogether
different matter than the premeditated murder of the innocent unborn. The
democratic party is the party of pro-choice in this country. And I might add
that given how the pro-choice folks have mocked Governor Palin on this, it
seems that "choosing" life doesn't count!

Posted by Sheila Cantrell | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:56 am UTC

The letter Archbishop Burke refers to was from then Cardinal Ratzinger, now
Pope Benedict, to the US Council of Catholic Bishops. The letter instructed
the US bishops to deny Communion to Catholic politicians that supported
abortion publicly. The letter was intercepted by the now retired cardinal of
Washington and intentionally hidden from the council of bishops. Later when
this Cardinal submitted his 75th birthday resignation to the new Pope
Benedict, it was accepted promptly.  
Archbishop Burke has been the greatest defender of the faith here and in Rome.
Benedict's recent Papal appointment to Prefect of the Apostoic Signatura (the
highest ranking figure in church law) makes him a very prominent figure in the
Vatican and some say a name to be reckoned with for the next Pope. He is sure
to stress his points on Catholic teaching further here when it comes to
abortion and Catholics that support it. No doubt about it. God Bless him.
American catholics have been mislead by Washington politicians that keep
promoting themselves as "Catholics" to get votes but promote baby killing at
the same time. Archbishop Burke, I believe has had enough of that.

Posted by John McCuen | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:57 am UTC

Remember !!!!!!!!!!!!! "Blessed Is The Fruit Of Thy Womb!

Abortion Kills Children!!

OBAMA/BIDEN = PELOSI!!!

SAY NO TO MORE OF THE SAME!!!

Posted by Mike Mundy, Houston, TX | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:58 am UTC

[…] We must choose life ! […]

Posted by My Hispanic Family » Blog Archive » Vatican official attacks U.S.
Democrats as “party of death” | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:58 am UTC

Wow, a Reuters article that seemed to give respectful coverage of the Vatican
-- I was amazed. But then I start looking at the comments and realize that the
moonbats hoover near at hand. Really -- what a disgraceful bunch you all are.

Posted by Nancy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:58 am UTC

Everybody's wrong! Life begins with the production of sperm and egg cells.
Through the artifice of celibacy the church assures the death of these sparks
of human life. It is the Catholic Church that is the party of death, in in
defiance of the Bible's admonition to be fruitful and multiply. Bruno I'd
better get out of here the church probably wants to burn me again!

Posted by Runo | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:59 am UTC

politicians can't hide behind the naked truth that abortion today is analogous
to slavery 150 years ago.

would politicians today argue that slavery should remain legal because it was
the law ? or that slavery should be up to the "choice of the landowner" ??

i left the democrats when i finally recognized this argument. they are cowards
and have exchanged their knowledge of what they know is right and wrong, they
know right from wrong but have sold their souls to remain in power.

who can have a conscience today and still be a member of the democratic party
anymore.

not me anymore.

not me anymore.

if this argument has not sunk into your thick head, what is the matter with
you.

if you are pro-color, do you realize that blacks are only 12 percent of the
population but a gigantic share of babies killed ?? are you jiggy with that ?
are you ok that our "black leaders" are jiggy with that ?

if you are pro woman, do you realize that half of the babies killed, i.e. 1-2
million babies a year, are baby girls ? are you ok with killing all these
little girls ? and you call yourself pro-woman ? who is defending THESE women
? who ?

what a disgrace !!!!!!!!!

Posted by jm | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:04 am UTC

Good for the Vatican, and the numbers of pro-life democrats are growing!

But - - why is Senator Infanticide going to be welcome at the Alfred Smith
Dinner in NY?

What kind of mixed message does that send to Catholics?

Posted by Ann | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:05 am UTC

Abortion murders the most vulnerable in society who have no voice wether they
can be born at all. I am a Catholic who admits to being a worthless sinner,
but I pray that God will have mercy on not only me, but on all those who also
fall short of His glory. I ask every one to open your heart to Christ because
He gave his life for all who believe in Him

Posted by Patrick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:07 am UTC

This is America not Medieval Spain. You don't have to be Catholic here. But if
you ARE Catholic you have to accept the Church's teachings. Don't agree, go to
another church. It's really that simple. BTW, Rudy Giuliani and former
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge should be included in that list and they are
Republicans. The Democrats are fully Pro-Death though.

Posted by Ted K | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:07 am UTC

Simple and plain Logic: Abortion- MURDER Aid and Support to Abortion- MURDER
The taking of a life for the sake of 'convenience'- MURDER The taking of an
innocent life in the womb that cannot defend itself- MURDER Support for
individuals who profit in the Abortion industry- Accessories to MURDER Voting
for people who support the taking of life; whether it be in the womb,on a
feeding tube,the aged and infirmed in a hospital bed, or just because someone
is not wanted- MURDER. Any way people that want to rationalize it, justify it,
make excuses for its existance, ignore it, downplay it, ocstracize and
ridicule in the Public forum those who defend life in all its glory, there is
just one word to describe it- Pure and unadulterated EVIL. Think about this
when you go to the polls, people. How will God judge us as a Nation, on what
we have accepted into our hearts, and what we have ommitted by CHOICE…

Posted by Den | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:07 am UTC

Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi, and John Kerry joined the church and remain in the
church of their own free will. If they don't believe in the church teachings
they should leave the church.

Posted by Carol Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:08 am UTC

I have to laugh at some of these comments from liberals and Democrats. I also
have to ask, especially you liberal, Democrat parents, to take a look into
your son's or daughter's eyes, hold their faces close, then tell the world
that child was not a human being at conception.

Posted by Peter Fusco | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:08 am UTC

Archbishop Burk could not have stated it any clearer. We are taliking about
the unborn Human life. Who is their voice? Have you ever noticed everyone who
supports abortion is living!

As far as war goes this is not a one party issue, Democrats have voted to
support every war this country has engaged in. We have never engaged in a war
where every single Democrat pulled their supported.

Posted by Ron | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:14 am UTC

FOR ABORTION?? TAKE A LOOK AT THE PICTURES OF ONE AND YOU'LL CHANGE YOUR MIND
IF YOU HAVE ANY HEART AT ALL…  
THANKS FOR BEING A GREAT SHEPHERD TO THE FLOCK ENTRUSTED TO YOU BISHOP BURKE.
TRUTH IS TRUTH AND YOU HAVE STATED IT.

Posted by Teresa | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:19 am UTC

After reading posts to this article, one thing is clear. Hardly anyone has any
command of facts. What a bunch of Moonbats and hypocrites.

Posted by sportsguy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:19 am UTC

ISN'T IT RIDICULOUS THAT 'WOMEN'S RIGHTS' HAVE COME TO MEAN THE EXTERMINATION
OF WOMEN IN THE WOMB? THE FIRST FEMINISTS WERE DEAD SET AGAINST ABORTION.
ABORTION IS A SATANIC SACRAMENT…EXTERMINATING THE VERY FRUIT OF LIFE.

MOTHER TERESA WARNED THAT THE FRUIT OF ABORTION WOULD BE NUCLEAR WAR. SO DID
ARCHBISHOP FULTON SHEEHAN. DISRESPECT FOR LIFE JUST MAY BRING THE ULTIMATE
DISREPECT FOR LIFE…then it will be to late to repent of this modern day
atrocity.

Posted by Maureen | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:20 am UTC

In reference to:

"You must be informed that taking the life of an INNOCENT human being directly
from the womb is far different than wars, the death penalty, nukes, etc." by
Tommy

NO IT ISN'T!! According to the Mageserium and the teachings of the Catholic
Church, including the views expressed by Pope Joh Paul II in St. Louis in
1999, the view of the Catholic Church is that all heman life is equal, and
that executing a person is as grave a sin as abortion. He said that "All
executions are cruel and unusual punishment in all cases and without
exception". He also said that any taking of human life except for direct self
protection or under St. Augustine's direction of a "just war" is sin. And the
church in 2003, 2005, and 2006 issued statements that the war in Iraq
"clearly, and in no case" falls under either or these directions. Please get
your facts straight before you try to argue.

Posted by Kirk | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:21 am UTC

Ultimately, if we do not legislate someone's beliefs, what exactely are we
legislating? If not, why isn't the Biden principal a universal? I believe
abortion is wrong, but I do not want to impose that on others. I believe
murder is wrong, but I don't want to impose that on others. I believe stealing
is wrong, but I don't want to impose that on others. I believe fraud is wrong,
but I don't want to impose that on others…. Either abortion is wrong, or it is
good…period.

Posted by Joe | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:21 am UTC

[…] official attacks U.S. Democrats as ?party of death? Link FaithWorld ? Blog
Archive ? Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as "party of death" … How
many Catholics will actually read this, then again is it likely that any will
change their mind […]

Posted by Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as ?party of death? - Debate
Politics Forums | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:21 am UTC

okay, Let's take this one by one.  
1. If we go by how we feel or man's standards of correct or prudent conduct, that conduct or standard is changeable, because the human heart is wicked above all things. It seeks it's own level. Right and Wrong as decided by cultural mores have caused the most damage. The khmer rouge, hitler and his eugenics movement(lead by american eugenisists such as Margeret sanger, rabid bigot and founder of planned parenthood, as a means of eliminating blacks and so called undesirables) If there is no objective truth, we end up with humanities subjective truth. We see how that works out. Murder by numbers.

Often misquoted by the misguided, thou shalt not kill….well no, that is not
what it says…it says, thou shalt not do murder. If God did not believe in war
for a righteous cause, he never would have told the Isrealites to take the
land from it's inhabitants, nor would he have made David King of Isreal after
slaying Goliath. Abortion is murder, because it is the taking of innocent
life. The death penalty is allowed in Genesis. If any man sheds the blood of
another man (plainly meaning cold blooded murder when read within context)
then by man shall his blood be shed. Murderers are not innocent. They have
taken it into their own hands to sow destruction, and in doing so, have sowed
the seeds of their own destruction.

And before someone attempts the red herring of old testament laws in
leviticus, the new testament put ceremonial law to rest with the crucifiction
of Christ, his blood the recompense for our sins,has made us whole through
grace by faith, not works. Paul stated in romans (not a direct quote here…'one
man esteems one day above another, one man will only eat vegetables, let each
do his own will'. Does that mean we continue to sin? By no means. As Christ
said, it is not what we eat that defiles us, it's what resides in the heart.
For we are freed from sin by the indwelling spirit of Christ, when we accept
his redemptive offering we are freed from the law, but not from seeking to
become closer to Christ or more christlike. His attributes are found in his
words, not the least of which is the sermon on the mount, BUT dont forget, he
also drove the money changers out of the temple with a WHIP in a righteous
rage, he was no soft pacifist, when it counted, when truth counted, Jesus
fought. Therefore we put off our old selves and pick up the cross of Christ
and seek to be his representatives in this world.

Last but certainly not least…Just because we are imperfect and sinful does not
mean we cannot speak out about the evil of abortion. Speaking about one evil
does not prohibit speaking about poverty, Nor does it negate the argument that
abortion is the taking of a human life. All the human sin in the world does
not negate the evil of abortion, one sin no matter how grotesque, does not
negate another lesser sin, nor does the lesser sin dim the more henious one.
One evil (the pedophilia of a few priests) does not mean that another priest
who has not been implicated in such things can not speak about sin. Just
because people sometimes do not live up to ideals and standards DOES NOT MEAN
THERE SHOULD BE NO STANDARDS. Without standards, we are mere animals without
dignity or humanity. Anything becomes acceptable in the name of tolerance,
(which is really just lazy apathy) and even morally equal. When that happens,
the collapse of civilization cannot be far behind.  
cm.oursler

Posted by cmoursler | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:22 am UTC

Get the facts straight-Burke's objection to Crow was about embryonic stem cell
research. The Church supports adult stem cell research.

Posted by Johns | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:22 am UTC

I love my catholic church.

THE DEMOCRATS ARE THE PARTY OF DEATH  
IT IS WHAT IT IS.

Long live our Pope.

Posted by bruno | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:23 am UTC

I wonder if Burke regrets the tacit approval given by church and Pius XII to
Hitler, and look forward to hearing his opinion on it?

Posted by Herb Siegel | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:25 am UTC

It's about time the Catholic Church spoke out about abortion and the party
that thinks it's ok.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:28 am UTC

Bravo to Archbishop Burke!!

Prayer and reparation will win the day. The Democrat party will once again be
a party that supports human dignity. In the meantime, instructing the ignorant
remains the crucial spiritual work of mercy.

+Jesus, Mary and Joseph, save souls!+

Posted by Patrick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:29 am UTC

As an American Republican, I must admit mixed feelings about the Democrat
embrace of Extinction Life Style. The famous article, The Empty Cradle Will
Rock published by the WSJ a few years ago, pointed out that there are now
about six million missing Democrats at the polls. This is one reason Democrats
lose elections despite many advantages such as having the establishment media
in their hip pocket.

I think we already have a workable compromise. We Republicans should continue
loving and cherishing children and Democrats should continue terminating
theirs. Over time this will also improve the American gene pool.

Posted by Bob | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:34 am UTC

When the bishops and priests were screwing the kids where were you?

Why have you npot condemned them? Hipocrite !!!!!!

Posted by Sreve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:34 am UTC

I'm very concerned, as a Catholic, that the church has defined life strictly
in terms of abortion. In America, the church has become solely defined as the
anti-abortion church. We are more than that

The United States is engaged in an unjust war, the country condones the death
penalty, we have ignored the least amongst us on a daily basis. Yet as a
church, we do not care. Our sole interest is in abortion and telling people
who disagree with us they have no place in our church. We do not care if they
agree -that abortion is morally wrong. Instead we expect that they agree
totally on how we end the problem of abortion. Do you really think outlawing
abortion will end abortion? No it will not. It will only close the door to
confused people. It will tell Catholic women that the church door is not open
to them for advice and forgiveness.

Posted by Cindy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:35 am UTC

The Catholic Church is entitled to have her own rules.If you filled there are
to rigid for you, you don't have to be part of it.But Nancy Pelosi, Biden and
the rest of them, start to Pontify from the Halls of Congress what means a to
be a good catholic .So Bishop Burke has to may clear (for us CatholIcs) the
Church position with respects to the babies in the mother's womb.

Posted by Martha | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:35 am UTC

Abortion IS a HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE! Without LIFE there can be no LIBERTY! ROE v
WADE is the most illegal and baseless law ever perpetrated on the American
people. We Catholics need to team up with our Protestant brothers and sisters
to further the culture of life!

Posted by Patrick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:42 am UTC

Herb: The Roman Catholic Church has already apologized for any help Pius XII
may have given the Nazis. Isn't it about time that you got over your anti-
Catholic bigotry?

Posted by Cyrus | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:43 am UTC

Dave and like-minded people say:

"Some people believe life begins the very moment of conception, some like
myself feel that true life doesn’t begin until you are born into the world."

So Dave would agree that there is a chance that life begins at conception.
Wouldn't you rather err on the side that it does indeed begin at conception
rather than risk killing a human being?

We are not like the hoofed creatures of the Serengeti. We still cannot take
care of ourselves the moment we leave the womb. If you really want to side
with someone who shares your view and feels even newborns don't deserve to
live, then you need to cast a vote for Barack Obama.

Stop taking the "I feel this way and other people feel another way" stance -
and choose. Is it a human being or not? Give valid reasons why or why not -
that ultimately is the question that everyone drawn to this blog needs to
answer.

Posted by Mikey | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:44 am UTC

Sreve: He ALREADY HAS apologized for priest pedophilia. When are you going to
get over your anti-Catholic bigotry?

Posted by Cyrus | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:47 am UTC

As typical, the internet crowd rears it's ugly head with all sorts of vitriol
against what is good and right.

Abortion on demand kills innocent babies.

A just war kills murderous dictators like Saddam who operate rape rooms and
torture chambers.

Liberals frequently confuse good and evil for some reason, I'd like to find
out why.

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:48 am UTC

Abortion = Murder

Good for the Catholic church to finally stand up and condemn these
pro-"choice" "Catholics."

Posted by ElCapitan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:54 am UTC

45,000,000 Americans have been murdered since Roe vs Wade. The Democrats, more
than any other party, have made it their mission to keep abortions happening.
NARAL and Planned Parenthood kickback millions to the Democratic Party. Just
like the Nazis who pulled the gold teeth out of their victims mouths, the
Democrat party profits from the murder of the innocent unborn. If these
Americans had not been murdered, maybe we wouldn't need to bring in 20 million
Mexicans to fill US jobs. Maybe they would have been hard working taxpayers
that could have contributed to the solvency of Social Security for future
retirees. If just 10% of them were geniuses, then abortionists have murdered
4,500,000 Americans that could possibly have found solutions to the critical
problems faced by our nation and the world. Those who defend abortion rights
are evil.

Posted by Alan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:57 am UTC

The wages you earn for sin is death (Romans 6:23) Sin is breaking any one of
Yahweh's 613 Laws found in the first five books of your Bible called The Torah
(Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy.(1 John 3:4) If you read
Revelation Chapter 17 you'll read of a "whore" who sits on 7 hills who is
teaching the world to commit fornication and abominations. Check any reliable
encyclopedia and you'll find that ROME is the city of seven hills. This is
where the Pope resides, in the Vatican which sits on one of those hills. He
has taught this world to worship a GOD named Jesus (also known as ZEUS THE
GREEK SKY GOD)who is nothing more than a false savior who is powerless to do
anything for anyone.Yahshua Messiah is the true Savior sent by Yahweh to bless
us by turning us away from all of our iniquites.(Acts 3:26) Iniquity is "doing
away with" Yahweh's Laws as you can read for yourself in Strongs Concordance.
This is what the Pope of Rome (the Holy Roman Empire) has accomplished. They
have taught all of us in the inhabited world to commit fornication and partake
of all abominations, i.e., eating pork and rodents, like the Capybara the Pope
approved the South Americans to eat during Lent declaring this rodent a "fish"
to justify this abominable practice. Read Isaiah 65 and 66 and see what Yahweh
thinks of eating unclean creatures. Recently this deceiver on the seven hills
of Rome mandated that Yahweh's Name be taken out of all catholic literature
and songs and must not be used during mass as it is "too holy to pronounce".
Google this for yourself and you'll see its true. Notice it is Yahweh whom he
is against, not GOD or Jesus or Jehovah or Buddah or Allah or any GOD of this
world…only the Heavenly Father Yahweh Whom is not a God nor ever claimed to
be. In fact He told us not to be worshipping (serving) Gods!  
The reason the Pope does not Yahweh's Name in the literature is you might get
wise to who ther Creator truly is and you might start calling on Him (Yahweh)
and be delivered from the destruction, diseases and nuclear war that is soon
to come. (Joel 2:32) The whole world is deceived. Revelation 12:9 The Pope's
time to deceive the world is alost over. COME OUT OF HER (THE CATHOLIC CHURCH)
MY PEOPLE SO YOU DO NOT PARTAKE OF HER SINS AND SO YOU DO NOT RECEIVE OF HER
PLAGUES. Rev. 18:4 Go TO YAHWEH.COM AND BE ENLIGHTENED.

Posted by william crouse | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:59 am UTC

Kirk said, <>

John Paul may well have said that, but he was NOT speaking 'ex Cathedra'. No
pope has ever asserted that opposition to capital punishment is binding on the
faithful. In fact, the Catechism actually specifies the conditions under which
capital punishment is allowable. All American states adhere to that or more
rigid standard.

Consider your ignorance relieved a little.

Posted by Cyrus | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:00 am UTC

Let us look at two similar human rights situations:

1854 Dred Scott decision: some human beings, because of the color of their
skin, are labled "chattel" and not recognized as human persons. This
dehumanizing of the African American person was fundamentally immoral and yet
upheld by law in mamy States. Dred Scott, who had sued for his freedom, was
given the decision that, not only did he have no right to sue for his freedom,
he had no right to be a free individual, the Supreme Court having usurped a
God-given right (as defined in the Declaration of Independence -"endowed by
the Creator")  
A civil war came to be fought over States' rights and whether or not this
great nation should divide over the slavery issue or not, if slavery should be
abolished or not.  
President Abraham Lincoln, midwestern, self-educated (not Harvard educated)
lawyer chooses war (as a last resort) to defend the Union and the humanity of
enslaved blacks.  
Outcome: the Union was preserved and blacks were declared emancipated - free
persons and granted citizenship with all its rights (even if it took time for
this to be fully accepted in some places).  
Lincoln was a Republican. Democrats favored slavery or were, at least, "pro-
choice", to let Southern landowners decide whether or not to own slaves
(perhaps out of respect to the "right to privacy"?). The South voted solidly
Democratic until the late 1970's. Many opted out of the party of their parents
and grandparents because it no longer reflected their values, as per the 2nd
case.

1973 Roe v Wade: some human beings, because of their age and vulnerability,
are labled with words like "products of conception", "blob of tissue". The
result left those not yet born, but on the way, to no protection by the US
government. Any reason could be given to abort under the "life of the
'mother\'" clause, even up to the day of birth. This dehumanizing of human
beings who happened to be one day old or one month old or five weeks or six
months led to the desensitization of our people and those who worked for this
decision have also seen fit to ensconce it in the psyche the nation by
ensuring its indoctrination in our children in school, our youth in
universities (those born the year of the decision are at least 35 years old).
It has opened the door for the hubris of the scientific community to
manipulate very young human beings for the sake of "research", to strip them
of their stem cells, for example, even though all credible studies have shown
that adult stem cells have actually cured diseases and embyonic stem cells not
only have never cured any diseases, they have caused cancer in many cases when
tried. Those who want to keep the unborn child, whether embryo, fetus or
zygote, in its current state of "slave" to the will of the adults who called
it into being and/or wish to manipulate or destroy it at will include NARAL,
Planned Parenthood Federation, and, since the last 35 years or so, the
Democratic Party. Infiltrated by disgruntled leftists who could not make it on
their own (socialists, communists), they have succeeded in highjacking the
party and refashioning it according to leftist ideologies in the name of a
self-defined "progress". The result has been a regress of our people. Since
Roe v Wade, "Roe" (Norma McCorvey) has since become staunchly pro life; so
also have women who have had abortions who are "Silent No More" and abortion
doctors, such as Dr. Bernard Nathanson, one of the founding members of NARAL
who once operated the largest abortion clinic in NYC.  
The experimentation on very young humans resembles the horrible experiments
carried on by the Nazi scientists on human beings, including children, during
WWII.  
Just as slavery did not make us a better nation, so, too, abortion on demand
has not made us a better nation.  
Women are more easily preyed upon by men who exploit them and then refuse to
help them or, worse, encourage them to abort. Economics has become an excuse
(just as it was for the slavery of the 19th century). As Nobel prize winner
Mother Teresa of Calcutta once observed when questioned by an American
journalist her views on abortion: "America is such a poor country. In India,
we are poor, but we feed our children. But in America you are so poor you have
to kill them." Again, she brought up the "A" word at a White House Prayer
Breakfast during the Clinton administration: "Abortion is the greatest
challenge to peace in our times. If a nation permits the child in the womb to
be killed, what is to stop me or anyone from killing any other person?"
Abortion has forced health care workers, called to heal and "do no harm", to
become workers in the "killing fields" of the abortion industry. And, make no
mistake about it, it is a multi-million dollar industry. Were that not so,
groups like Planned Parenthood would not be so tenacious about maintaining it.  
I have faith that Roe v Wade will be overturned. As more and more people are
coming to discover the truth about the life of the unborn -new ultra sounds
have also helped to bring this reality home to many people- more and more are
finding the whole abortion thing so very distasteful and immoral, and the Roe
v Wade decision for the sham that it was/is. It is the Republican party, the
party of Lincoln which freed the slaves, which has stood more consistently on
the side of the unborn child -and the elderly, the sick, the average
traditional family, working people and so on. The Democrats have so removed
themselves from these groups; the few pro-life Democrats have been silenced,
if not exploited. They may have to do what Ronald Reagan, once a Democrat did
-leave the party since, "it isn't they who left the party, it's the party
which left them". It is no longer the party of FDR and JFK, both of whom would
be appalled by what it has morphed into.  
Moreover, the media has, by and large, taken sides -the side of the neo-
liberal Democrats (neo-liberal because they are not liberal in the classic
sense of being open to the viewpoints of others). It was enough to see the way
Charles Gibson and Katie Couric condescendingly interviewed Governor Palin.  
I believe in the common sense of most of our citizens who have been seeing
through the web of lies spun by the media, spun by the Democrats, spun by the
Obama camp, and they will rise to the occasion and make the right choice on
November 4. When they do, we will begin to see, at long last, the emancipation
of the unborn child and the end of the exploitation of unborn children.

Posted by therese | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:00 am UTC

um hello we haven't waged nuclear war on iran… wake up

Posted by Bob Georgeson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:00 am UTC

It's way past time that the Catholic Church puts its money where its mouth is
and stand up for the unborn. Abortion is a barbaric procedure any way you look
at it and if the Catholic Church doesn't defend these innocent babies who
will? There is no wiggle room when it comes to defending the unborn and these
so-called "catholic" politicians must be held to account for their evil stand
on abortion by the leaders of the Catholic Church. Like I said it's way past
time for the clergy to put these politicians in their place.

Posted by Ray | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:01 am UTC

um we haven't waged nuclear war on iran… wake up!

Posted by Bob Georgeson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:03 am UTC

I am not Catholic, but I so agree with the archbishop and POPE, if you can not
defend LIFE

Posted by Cathy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:03 am UTC

OK… First, for all you talking about separation of church and state… there is
no state sponsorship of the catholic church whatsoever, so this point is not
relevant.

Second, for those of you who know this but understand the 501(c)3 status of
churches and the requirement that 501(c)3's not endorse any particular
candidate or party, there is are reasons there is no problem here.

    1. First and foremost, this is not an endorsement, its a criticism of a political policy of a particular party and most specifically of politicians who are uneducated in certain aspects of their moral philosophy and the faith which they claim to represent. Non-profits do not lose their right to support or criticize POLICIES of any particular party or politician. (Lets not forget the Pope's vocal opposition to the Bush doctrine of pre-emption and the war in Iraq, not to mention the death penalty during his visit to the US.)

    2. The comment comes from the Vatican i.e. a sovereign nation according to international law. 

    3. Now, those of you who talk about "The Catholic Church" having tax exempt status, I invite you to pause and reflect and think about if you really honestly think the Vatican in Rome files a U.S. Tax Return… I hope you've quickly concluded that's ridiculous. 

The Church, like all other international non-profit organizations is
incorporated in each place separately from the Vatican. Dioceses are each
incorporated as their own entity in the U.S. and in some states parishes are
only partially incorporated into the diocese sort of like franchises. Each
individual parish could in theory break with the diocese or dioceses could
break with Rome, although it would require a rogue Bishop because of the way
the articles of incorporation are written. Each diocese or parish files its
own tax exempt forms with the IRS (and state if necessary).

SO, if one parish priest in Wyoming endorses a candidate or party he endangers
his parish's tax exempt status for that year, but not the entire Catholic
Church throughout the nation… which I think all would agree is reasonable. Now
with regard to the pedophilia cases, federal courts have decided to "pierce
the corporate veil" in those cases due to managerial negligence. That is to
say that while a parish may be incorporated separately from the diocese the
separation between the diocese and the parish level is non-existent when the
Bishop is the one moving people around. But that rule would not apply unless
it could be proven that the diocese knew what was going on at the parish
level.

Thus, even IF the archbishop was representing his diocese when making those
comments, any tax exempt status could theoretically only be stripped from his
diocese (of course assuming he was breeching the 501(c)3 stipulations - which
he was not). Tax exempt status cannot be stripped from "The Catholic Church"
because according to the law there is no such think as the universal catholic
church as we imagine it in our heads, only dioceses incorporated in each
state.

    1. Now on a Constitutional note, truly the last thing the federal government (the President, Congress, and Supreme Court) want is a Supreme Court case between The Catholic Archdiocese of (x) and The United States of America. Talk about political suicide and culture wars. Not to mention there is no established constitutional authority for the 501(c)3 restriction on churches. The first amendment says, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or respecting the free exercise thereof." The supreme court has primarily held two different standards, one being that government could support religious organizations so long as it did not discriminate between them, and then there is the more recent "wall of separation" doctrine. The problem for those who are against religion in the public square is that they would like to apply the "wall of separation" when it comes to government GIVING money to religious affiliated institutions however they often have no problem with taxing the churches. This view is blatantly, although often not intentionally, hypocritical. If one believes in a strict wall of separation then the wall must apply both ways. However, if you follow the school that says government can fund religiously affiliated institutions under certain circumstances then you must leave open the possibility that funding or other privileges may be withheld based on certain conditions. 

You can't have it both ways, and so it is not entirely certain that the the
"secularists" would win this Constitutional battle. In the end the Supreme
Court could enshrine a church's right to not be taxed as part of the free
exercise clause and then speech be protected under freedom of speech and
priests and bishops could endorse parties and candidates outright and without
penalty from the government. Instead I think we should be content to not have
the culture wars explode on the federal level and remain content with the
current comfortable, although vague, truce between the churches and state.

The churches that really benefit most from this arrangement are the baptists
and evangelicals. The catholic and mainline protestant churches are organized
into hierarchical structures (dioceses) and largely based in major population
centers with parishioners encompassing a wide range of the political spectrum.
They therefore are more easily exposed and make easy targets for a theoretical
lawsuit. Therefore, they are careful not to breach the 501(c)3 restrictions.
Evangelical churches however use a truly American strategy to gain their
political sway and that is celebrity status of a select few evangelical
pastors. Because they do not actually speak for an organized church at all
they are impossible to penalize for endorsing one candidate or the other. Even
if pastors in the large rural congregations did breech the 501(c)3 status, the
government would not only have to prove it, but also have to try each
individual 100 seat church separately in court rather than entire dioceses. As
you can see the law favors the political power of churches that are
decentralized, rual, and often radical - so long as they don't put anything in
writing. So when pundits talk about the powerful Evangelical conservative vote
and the near irrelevance of the Catholic vote, remember what you read here,
and what you know of American history, 501c3 status is just another tool of
southern white protestants to maintain their control of the country.

Posted by primusinterpares | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:03 am UTC

Obama gave the typical "pro-choice" interpretation when he said if one of his
daughters made a mistake, he didn't want them "punished" with a baby.
"PUNISHED". So, in the pro-choice mind…….having a child is "punishment" and
the "mistake" should be terminated for convenience. 95% of all baby murders
are murders of "convenience". Dress it up or try to rationalize it any way you
want. They are abortions of convenience……….period ! ! !

Posted by bill brady | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:06 am UTC

With regards to abortion and the Democratic party's stance:

There appears to be a very strong motive for their wanting to "protect" a
woman's right to choose … selfishness.

1) A woman wants to have sex and does so, without concern in becoming
pregnant.  
2) The woman decides she doesn't want the child growing within her.  
3) The woman has an abortion.

For some reason, the Democratic party doesn't want us procreating. Their
rationale is very clear as they want it to otherwise look like they're
"protecting" a woman's right to choose, while the entire time they're
encouraging them to NOT reproduce.

Interesting thought, is it not?

I just wish people would hold the sanctity for life and the sacred act of
procreating in higher regard. We need to return to being a more responsible
society.

Posted by Larry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:08 am UTC

I'm not a Catholic, but I totally agree with the church official. Plain and
simple, the Democrats are a "party of death." It was the logical step for them
to get the most liberal senator to run for president, and one who has voted
against the unborn time after time. NARAL, NOW, and all the liberal feminist
groups support Obama.  
And no wonder, their sacred cow, "convenience killing," is at stake in this
race.

Are you proud dems? To be linked to the holocaust of our times in the name of
convenience and "equal rights" for women? What a joke. You have the blood of
millions of innocents on your hands. The unborn are the most vulnerable of
Americans. No one can hear their cries of anguish as they're sucked, scraped,
skulls crushed, or they're torn apart in the womb. I've held three kids and
nine grandkids as newborns, and I can't imagine anyone of them to have someone
party to having their innocent little lives snuffed out. I know the hard
cases. Almost 98% of abortions are for convenience, and not a health, incest,
or rape issue. Democrats=the party of death.

Posted by Katrina | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:14 am UTC

this article makes me want to go and have an abortion

Posted by appone | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:20 am UTC

Nancy Pelosi and Joe Biden need to find a church that aligns more with their
way of thinking. They should not be a member of a church if they can't support
the belief system of that organization. Religion is a choice not a birthright.

Posted by Mary | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:20 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” - Reuters
BlogsVatican officials seldom single out political leaders who differ with the
Church on issues like abortion rights or embryonic stem cell research. But now
that the Vatican’s highest court is led by an American, the former St. Louis
Archbishop Raymond … […]

Posted by Religions » I. Summary - Human Rights Watch | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:23 am UTC

Why does everyone seem to forget that it was a Republican appointed judge,
Blackmun who made abortion legal, with Roe vs. Wade. The majority of
Republicans were for abortion, even Ronald Reagan who appointed Judge Scalia,
who is Catholic and said on 60 minutes show that he would not make abortion
illegal and that he didnt believe a fetus was covered by the constitution. How
come he is not denied communion? I dont believe democrats should be called the
party of death. But the hypocritical Republicans. Out of their mouths they say
they are against abortion. But didnt change laws when they could have with
Bush, who didnt keep his promises.This is the example of wolves in sheep
clothing.

Posted by Candy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:31 am UTC

According to science, life begins at conception.

According to Obama, fatherhood does not end at conception, so one can assume
it must start at conception.

Do we want to want to help those who are most in need?

Posted by Walter Funk | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:35 am UTC

Wow.  
I left the Church a few years ago because I was disappointed about several
things.  
This comment about the Democrats, which I totally agree with, may steer me
back to the Church.  
Thanks for standing for something in this day of whimps.

Posted by Julie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:36 am UTC

Micheal, your argument is so ridiculous you should never be allowed to post on
the internet ever again. No U.S. politician has ever threatened to use nuclear
weapons anywhere in the Middle East. The U.N. is actually trying to stop the
Middle East from getting nuclear weapons so they don't blow Israel off the
map. Or do you actually think Iran wouldn't love to do just that. If so you
truly are ignorant and should be banned from the internet and all intellectual
venues.

Posted by Sam | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:38 am UTC

The responses her are stunning. Like the one who argues that we need to keep
killing innocent babies until we end all wars, because only then will we
realise the sanctity of life. Can you truly be foolish enough to believe your
own twisted logic?

And those who argue that Biden is right to argue for abortion, because while
his beliefs which states that life begins at conception should not imposed on
others. Basic science states that life begins at conception. Look at the
definition of "Life". You may want to argue wether it in intelligent life, but
to argue it is not life shows a lack of understanding of basic biology.

So if Biden believes that life begins at conception he has no more moral
standing justifying abortion than he would attempting to justtify murder of
full grownn adults. What next argue that we should let infants die post birth
if the mother decides she does not want the baby. Only Obama could support
such a sick resolution (BAIPA).

Posted by Dan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:41 am UTC

Bush met with the Pope in the medieval tower a few months ago… As you all
probably know, the pope was a Hitler Nazi youth during WWII. It is the
republicans that started a oil/pipeline war on behalf of Israel in the middle
east and Afganistan… and the democrats are the party of death?

I know, I know, the conservatives flip reality so that their idiot class
supporters will believe it, but then these poor suckers will believe anything.

Who cares what the vatican thinks? I think billions of dollars payed out to
settle child molestation claims is what they need to focus on and the current
pope was the person responsible for shipping those priests elsewhere and
covering these crimes up.

Posted by Ray | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:46 am UTC

Typical. Secular Americans have a problem with the Catholic Church, therefore
the Church MUST be wrong (and we wonder why the rest of the world believes we
are ignorant). Simply put, the Roman Catholic Church is NOT a pluralist
Democratic institution. It is patriarchal with a singular authority figure at
the top (which is not you). At no point does the Catholic Church require or
even need your input. Would you insist upon using your hands in a soccer game
because you dont like the rule "feet only"? NO ONE has the right to be
Catholic. If you disagree with the Orthodoxy, go somewhere else. The
expectation that one can be a pro-abortion Democrat (or Republican) and then
insist they are Catholic speaks to the immaturity of that individual (not to
mention the almost manic selfishness) and NOT the Roman Catholic Church.
Nothing more.

Posted by curious | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:47 am UTC

The only reason for abortion is to rob American of its nationality. Once the
legal and illegals fill the labor force and political posts then the borders
will disappear and we will become the great North American Union nanny state
with our own Euro and sing kumbya to our glorious leader, Obama.

Posted by Whitey Right | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:48 am UTC

If the question of when life begins is so open to interpretation, then can we
extend the pre-life period to, say, up to two years old? That would give us
plenty of time to really decide if we want to keep this thing that we haven't
labeled a child yet. This "in the womb, out of the womb" distinction just
doesn't fly. I mean one second it's a "fetus", and the next moment, with a
push or the slice of a scalpel, and ta da, we have life? Head still in the
birth canal? Just a fetus. Full delivery? Hmm, well, if you can't put the head
back in (to perform the abortion) then we have to call it a life. Kids aren't
really human anyway until after the terrible twos. So would any pro-choice
proponents disagree with my choice to have a post birth abortion, so long as I
do it before this post born fetus turns 2?

Posted by Bustyn | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:49 am UTC

Any Catholic who participates in, is a party to or is an enabler of abortion
stands excommunicated from the Church and will spend eternity as a damed soul
in the hands of Satan for all eternity in incomprehensible torment. They have
exercised their free will to choose death over everlasting life. Joe Biden,
Nancy Pelosi, John Kerry, Ted Kennedy, Thurgood Marshall and all the others
who are soaked in the blood of millions of the innocents are pathetic damned
souls whose departure from this life will take them straight into hell and a
torment that they have lied to themselves and lied to the weak fools who kill
babies. God himself said that it would be better that a millstone were hung
about your neck and you were cast into the sea rather than to face his
judgement with the blood of children on your hands. So, Joe, Nancy, John, Ted,
Thurgood and the rest… good luck with that!

Posted by Joseph Barack O'biden | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:56 am UTC

If the Vatican is using derogatory name calling and thinks the Democratic
party is the "Party of death", then I suppose one could respond by saying the
Vatican is, "The home of child molesters." The Vatican needs to stay out of
politics and clean up it's own house. Btw, I used to be a Catholic. I am now
100% atheist. I add that in case some religious whacko, and this country has
more than it's share, responds with, "You must be a Jew or a muslim." It never
ceases to amaze me, in this age, that people still think there is a god or
believe in that comic book without pictures called the bible. Note the small
"g".

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:05 am UTC

So when people know that a murder is happening they are just supposed to let
it happen? I don't think so.

Posted by mulligan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:06 am UTC

Yeah, and the Catholic Church is the sanctuary of pedophiles.

Where does that get us?

Posted by Tina Perkins | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:08 am UTC

So you think that Republican foreign policy makes it right to stick a knife
into a baby's neck or to salt poison a baby?

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:17 am UTC

I appreciate the Catholic Church standing up for the poor and helpless of this
world. Good for you. I am not a catholic and when my youngest daughter was
entering the 4th grade of the local public school and I saw the propaganda
written on the blackboard by the home classroom teacher, I took her out of the
pathetic public school and put her in a great catholic grade school in
Portland Oregon - St. Claire's and later into Valley Catholic High School
where she received a fabulous education. Thank You Very Much. WWTerry

Posted by WW Terry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:21 am UTC

Joe Biden and Nancy Petosi should leave the catholic church. In San Francisco
there is a church more to their thinking. It's The Church of Satan. Caio!
WWTerry

Posted by WW Terry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:24 am UTC

YOU GO BURKE,  
FUNNY HOW AMERICAN DEMOCRATES ARE ABANDONING THIER FAITH. WHY HAVE A FAITH IT
YOU DON'T REALLY UNDERSTAND IT? JUST TO STAY IN POWER? REALISE THE END GAME
FOR THE UNITED STATES SENATOR(S)

Posted by CHARLES BLATNER | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:25 am UTC

WHY DO YOU STOP POSTING RESPONSES??????????

Posted by Kuntt Licquore | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:30 am UTC

if you are catholic, you do not support the death penalty or abortion. i
suggest you find another religon if you intend to vote for either.

Posted by reason | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:33 am UTC

Dear Vatican,

Can you PLEASE, PLEASE get father Michael Pfleger be defrocked? He is a shame
of the Catholic church.

Posted by A Woman for Palin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:33 am UTC

Vatican - if we don't abort them, will you promise not to rape them?

Posted by KS | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:39 am UTC

Democrats = party of suppression, racism, socialism, elitism. Dixiecrats won't
vote for Obama so no matter what the polls say McCain will be president. Not
that there is a whole lot of difference between the two.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:41 am UTC

well there have now been over 50 MILLION abortions is the USA, including 15
MILLION blacks.

i would not want to be ted kennedy facing death if there is a fainal judgment.

all the other phony cafeteria cayholics are in trouble. pelosi, biden, durbin
and all the rest

Posted by deroy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:46 am UTC

Michael Cecil

It ain't about Iran so get back on your knees your not finished till I say
your finished

Barrack Hussein Obama

Posted by Henry Poole | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:49 am UTC

Leftist pigs underestimeate the seriousness and power of those of us who
support the nationstate and are willing to fight for it. Push us as you will
and see what end awaits you.

Next time, no more Mr. Nice Guy.

Posted by ME | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:54 am UTC

Individual Catholics may stray from the fold on certain issues. But when they
publicly misrepresent Church teachings, they bring scandal and shame on the
Holy Catholic Church. If Pelosi is such a good Catholic, she could really use
some time in "the box." In 2000 years, the Catholic Church has never
excommunicated anyone. Although many people excommunicate themselves by their
actions, they are always welcome home by a forgiving God.

There can be just wars (and I'm not saying Iraq is or isn't one of them) but
there are no just abortions. Ever.

Posted by Kaden | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:03 am UTC

Reading all these comments, I'm thinking about the cartoon with the sign
"Morons on Parade". Are you over 8 years old? Did you gradz8 3rd grade? Maybe
you'll remember that the statement "separation of Church and State" is NOWHERE
in any of our laws. It was discussed in the Federalist Papers when the
founding fathers were debating whether to include it in the Constitution
(which they never did), which led to the first 10 Amendments (called the Bill
of Rights), and the First Amendment guaranteed the Freedom of Religion.
Remember any of that? The reason for how this happened in our country goes
back to jolly old England, where Henry VIII committed mass murder to declare
himself Head of the Church so he could screw around without any criticism. So
he invented a warped version of Christianity that suited his own sex life, and
then he forced it on the people at the point of the sword. Years later, if you
wanted to have any authority in the upper circles in England, you had to join
the Church. Here in the colonies, we wanted to cast off all ties with England,
and we didn't like the way the politicians ran the Church. We wanted a Freedom
of Religion. And to this day, we want religious leaders to influence the moral
debate. So this "wall of separation" is a 1-way thing. We want politicians to
leave the Churches alone, but we very much want Churches to speak out on moral
issues. As to the tax exempt status of the Catholic Church being revoked for
"preaching politics", note that they aren't doing this. They are preaching
MORALITY, and that is independent of anyone's political party. As to the
Church "forcing it down the throats" of people like Biden or Pelosi, they
aren't doing that either. All churches (and all clubs of any kind for that
matter), are composed of people who have something in common and get together
to celebrate it as a binding force, as something that makes them "one". The
Catholic Church is a group of people who wrote a Creed of what WE BELIEVE in
common, and it has ALWAYS held that abortion is murder. If you think
otherwise, you are always free to leave. In the cases of Biden and Pelosi,
this Creed was there long before they chose to profess it and thereby join the
Church. Today they feel different, so today, they are no longer one of "US".
And that's all Archbishop Burke said, and he said it because it's the truth.

Now as to all the comments about views on war, the death penalty,
homosexuality, hypocracy, and so on, the old saying goes "what does any of
that have to do with the price of tea in China?" When the discussion is about
those other subjects, then fine, we'll address them at that time. But when it
is about the Church's view on abortion, then stick to that. Arbitrarily
changing the subject in the middle of a debate is a coward's way of admitting
he's losing the debate, so like a spoiled child, he throws mud where ever he
can. But it doesn't change the fact that he's lost the debate. Archbishop
Burke was totally right in what he said, and I applaud him for having the guts
to stand up to the "Morons on Parade". He told the truth. And you Morons can't
stand it. I look forward to your turning 9 or even 10 years old (in other
words, grow up babies).

Posted by Jim V | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:06 am UTC

Now lets see why the pot is calling the kettle black…

Rwanda, Spanish inquisition, the second world war agreements with the Nazi
regime, the covering up of pedophile priests….oh my…this is a really really
long list here….but we get the picture…

How about the Vatican come clean with all of their misdeeds….and PROVE they
are what they preach…then maybe we can take their council.

Clean your own house Vatican! Stop worrying about the speck of evil in the
Democratic Party's eye when you have a history of so much corruption.

Posted by V Detta | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:11 am UTC

Bishops and others officials at Peter's See: please, go back to molesting
children and telling your parishioners not to have sex with their own spouses
except on certain days of the month. Maybe you could distract yourself with a
scapula, or a cat of nine tails, or some other sort of torture device during
this election period. The rest of us will do just fine here in the 21st
century without your input. We want our free, secular country to survive the
crises created by the last 8 years of nonsense. We came here to this country
to get away from people like you. K. Thanks. Bye.

Posted by M | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:15 am UTC

I'm surprised he didn't mention Obama, who 4 times voted against giving care
to babies that survived abortion, if yo don't believe this read the truth at
BornAliveTruth.com

Posted by Tatiana | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:26 am UTC

Actually none of these politicians have actually been denied communion.
Accepting communion means that you follow the Catholic church's precepts. The
Catholic church is a Pro-Life church, the Bishops had every right to speak up
when two of their "faithful" mis stated Church teaching. On the whole "How can
you be Pro-Life but Pro-War?" thing… No one is Pro-War. War can be a tool to
stop violent regimes to stop people from invading other lands, sometimes it
doesn't work out as we'd hope. We don't go to war to kill as many
indiscriminate people as possible… But there is only one reason to go into an
abortion clinic. To end a pregnancy… And what does that entail? The very
weakest among us deserve better.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:31 am UTC

The concern of the Catholic Church is the salvation of souls. It is part of
cannon law that any Roman Catholic who participates in any way, encourages,
pays for, performs, undergoes, or votes for abortion is automatically
excommunicated. If such a an excommicant recieves Holy Communion he commits
mortal sin. Archbishop Burke is merely stating longstanding Church teaching.
His goal is to bring such people back to the truths of Holy Mother Church.
Catholic politicians who support abortion, and those who vote for them are
putting their souls in the gravest danger. It is not just Amercian unborn,
every year 50,000,000 surgical abortions occur worldwide, most done for purely
elective reasons. That does not count the ones killed by abortifacient drugs
and devices. This is a crime bigger than any in history. Those who say the
Church should not speak about this most monstous bloodbath in the history of
the world are fools or cowards. It is exactly the job of the princes of the
Church to "suffer the little ones" to be protected. The famed separation of
church and state comes from a letter of Jefferson. It applied to the federal
government. Let those who think it is just a blob of tissue go to Population
Research Institue and read about how our foreign aid helps spread abortions
around the world. If you dare,and have the stomach for it, go to the site of
Dr. Robert Suengenis where you will find a video of an actual aboriton. The
democrats support all of this, it is in their party platform. And now Obama,
it turns out, does not support giving medical treament to babies, outside the
womb, who have survived abortions. The most dangerous place in the world for
an unborn child has now become his mother's womb. The slaughter is far worse
than Mao, Stalin, and Hitler combined,yet the democrats defend it all. If that
is not a "party of death" non ever existed. Do we build a better future for
ouselves in the blood of innocents? May God forgive us all.

Posted by Lawrence Brown | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:32 am UTC

Who cares what a bunch of boy-raping psychos think, anyway? Not me.

Posted by Tony | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:32 am UTC

I am a faithful, practicing Catholic, and I am a Democrat. I support the party
despite its position on abortion. Church teaching states that this is an
appropriate result of prayerful discernment. A Catholic (like me) can and will
vote on the basis of other faith-based issues including care for the poor and
sick, opposition to pre-emptive war, opposition to torture, concern for the
environment, etc. I believe as a Catholic I can work for an end to abortion in
other ways, such as helping those faced with that (currently legal) choice.
This is what my prayer has led me to. I vote Obama/Biden.

Posted by Prayerful Voter | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:34 am UTC

I suppose the VP debate didn't cover abortion. Biden gets to talk about deaths
in Iraq, but Palin has to keep quiet about murders in America?

Again to the Dems - do you think that all your anti-Church propaganda comments
"justify" killing babies? Are you trying to say that you keep that policy
going just so you can be "as corrupt as the Vatican"?

Nice morality.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:35 am UTC

When the pope messes in U.S. political affairs, it is time to recall the
Ambassador to the Vatican. United States was founded by persons escaping the
religious tyranny in Europe.

Posted by Charles Wilkins | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:46 am UTC

As one posting suggested, do a Google search for "abortion images". This alone
will speak the truth about this evil to your very soul.

I am adopted. I could have been aborted, but instead was allowed into this
world and have had the privilege of helping many people in many ways. I am
beside myself to think that selfishness could prompt individuals, claiming to
be Catholic, who want to lead our country, allow - and support - the murder of
the unborn.

This year I was confirmed as a Catholic. While I always knew deep in my soul
that abortion was wrong, I now have the right understanding of why this is so.

The images one will find through a Google search is enough to show you the
face of this evil clearly and directly.

Posted by Jill McLean | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:04 am UTC

It's interesting that people like Tony who don't care at all what the Catholic
church thinks actually care enough to pronounce here that they don't care at
all. We believe you! Really.

Anyway - that comment aside - I firmly believe that abortion is a choice. The
same as murder is a choice. Theft is a choice. Adultery is a choice. There are
also consequences and responsibilities involved. Unfortunately, the first on
the list has been moved away from a civil rights issue to a political issue.
Perhaps that will one day change.

Posted by Amazed | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:15 am UTC

It is shocks me that his eminence forgets the Democratic party's opposition to
war, the death penalty, pro poor/middle class policies etc when he issues such
biased statements. I am a catholic and am glad that there is seperation of
church and state. The cardinal should stick to prayer.

Posted by ep | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:35 am UTC

the dems have always been

the win at any cost party

no conscience

no morals

illegal voter registration

multiple voting

it goes way back to 1960

daley won illinois for kennedy

he won the "dead vote" by 99%

complicit media doesn't help either

the rest of the world feels like a salmon

going upstream

Posted by the voice of reason | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:48 am UTC

Totally agree……the Democrats are nothing but closet communists…….they are
Anti-American and destroying every fabric of this country. One bought voter at
a time.

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:52 am UTC

The indoctrination process for becoming a liberal is to first define all
morality as relative. Next use the historical record of any group that opposes
their leftist ideology to destroy it's credibilty. Of course the dishonesty of
this approach is self-evident as every single organization or religion with
traditional values has a history with bad chapters. For liberals, their "new"
approach has no historical record to compare and so above reproach. But no,
there is and it's practiced in North Korea and Cuba. Old message, new
packaging.  
So contiue sucking the brains out of babies and calling a choice. If you
wouldn't be any more disturbed by seeing a pic of an aborted baby than you
would of seeing one of a removed gall stone, then you could vote Democrat.

Posted by andy tokyo | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:52 am UTC

Way to go Catholic Church. It's about time to stand up for the Word of God and
speak the truth.

By the way, it's not an "attack" if it is true.  
It is only becomes an attack when the editor of this piece supports abortion
on demand, and probably disdains babies and Catholics.  
Hate editorship

Posted by dingorex | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:18 am UTC

Abotion is a matter between a woman and her God. I to am a practicing catholic
and feel abortion should only be in certain cases.Don't be fooled the
republicians have had a president, congress and supreme court for the last 8
years and haven't done a thing.They continue to use you.How many republicians
have had abortions? The church also teaches us not to steal or kill.How many
lives have been lost in Iraq over the republician greed for oil? Wake up!

Posted by Larry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:20 am UTC

I AGREE. THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY SHOULD CHANGE ITS NAME TO THE DEVILCRATIC PARTY.

Posted by JOSE A VAZQUEZ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:26 am UTC

It is not a sin if a Catholic believes in his heart of hearts that abortion is
not a sin. What is terrible wrong is when an influential Catholic, be it a
politician, journalist or an actor, speaks out in support of abortion. His
words, his actions in passing laws may indeed enable someone to abort an
unborn child. These same Catholics who are in the public eye could just as
well say that it is a personal matter and I will not discuss my feelings on
the subject.

Posted by Capitalist Pig | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:29 am UTC

Don't you people have anything better to do?

Posted by Jeffrey | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:29 am UTC

This is not good news for Obama…

The Catholic vote is huge and if the Vatican is challenging Biden and Pelosi's
spiritual beliefs, it will trickle down to the Democratic ticket…

Hmmmm…

Posted by sunny | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:42 am UTC

When the Republicans bring up going to war, its not to kill the innocent
people.  
I'm sure most of you know why we go to war, though i'll still educate you.  
Either they (whoever it may be) attack us, or are planning to attack us, or
planning to attack an ally. And when we sign a treaty to go to war if our ally
does, then we have to. Or we wouldn't be a Country of our word.  
When Democrats bring up abortion, Its about getting a woman's vote. I doubt
they think at all about what they say they're supporting. And if you don't
follow Catholic doctrine, you should be refused communion.

Posted by Joseph | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:55 am UTC

Easy for the church of Pedophilia to say.

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:55 am UTC

Is this the same church that receives US government financial subsidies? Those
same subsidies stolen from the people of the US without their consent?

Sorry stupid church but your moral platitudes make me sick. You pederasts you…

Posted by Black Pot | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:01 am UTC

ALL religion is the root of all evil…….

Posted by Jim | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:01 am UTC

It is nothing short of an outrage that the Vatican is meddling in U.S.
elections.

It is the Vatican, with the despicable policies it promulgates (and deeds it
covers up), that is an institution of misery, death and evil. It is dying an
agonizing death, but not nearly quickly enough.

Fortunately, only the weak-minded and stupid pay any attention to these
pedophiles, and they vote Republican anyway.

Posted by Filecabinet | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:01 am UTC

Abortion is about the murdering of INNOCENT life.

The fourteenth amendment reiterates our basic principles: "nor shall any State
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law."

What due process has an unborn child had (conversely, this clearly explains
how pro-lifers like myself justify the death penalty).

"At the heart of the controversy in these cases are those recurring
pregnancies that pose no danger whatsoever to the life or health of the mother
but are, nevertheless, unwanted for any one or more of a variety of reasons —
convenience, family planning, economics, dislike of children, the
embarrassment of illegitimacy, etc. … I find nothing in the language or
history of the Constitution to support the Court's judgment. … As an exercise
of raw judicial power, the Court perhaps has authority to do what it does
today; but, in my view, its judgment is an improvident and extravagant
exercise of the power of judicial review that the Constitution extends to this
Court." — Justice Byron R. White.

Posted by BamBam | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:12 am UTC

Let's get this straight… the scariest and wealthiest cult in the world is now
calling out democrats? Laughable. Maybe they will get their word across to all
those abused alter boys.

Posted by will | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:18 am UTC

Pelosi and Biden should be excomunicated.

Posted by stan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:19 am UTC

Let me get this straight .Biden and Polosi (not to mention Obama ) are
strongly against the Death Sentence for mass murderers in the USA even Child
Rapist and their Killers but they are Fore Abortion .  
Well that makes sense but only too a Nut and a complete Fool ….. meaning
Socialist/Liberals in Politics in this Country .  
Oh Yea they also see Morals as there is no Right and Wrong .  
That is why Holly Weird is so Leftist and equally stupid .

Posted by Sam Moore | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:20 am UTC

Anyone who is captured will be run through with a sword. Their little children
will be dashed to death right before their eyes. Their homes will be sacked
and their wives raped by the attacking hordes. For I will stir up the Medes
against Babylon, and no amount of silver or gold will buy them off. The
attacking armies will shoot down the young people with arrows. They will have
no mercy on helpless babies and will show no compassion for the children.
(Isaiah 13:15-18 NLT)

….and this is pro-life?

Posted by A Rogers | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:27 am UTC

The Civil War was not the answer. Is that your position, Mike? Abortion is
never the answer, because no matter how you twist yourself you cannot make it
anything but murder; but war sometimes is the only answer to deal with people
like Hitler and others who would in fact enslave as many human beings as
possible.

Posted by Constance | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:28 am UTC

Blacks in America have had 9 Million Abortions since President Johnson allowed
them to be paid for by Tax Payers in 1964 .  
That is more Women and Men than have been Killed in all Wars America has
fought in since our Birth as a Nation .Blacks shoud be mad about that but they
are not ?

Of course as a Tax Payer I should be happy but I am not .

Posted by Sam Moore | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:32 am UTC

Capitalist Pig,  
In Catholic teaching there is such a thing as "false conscience" that is what
you are espousing. You cannot take infanticide and pretend it is OK because
somehow you have twisted your thinking to pretend it is a good thing. You can
try to talk yourself into these phoney positions but you know in your dark
little heart they are wrong, which is why you rail against anyone who speaks
to the truth of the matter.

Posted by Constance | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:42 am UTC

Abortion = Murder. Those who practice, perform or support abortion, therefore,
support murder. Politicians and Political Parties… EITHER or ALL… stand
guilty. "Pro-Choice" is a white-washed tomb. "Pro-Murder" is more the truth. I
commend the Roman Catholic Church for proclaiming simple yet profoud truth.
Why have Americans of all political and religious backgrounds become so
heartless, cruel and morally blind? A "Sign of the Times" it would appear…

Posted by Steve in Indiana | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:43 am UTC

The catholic church was a world power for 1260 years"the Dark Ages", and they
won't be happy until they're at the top again. Watch out Protestant America!
Study Danial and Revelation

Posted by Albert Winkler | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:43 am UTC

Through all the discussion of Archbishop Burke's statement we can discern an
undercurrent of emotional, spiritual and mental anguish existent in the pro-
abortion comments. This mirrors the trend we see in Democratic Party politics,
that of coalescing those seeking self-destruction, sexual and morally perverse
lifestyles, and every manner of socially degenerate and irresponsible behavior
into their constituency. Irrespective of the Constitution, they would force
everyone to accept their religion celebrating atheism and perversion, under
the guise of hate laws - an anti-Bible codified into law.

God recognizes the mental disorder inherent in these people, as should we. We
are, therefore, duty bound to deny the Democratic Party any further access to
power until such time as the spiritual evil at the core of their affliction is
exorcised. Until then we must recognize that spiritual evil exists, in the
same way that redemption through Jesus Christ exists. The faithful should not
negotiate nor discuss these issues with those possessed of evil, rather they
should fervently pray for their healing salvation. There is no disease of the
mind or spirit that can stand up to a daily dose of prayer and blessing.
Arguing with the afflicted is pointless.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:43 am UTC

[…] an interview with an Italian newspaper that the Democratic Party is well
on its way to becoming the "party of death" in the United States. Burke called
for greater discipline within the American church for holding […]

Posted by Vatican official calls Democrats “the party of death” « Dirty
Democrats | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:43 am UTC

So many of these response are pure politics. The CHurch is required to uphold
its doctrines and to discipline its constituents who err.  
When these constituents ar high profile dems, the liberal ungodly go bizirk.
The church is the church and it has taken its moral responsibilities
seriously. THankfully so. WE are a nation of high moral standards, I wish that
the Baptists had done this to Bill CLinton, they apparently don't have the
same moral fiber.  
Morality needs to stop being legislated, so we need to get rid of liberal
judges who have predetermined to make us an amoral society.

Posted by Erich Abraham | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:44 am UTC

I think if you idiots would take time to check it out you would see that the
church has always spoke out against war. Idiots!!!

Posted by joe | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:50 am UTC

The church can gripe all they want in their city covered in gold and stolen
artwork…they can shout from the highest mountain about how "wrong" everyone
who doesn't believe their mindless crap is but at the end of the day the
greatest thing about this country is the choices we are free to have. The
Catholic church is responsible for more terror, genocide and pain than any
other institution in human history. The Vatican makes the Third Reich look
like a happiest place on Earth when viewed through the lens of unbiased
history. Hitler wished he could kill half the number of people that the church
did in it's history. They have no platform of righteousness to stand on, they
are the biggest hypocrites of all time. I don't agree with abortion but I will
tolerate it because it's not my place to tell anyone else what to do. If
people want to take on the emotional burden of abortion that's their choice to
live with. Life does NOT begin with conception…it's a ball of cells for many
weeks before it even comes close to resembling anything human. If it can't
survive on it's own outside the body it is not a human being…it's the
potential to be a human but that's it. Instead of focusing intently on
everyone else, people should focus on their own beliefs and morals and butt
out of everyone else's business. The purpose of government isn't to legislate
morality. Killing a living, breathing person is a crime because they are
living and breathing. I agree that if you don't want a kid take preventive
measures of birth control. Sex is a beautiful, natural part of life…animals
engage in it for fun, it's part of biology. There is NOTHING shameful or
"sinful" about it. I got a vasectomy because I want to engage in sex without
worrying about a child. But the religious zealots seem to think that
abstinence is the only way but all you have to do is look at how abstinence
education has failed universally. 90% of all teens that take that idiotic
pledge break it, why? Because it's natural and part of our biology and there
is no way that will ever change. Religion has no place in the political
sphere, it's just a mindless distraction from the real problems of the
world…war, disease, OVERCROWDING and poverty. The government needs to focus on
people that are already alive…

Posted by NickE | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:51 am UTC

Its about time the Vatican spoke up the truth. The Democrat Special Interests
represent a cesspool of thinking. They have gamed the system and foisted much
of this filthy minority thinking into laws upon the majority. It will be like
the forthcoming expose of the Democrats stuffing the ballot box using absentee
ballots after the fact they got Obama elected. The American voting system is
being contaminated by this scum Democrat party.Tolerance is one thing but laws
are binding. This scum thinking is prevailing. We can no longer be silent. I
now hate the Democrat party that I was once a member of as was my parents.
SCUM THINKING LEADERS!

Posted by Paulc | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:58 am UTC

And the Vatican is a foreign country and it's "church" in the US needs to pay
taxes like any other foreign entity operating on US soil.

The Vatican over the centuries is responsible for death and atrocity,
including its refusal to allow effective anti-nADS and birth in many nations
where it exercises its ignorant and outmoded influence.

Voltaire said it best: "crush the infamous thing!"

Posted by denis arvay | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:01 am UTC

Pro-life and pro-choice are meaningless phrases. The abortion issue is about
who makes the decision, the government, or the woman involved. Sarah Palin
chose to have Trig, and I applaud her. Pro-choice dos not mean pro-abort. Many
so called pro-life people are pro-war and pro-death penalty. One is either
anti-abortion or pro-abortion. Very few people are actually pro-abortion.

Posted by Lyle | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:05 am UTC

THANK GOD THE CHURCH HAS SPOKEN OUT ON THE ISSUE OF CATHOLIC POLITICIANS WHO
ENDORSE ABORTION AND STEM CELL RESEARCH USING EMBRYONIC CELLS! BUT, THE
CATHOLIC CHURCH MUST NOW ISSUE A STATEMENT STATING THAT THESE CATHOLIC
POLITICIANS MUST NOW FACE EXCUMMINATION AND THIS THEY MUST STICK TO AND
DECLARE THEM NON-CATHOLICS.

Posted by GERVASE KAZARNOWICZ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:07 am UTC

Is the Catholic Church prepared to forfeit its tax-exempt status? I am
Catholic and I am proud of all the Catholic Church has done for social justice
in America over its long history. The safety of factory workers and the civil
rights of Black Americans were hard fought. But now the church is entering the
realm of personal politics in a very public way. Over recent years, Catholic
bishops have found no moral issue with routinely threatening to withhold
Communion from Democratic politicians, naming many (including current VP
contender Joseph Biden by name). The same church that failed to weigh in on
Nazism until the dust had cleared now threatens the mortal souls of U.S.
politicians in a strong-arm attempt to influence day-to-day politics. How …
human of them.

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:13 am UTC

I say Amen to the Church speaking up against so-called Catholic politicians
who espouse views contrary to their faith, let alone attempt through their
political positions to even to speak about church policy. I am tired of the
Kennedy Catholics of the world who act as if they are "practicing" Catholics.
Describe them as practicing Democrats, because practicing Catholics they are
not. I'd even go further and ex-communicate Pelosi. We don't need her.

Posted by Janet | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:15 am UTC

Just think someone has probably been aborted that could have cured cancer,
been a great president, brought about world peace, stopped nuclear weapons,
etc….  
and in the name of worshipping at the altar of abortion. Shame on you all

Posted by Mary | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:20 am UTC

Jesus never advocated influencing politics as it relates to secular law
("Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's…"). As a matter of course, the
Catholic Church should mind its own business when it comes to all political
matters. That said, it is refreshing to see somebody within the church get
something right about the Democrat Party.

Posted by Flasheart | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:20 am UTC

Very simple solution. Excommunicate Biden, Kerry, Ted Kennedy, Pelosi and any
other Catholic politician who supports abortion or any other matter that is
against church policy and biblical principles. Deny them communion, a Priest
to conduct their funeral and any other church service until they recant.

Posted by FX | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:21 am UTC

To all liberals who think your duplicitous remarks go un-noticed about
religion having no place in "today's politics", Pelosi herself said of BHO
that he is, "a leader God has blessed us with at this time." Would God bless
someone who thinks that a doctor who botches a late term abortion resulting in
a living child should.. "get a second chance at it"? Liberals, who mostly
don't believe in God, apparently think doctors should get that second chance -
BHO is no exception and he voted nay on an IL law designed to protect those
innocent lives OUTSIDE THE WOMB. So they DARE claim God's blessing when it's
convenient yet endorse MURDER OF INNOCENT BABIES inside … and now also,
outside the womb! Party of DEATH? YES INDEED. Dear God save us from these
monsters!

Posted by Mike M | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:27 am UTC

[…] Democrats are bearing rancid, spolied fruit, and by this fruit, we know
them very well. From the Faith World blog at al-Reuters: [Archbishop Raymond]
Burke, who was named prefect of the Vatican’s Supreme Court […]

Posted by Democrats "the party of death" « Crush Liberalism | Report as
abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:28 am UTC

Dear Readers,

Please read "The Decline and Fall of the Roman Church" and see what really
happened in the Roman Church in the early days…Besides, one can enjoy the
communion rites at any church that baptizes in the 'Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Spirit'!

Posted by Donald Beggs | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:29 am UTC

The point is that all life should be protected from inception to natural
death. The specific issue that separates abortion from all other issues is
that it is the only life that has absolutely no chance of defending itself.
The scariest part of abortion is that it pits humanity against itself, by
destroying its own future.

The only medical procedure where half of the patients live thru it.

Posted by Tired of Stupidity | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:32 am UTC

In the weekly newspaper "The Wanderer" a couple of issues ago there is an
article titled "Kansas Bishops Call Voting For a Pro-Abort "Evil"" In this
article the Kansas Bishops released a voter's guide that states "Catholics who
cast a vote for a politician who supports abortion and same-sex marriage
commit moral evil",in other words a mortal sin. It's about time that our
Bishops finally are publicly stating truth. If one does not like it join the
Episcipal church where they allow Gay bishops or some other watered church
under the banner of "Christian" that share your views. But don't call yourself
a Catholic in good standing when you know that these politicians regardless of
political party are pro abortion and you go ahead and vote for them, by the
way pro-choice is the same as pro-abortion. On matters of Faith and Morals it
is the Catholic Church that has always teached and posseses these truths and
the Bishops along with the Pope are keepers of this truth. Sounds like peoples
consciouses are bothering them.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:34 am UTC

A president the oversaw more executions when he was governor than any other
state in the union, the bombing of innocent Iraqi civilians, the tourture of
prisoners; and the head of the "little boy rapers group" is calling us the
party of death.  
When we will you people out there that listen to this old fool grow up and
stop following this out dated crap.

Oh by the way, go see Religulous, opens tonight.

Posted by fel121 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:40 am UTC

Looks like Raymond Burke struck the nerve, Well done Ray, keep calling out the
baby killers.

Posted by Greg | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:41 am UTC

Remeber God spelled backward is DOG.

Posted by fel121 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:42 am UTC

Hooray for Archbishop Burke for speaking truth to power. Pelosi, Biden, Carey,
Kennedy and other Prominent Democrats cynically use their Catholic Religion to
get elected and then go about their merry way pursueing their true religion
-tyrannical socialism forced onto the masses by the wealthy elite who view
themselves as god-like with powers to decide things like who is and who isn't
"inconvenient" (i.e. the unborn).

The Catholic Church needs quit coddling up to socialist govermental policies
and focus it's appeal on raising the individual poor person through liberty
lead by Love and personal responsibility. Because Socialists like the
Democratic party don't believe in the worth of the individual (especially the
unseen, unborn)

Posted by dsp… | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:42 am UTC

well thank god, finally someone has come out and said it, yes, the democrat
party is exactly that, the party of death.

Posted by james martin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:42 am UTC

(remember), sorry about the spelling.

Posted by fel121 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:43 am UTC

Palin believes that the war in Iraq is a task from God. Both John Paul II and
Benedict have called the war in Iraq immoral and unjust. So, who do I beleive?
A former Roman Catholic or the Pope?

Posted by T. Kruger | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:46 am UTC

Party of Death? We are going to have a Death Party because we are going to
have a civil war over abortion. It's funny how Cafeteria Catholics fixate on
life in the womb, but once a person is expelled past the labial gates, they
are on their own. In for a penny, in for a pound, folks.

The Right-To-Life people should be putting on the post funeral spreads in the
church basements for the families of those killed in Iraq. They supported the
GOP (God's Own Party) because they promised to be the party of life.

No Church basement? No Church?! Money for faith tends to dry up in hard times.
Especially after Jesus strolled down Wall Street last month.

Posted by Mad Dog | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:56 am UTC

Bravo for the archbishop. It is one thing to disagree with the Church's
orthodoxy. It is altogether another thing entirely to misrepresent it. Both
Pelosi and Biden know better. Their comments are bitter, bitter words to hear
from the lips of Catholics high in the American government. Much better for
them to have simply said, "my conscience does not allow me to agree with
Church teaching." In politics, it is too easy to misrepresent the position of
another with whom one does not agree. It gives a comfort that is false and,
when put into practice repeatedly, it invites comparison with the dark spectre
of a lie.

Posted by libertasdon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:59 am UTC

Yes, Michael…the Republicans _are_ the party of LIFE. If you were living in
Israel I am sure you would agree. And although this article is on abortion (I
happen to be pro-choice), make no mistake….if the theocracy and their thug
front man succeed at developing nuclear weapons, Israel will be destroyed.

Posted by Larry Myles | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:59 am UTC

Since high profile people in the Democrat Party insist on touting their
Catholic Faith as a badge of honor I see that the Church has every right to
call them on it when they dis the tenent of the Faith. They don't have to be
Catholic but they seem to feel they need the Church to assure their election
because of the number of Catholics in their districts.  
The Church has always been against Abortion and no amount of excuses from the
so-called-Catholic candidates can change that so in that context the Democrats
are the Party of DEATH.

Posted by FHVaughan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

11:59 am UTC

The real party of death is the war mongering Republican party. If you want
more war and wanton destruction of human life then vote Republican. It is
ludicrous to save the lives of the unborn in order to send them off to die and
kill in phony wars over oil all in the name of "Democracy".

a prolife Democrat

Posted by denis | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:05 pm UTC

I really don't care what the Church says. Their history of creating and
sheltering an elite cadre of child molestors should eliminate them from
serious consideration in determining morality on reproductive issues.

catholics care more about the nonsense of determining how many angels can
dance on the head of a pin than they do about relieving human suffering. Fine.
you don't want abortion? You don't want men and women to be able to control
fertility through birth control methods? Fine, let nature do it through
starvation and disease. what a bunch of idiots.

Posted by JB | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:08 pm UTC

All reading this were given the beautiful gift of life.  
War vs Abortion - equates to - Evil vs Innocence.  
This world is ruled and run by - evil – it is rampant and growing.  
Abortion is murder for convenience sake.  
In the infinite wisdom of the creation of all – a conscious was given to all.
Uncover it - listening to it - and stop smothering it.  
Our hour is near. And those who laugh – look around….  
My faith and hope in mankind is lost……evil has won!

Posted by a reason | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:10 pm UTC

Alleluia! Finally, a man with spine!

Biden, Pelosi, Kennedy, etc., can say what they want, but to then portray
themselves as good Catholics is the height of hypcrisy.

More of this from the Vatican will help clarify the teaching of the Church and
strengthen the moral foundation of the faithful. For those with poorly formed
consciences, this is helpful to jolt them from the hypnosis of the democrat
party, aka the party of death.

Posted by Jeff T. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:16 pm UTC

See there's this thing about being a church - It has to stand for something.
Good of the church to shake the cobwebs out and remember - oh right, we're
supposed to teach right from wrong. Sorry that the conflicted Catholics are
thrashing about with their comments here as they remember the words of their
mothers and grandmothers on the truths of the church and try to reconcile that
with their own life "choices" to support the ending of an innocent life. It
must be hard to be wrong and have to rationalize it with excuses that ring
hollow like "I know life is sacred, but we should be able to kill a baby from
rape or incest…" Troubling? Good.

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:17 pm UTC

1) The vatican's opinions on our political process is irrelevant.

2) Anti-war nuts do not live in the real world. There exists no absolute peace
in this world. If you want absolute peace, go to the afterlife. War exists
here. People want to kill us because we are not them. Appeasement has never
worked in all of human history, and it never will work. Read your history.
These people are not rational and cannot be 'enlightened to a rational
viewpoint'. Neither can the idiots who believe appeasing them will do any
good. War cannot be avoided indefinitely. War can only be delayed by creating
a Statist Fascist world-wide government that oppresses personal and political
freedoms, which would only delay war until the oppressed people rise up and
overthrow such an idiotic government. People will continue to hate other
people who are different as long as such behavior is excused and perpetrated.

Ask yourself this: How would you feel if these terrorists found a way to kill
1 million Americans or more?

How would you feel if Russia managed to throw a nuke our way?

How would you feel if the Democrats won power in the House, Senate, and the
White House and remade the United States of America into the Socialist States
of America, betraying the very principles upon which this great nation was
founded?

How would you feel if the Economy crashed to the point where only those with
millions of dollars could keep themselves off the streets because the
Democrats have only 1 strategy for economic change that they apply to EVERY
situation no matter whether it's appropriate to the situation or not: raise
taxes and tariffs, more corporate regulation, more regulation on small
business, paying lower class citizens with proceeds from tax hikes for the
rich and corporations (redistribution of wealth, a tenant of Socialism)…

This country has Capitalism, which is incompatible with Socialism, and our
economy is suffering not because capitalism failed, but because it's clogged
up with socialistic structures that have been installed by Democrats ever
since Carter.

Democrats KNOW how Capitalism works, and they KNOW that the Fiscal
Conservative principles lead to economic and financial prosperity for
Everyone, however they WANT the economy to fail so that they can replace
Capitalism with a Socialist state controlled economy. And I won't have it.

And before you try to tell me the Democrats are not socialists and are not
inserting socialist structures into our economy, go and look up the definition
and the tenants of Socialism. Then go look up how capitalism works.

It's true that the Republicans of the past century have been corrupt. However,
they were Rockerfeller republicans who believed in Lazzier-Faire capitalism,
which is predatory. That breed of Republican is nearly extinct. Neocon
Republicans are Big Government and are far more far right than fiscal
conservatives. Both Pres. Bush are Neocons. They do not represent the
principles of fiscal conservatism and small government.

So you ultra left liberal pin-heads need to get with the modern era. The
Neocons have lost power. The Evangelical Right have lost power. Palin may
belong to a church that is commonly referred to as evangelical, however, Gov.
Palin does not believe in pushing her religious beliefs on others, and thus
will not support nor ban any laws having to do with religion. She is not a
threat to Roe v Wade.

This is no longer the extreme right vs the moderate left. This is now the
moderate right vs the extreme left. Any time the right or the left go extreme,
the more moderate of the two wins.

This is why McCain will win this election. The average american people are
seeing just how socialistic Obama is, and how moderate McCain is.

Posted by Jason | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:21 pm UTC

This has been a L-O-N-G time coming. God Bless the Bishop!

Posted by Jeff | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:27 pm UTC

In response to Michael Cecil; the Republican party being the party of life has
little to do with it's position on warfare and support for it's allies -
Simply put, it comes down to the teachings of the Church and deeply held moral
beliefs as to the beginning of life; for one to personally oppose abortion but
publicly support it is a direct contradiction and shows the truth of their
beliefs.

Posted by Andrew | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:30 pm UTC

Here's a fun fact: 5 of the 7 Justices who voted for Roe were appointed by
Republican presidents. Today, 7 of the 9 Justices on the Court are Republican
appointees. 5 of those are Catholic Republicans, in communion with the Church.
Still, Casey v. Planned Parenthood (not Roe v. Wade) remains the law of the
land. Apparently Republicans have no stomach to change the current law, so go
ahead and waste your votes. Our President has never proposed legislation
restricting abortion, neither has John McCain. On the other hand, according to
the Catholic encyclopedia, adulterous women who obtained abortions in France
used to be buried alive. It must have been a great lesson to them

Posted by Tom | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:31 pm UTC

May I suggest that the reporter is showing his bias by choosing to use the
word "attack".

Posted by Curt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:34 pm UTC

"Life does NOT begin with conception…it’s a ball of cells for many weeks
before it even comes close to resembling anything human. If it can’t survive
on it’s own outside the body it is not a human being…it’s the potential to be
a human but that’s it."

Nick E. @11:50AM on 10/3 has it right.  
Oh, and for all you catholics out there, the soul doesn't enter the body UNTIL
the new human draws its FIRST BREATH! Coincidently, the soul leaves the body
after the human's LAST BREATH!

If you ever bothered to read the Bible, you would understand the importance of
BREATH…

Posted by St. Paul | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:44 pm UTC

The Catholic Church teaches that wars are possible provided the circumstances
meet a specific criteria. In general, in order to be a 'just war' they must be
in defense only (of either ones self or another). Frankly the war in iraq
woulsd not meet the criteria of a just war and Pope John Paul II was close to
saying so before he died.

Further the Church does not make a distinction between what a life is. Either
it is or it is not. As such Church doctrine teaches that life is the highest
gift provided to us by the creator. It is a sin to kill ones self and likewise
it is a sin to kill someone else outside of the permissable circumstances of a
just war or self defense. That being so why isn't the church preaching against
artificial insemination or more importantly fertility drugs. This is how all
those surplus stem cells are brought into the world. Clincs simply do away
with unused fertilized eggs-isn't that tanamount to abortion or murder? Yet
many so called born agains use fertility drugs to have kids.

We too often want to twist the Bible or a church's doctrin to a situational
interpretation rather than a global interpretation. Simply murder in any form
is bad so why don't we stick to that and see how things turn out.

Posted by Tom L. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:44 pm UTC

Now a foreign state (Vatican City is a state) wishes to participate in our
elections. Great. We should recall our ambassador or whatever that we have
there and throw their ambassodor out of the country. In addition, lets tax ALL
the assets of the Catholic Church here…and that of any other religion…which
wishes to participate in the state sector.

You want to be tax free, do not interfere in the political process. If you
wish to buy and sell elected government officials, you should be taxed as are
the corporations operating here.

Posted by Mike the Theist | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:49 pm UTC

Instead of seperation of church and state, what we really needs is a
seperation of Hollywood and state.

Posted by gary | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:50 pm UTC

How about the vatican and the pope butt out of our politics and clean up their
own house first?

I'm a life long catholic and I'm sick and tired of the church acting like it's
the 16th century. There are way bigger problems we need to address.

I've been waiting my entire life for someone to PROVE to me that a soul is
granted to a microscopic cell. Don't give me the tried and true "that's where
faith comes in." Give me something based in reality.

Until then, quit trying to force your beliefs - that abortion is wrong - on
people who don't think like you do.

Just because it's different, doesn't mean its wrong.

Posted by JJ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

12:54 pm UTC

>     * Posted by ProudProtestant

Proud, but bigoted. You wouldn't happen to belong to Reverend Wright's church,
would you?

> This is just a ridiculous abuse of religious power.

No, it isn't. Pelosi and Biden misrepresented Catholic doctrine. By rights
they were risking excommunication for heresy, but that was their choice from
the beginning.

Let's be clear on something, shall we? Nobody is forcing Pelosi and Biden to
be Catholic. They could join half a hundred Protestant churches just like
yours that would sanction their pro-death positions. They haven't done that -
instead, they've tried to force the Vatican to see things their way. Sounds
more like Government is trying to impose its positions on the Church instead -
which violates the non-establishment clause in the Constitution. They're
actually trying to impose Government doctrine on abortion on American
Catholics.

> This person isn’t even IN the United States of America.

So?

Archbishop Burke hasn't renounced his citizenship. In fact his status as an
American gives the statement more impact than it would have had otherwise.

> How does he get off bashing American politicians?

Because they are supposed to be Catholic, and they are mis-representing Church
doctrine. The Pope himself did the same thing in 2004 when he was running the
Inquisition. Pelosi, Biden, etc. can feel free to keep supporting infanticide
all they want - they just won't be part of the Catholic Church for much longer
if they keep at it - and the Church is well within its rights to throw them
out.

> They never made an oath to preach the gospel of the >Catholic Church in
their position of political >authority.

No, they just took an oath to defend the US Constitution - which states that
government officials cannot dictate doctrine to religious entities.

Posted by kunsunoke | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:00 pm UTC

The Pope did oppose the war in Iraq very forcefully.

Posted by Richard | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:01 pm UTC

Catholic politicians and Catholic Democrats should boycott the Catholic
Church. Remove all their tax except status in the US and demand apology from
the Vatican. What an outrageous statement from a group hypocrites.  
Perverts who prefer little boys to play with in the name of God. Looking down
on people who do not agree with the old ways of the church to pass judgment of
others. Would prefer an abusive women to stay with her abuser and belittle her
saying a good Catholic would not seek divorce.  
This coming from those who believe giving illegal aligns asylum in US churches
is a good thing, because those aborted US babies are not in the workforce.
This is why we have separation of church and state people. Too many wars have
been fought because of religious beliefs so the exception is okay to KILL IN
THE NAME OF GOD. Just contacted my Catholic church and informed them that we
will rally together and boycott the church and statement made by Archbishop
Raymond Burke. It's time for change and that goes for my Catholic church also.

Posted by Penny J | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:05 pm UTC

I guess the Catholic church forgot about the Crusades and the Spanish
Inquisition and all the other wars it fought in its attempt to convert others
to Catholicism, and as a result thousands died. The Catholic church should
have its tax exempt status revoked for being an active participant in the
political process. It should also be indicted under RICO for its cover-up of
all the sexual assaults by their employees. The Catholic church speaks with a
forked tongue. The Catholic church has no moral base on which to stand and
their passing judgment on the moral compass of others is ridiculous.

Posted by mikefromnyc | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:06 pm UTC

I'm reading again about the Reformation and any opportunity the Catholic
church had to burn people who didn't agree with her (labeling them heritics)at
the stake, they did so with glee. Now when they are not in absolute power,
they believe in life? Hypocrites!

Posted by B Smart | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:07 pm UTC

God will NOT judge us according to our sin as someone wrote: Christian
theology 101 says that 'in Adam'…we are ALL judged already…'conceived in sin'
even. Our only hope is to be found 'in Christ', the second and sinless
Adam…and THAT by grace, thru faith ALONE. Laz

Posted by lazarus | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:09 pm UTC

I'm reading again about the Reformation and any opportunity the Catholic
church had to burn people at the stake who didn't agree with her (labeling
them heritics), they did so with glee. Now when they are not in absolute
power, they believe in life? Hypocrites!

Posted by B Smart | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:14 pm UTC

It is very interesting to see all the pro-abortion commentariat changing the
subject from abortion to war, tax-exempt status and the death penalty because
a few prominent "Catholic" politicians get called out for what they are,
hypocrites. They are free to attend another church that permits their
congregation to abort children and they can still support their beloved union
thugs. Permit me to recommend the United Church of Christ.

Posted by Will | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:14 pm UTC

Why are they worried about abortion in the US when there is genocide going on
in Sudan? I don't see the Catholic church doing much to stop the killing of
already borned children and the rape of women. I am Catholic but I am
disgusted with the way the US Catholic church has behaved. So it is ok for a
priest to rape a young boy but not ok for a woman to choose what to do with
her body? Don't tell me what to do when you yourself don't follow your own
ideologies.

Posted by SoyGallega | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:15 pm UTC

Roe vs Wade should be overturned.  
Based on the simple legal fact that we have separation of powers in the US
Constitution. Only Congress, the Legislature, can actually pass laws.  
In this case the Supreme Court (the "Judiciary) in effect made law. It is
unconstitutional.  
Supreme Court decisions for that reason when they come to a conclusion always
states "it is the OPINION" of the Court…etc"

Let therefore Congress debate a bill and clearly vote up or down on a bill
that allows killing of babies in the womb. And see how members of our
Legislature vote according his or her conscious.  
I almost guarantee that when it is up to each individual it won't pass. Now,
conveniently they can cowardly hide behind the Supreme Court.

Posted by Buccaneer | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:16 pm UTC

To Dave,

I wonder how your 8 year old child would feel if he knew that you felt like
you were "living with a mistake"?

Posted by Thea Ray | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:17 pm UTC

The Catholic church has been wrong so many times down through the ages. Once
more that is the case.

Posted by son of oak | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:19 pm UTC

The church is not wrong about the abortion issue. But it doesn't like that we
have separation of church and state in this country, because not everyone
agrees on the Church's definition of the beginning of life and thus, what the
law should be.

But the bigger truth here is that the Church is very happy with the Republican
party because it is more of a religious organization than a political party.

It is angry that it has no control of the Democrats and is using the abortion
issue to try to change that.

Posted by Andrew K | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:20 pm UTC

I think that the whole argument is summed up by a pro-abortion guy named Dave.
He says that he had sex and that it resulted in a 'mistake' that's 8 years
old. His son is a 'mistake'. I feel so sorry for that child and wish that he
could be raised in a loving home where he would be seen as a gift of God.
That's what every child is and it's not dependent on whether you're 'wanted'
or 'unwanted'. That's the difference in a nutshell - party of 'my child is a
mistake' or party of 'my child is a gift of God'. Obama also says an
'unplanned' child is a 'punishment'. How can anyone think the Dems are an
attractive party? Wait, their policies are always 'for the children'!

Posted by Barbara | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:20 pm UTC

I think the dems are convincing my to be pro abortion… really they are just
killing their own, and we don't have to pick up a weapon. Matter of fact, they
should be able to abort to the 56th trimester.  
How many bad choices can you make before you get to kill a fetus… or is it
just fun???

Posted by Larry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:23 pm UTC

Ok so the Catholic Church isn't perfect, but atleast today in this crucial
hour are taking a stand against the HOLOCAUST of Abortion. It's so easy for
people to throw the Crusades in modern Catholic Church face, when that is
something that is long gone. Meanwhile the Muslims are still torturing and
killing those who convert to Christianity. So while the Muslims are crusading
still we are focused on a stain in the 13th Century Church. Have they not
repented? I believe we are entering into a season where God is waking up the
Church Catholics, Protestants to the things of His heart and we will see a
huge shift.

Posted by Michael | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:25 pm UTC

Dear Pope,  
Keep your opinions to yourself. We have separation of church and state here,
you wouldn't want any of your churches losing their tax exemptions now would
you?  
Signed,  
a Libertarian

Posted by LYNN | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:26 pm UTC

To quote Mr. Obama.  
This article is obviously above the “pay grade” of most Democrats.  
They have no clue as to what it is all about.  
And they never will.

It is interesting to see how many feel they are a authority on religion or the
Bible.  
When they have never read it.  
Most Democrats think John 3:16 is the men’s room on the third floor.  
Some here use words like”Hypocrites” and have no idea they are really talking
about themselves.

Posted by D Carr | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:26 pm UTC

Who said his criticisms had to be even? Abortion is wrong, pure and simple.
Stem cell research using aborted babies is wrong, pure and simple. Any
questions?

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:26 pm UTC

Hey dems, if you're so convienced that your amoral way is correct, why do you
concern yourselves with what a church leader says? Funny, though, I don't hear
any dems critising Obama's pastor Wright, or Flaguer or Fericon. Hypocrites!

Posted by RM | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:28 pm UTC

To all those who will vote for Obama in Nov. because of his prochoice view and
his liberal agenda. Let's remember it's was a personal choice to own a slave
or not, because the common thought was black people weren't wholly human. If
it wasn't for a "moralizers" and "religious zealots" who fought and sometimes
died for the rights of black human beings, Obama wouldn't even have a chance
to be president because he isn't human enough.

Give me a break you sick and twisted folks who believe an unborn baby is not a
human being therefore is not murder. Morality always wins! Slavery was
abolished, equal rights were finally granted and unborn babies will someday be
given rights regardless of what you selfish proud and godless think.

Posted by shane | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:29 pm UTC

If you don't believe the Catholic teachings, you are free to leave. Let he
without sin cast the first stone - remember that?

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:29 pm UTC

Seems like it's time to remove the 501c(3) status of the Catholic churches in
the states. It's fine for them to speak out against abortion, but to assign a
political value to that stance is illegal for a charitable organization. I
have no problem with their doing it, however… As long as their American
parishes also agree to pay taxes [or become a 501c(4, of course)]. But they
shouldn't be allowed to break the law just because they wear awesome hats…

Posted by Crunchy96 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:33 pm UTC

The first problem with this is that it's illegal. Religious organizations in
the US are tax exempt on the condition that they stay out of politics; now
that Raymond Burke has inserted the Catholic Church into politics, the
Catholic Church should be taxed like every other business. Hello there, IRS -
go for it! The second problem is that Burke, himself, is dissenting from the
Catholic pro-life ethic by supporting the Republican war in Iraq, which the
Vatican has declared not to be a just war. Third, as a human being like the
rest of us (although he seems to think he's better than most people) Burke has
no right to judge any one. Only God can and will judge. Amen

Posted by Louis Russo | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:33 pm UTC

It's about time the church has come out and stood up to these democrats.

Posted by conway | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:34 pm UTC

Pat Bianculli,

do you really believe that it is possible to separate your faith life from
policy? If you can, either you don't have a genuine faith life (Catholic in
name only) or you are a liar! I'm so sick of religion being relegated to the
"private realm" - if that is even possible!

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:35 pm UTC

Murder bad. Compassion good. Life good. Death, well we're working on it. When
will the world wake up to the silent genocide of abortion. No fetus ever has
asked for abortion.

Sexual behavior can lead to abortion.Controlling sexual behavior is possible.
Controlling abortion is possible.

Posted by 4macman | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:36 pm UTC

Dave,

So it was "Unehtical" for Christian abolitionists to push for end of slavery?
It was wrong for Catholics to push for better working conditions in the
1930's. Dave, Science is quite convinced and is in no argument that abortions
kill human beings, is this the "Non-Religious" evidence you need to support a
ban in law?

Burke is right the Democrats are the Party Of Death. They are the party of
separation. They split up husbands and wives through extreme feminism and
gender politics. They separate parents from their children by loosening the
divorce laws. They separate men from men and women from women by supporting
that there is no such thing as gender identity. They separate women from their
babies through abortion. They separate people from their faith by their brow-
beating bretheran in the media. Its awful

Posted by Tyler | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:38 pm UTC

The question is clearly is why Michael has so much time on his hands. I am so
sick of life's losers insisting that us winners (ie:actualy get a REAL College
degree and go to work and support ourselves san the USG)…have to pay for them
becasue they are such losers. Advice to Mike, wake up, get a job and support
yourself. There is a new revolution in the US under belly and we are going to
eliminate losers like Mike. Hey Mike, Castro is offering rice cookers to his
people, why not move there. p.s. I am at the hosptial (yes, I have insurane
Mike)waiting for my dad to come out of surgery, that's why I am not at work
there Mike. God Bless America and God Bless Sarah Palin!!!!!

Posted by Num-Num | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:40 pm UTC

The bottom line is that an innocent baby will be murdered. The "doctor" and
mother will meet their creator on judgement day. Thou shall not murder, and
there is a difference between murder and killing. The baby is with God and the
others will never make it.

Posted by Nick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:44 pm UTC

This action, while laudable, is 40 years too late. It is a disgrace that the
Catholic Church is silent about the murder of children fostered, encouraged,
and paid for by the Democratic party. It is the ultimate lie for these so-
called Catholic politicians to say they oppose it but won't prevent others
from doing what they want. Now their standard bearer is Obama, who approves
the murder of babies who survive abortions. How could any human brutally
murder children the way the Democrats do.

Posted by David Schroeder | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:46 pm UTC

The Church DOES speak out against the war in Iraq. Where have you people been?
If you want to know how the Church interprets scripture and what its teachings
are, read the "Catechism of the Catholic Church". It states that war is only
moral when innocent people or an innocent nation must be defended. The Vatican
continues to encourage American politicians to end the Iraq war. The Vatican
realizes that withdrawl must be done in a responsible way to avoid even
greater human suffering. See http://www.georgiabulletin.org/local/200
8/10/02/war/. By the way, many Dems have and do support the Iraq war.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:46 pm UTC

To all of you "Obama Robots", the "separation of church an state" refers to a
"state imposed religion". It does not mean the censorship of religion. If you
don't want to believe in God and would rather worship crystals in New Mexico,
that's your right. However, if you call yourself a Catholic, you can't have it
both ways like Kerry, Pelosi ,and Biden would like to. I think that these
people should be excommunitaeed from the church. Yes, the Democrat party is
certainly NOT the Democrat party of our parents. It is now a branch of the
international Communist party, and as such, the party of death.

Posted by Gator | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:47 pm UTC

I have been a life long Catholic. However, I wonder why the Church never zeros
in on the fact of what happens to life once it comes into this world. We have
a president sending men to war and loss of their life for his own special
reasons, not facts. We have people who are homeless. We have children abused
and going hungry. We have people dying with no health care. Church where are
you on these issues? I am personally against abortion, but I go for the words
"Let he who is without sin caste the first stone" and I think He was a bigger
authority than even the Pope. More death has been caused by the war,etc.

Posted by Joyce | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:47 pm UTC

To be Catholic and vote for Obama is a sin. Sometimes you can go to jail for
being guilty by association. In this case I see voting for the party of death
as a sin and putting people's mortal souls at risk. Obama supports killing
babies so long as the mother wants the infant dead. In the event that the baby
is accidentally born during the murderous event Obama supports letting the
viable baby die…because the mother wanted it dead. The truth is that abortion
is a barbaric procedure that dismembers the baby to remove it from the womb.
All Catholics have an obligation to vote for life and to not tolerate this
barbaric sacrilege.

Posted by Robert | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:51 pm UTC

IT'S ABOUT TIME THE CATHOLIC CHURCH TAKES A STAND ON WHAT WE AS CATHOLICS HAVE
BE TAUGHT AND BELEIVE. NOW THE CATHOLIC PASTORS NEED TO START PREACHING THE
WORD OF THE LORD. "THOU SHALL NOT KILL". SHAME ON BIDEN AND PELOSI. THEY ARE
NOT CATHOLICS IN MY EYES. OH YOU HIPOCRITES AND YOUR NEGATIVE COMMENTS. GOD
HAVE MERCY ON YOUR SOULS.

Posted by Gilda Suarez | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:51 pm UTC

It's really amazing how so many recoil from TRUTH. Whether we like it or not,
one day we will ALL have to face the TRUTH alone in the real "no spin zone".

Posted by Phil | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:54 pm UTC

OBAMA IS MORE POPULAR THAN JESUS

Posted by CarDriver | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:54 pm UTC

Roe v Wade is a moot point. It is not based on the will of the people as the
people were prevented from voting the issue. Roe v Wade is a decision of a
handful of people in black robes who have imposed their ideology on all
Americans.

The black robes, in the name of "social evolution," have again usurped
American's of their rignt to self-govern.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:55 pm UTC

The word of God has taught me what the Catholic failed to teach me and that is
"Judge not." It is blasphemous for Vatican not to introduce the word of God,
the Bible into their congregation and instead brainwash them from infants into
their adulthood with their hypocritical dogma. The Vatican must begin to look
back into their shameful closet and stop being judgmentally political and
instead spread the truth from the Bible. This pious falsehood image of the
Vatican is what the Blessed Virgin Mary reveals to some; weeping and lamenting
of the prostituting portrayal of her and son, Jesus Christ. Do not pick part
nor shape parts of the Ten Commandments and politicize to cover up the
despicable shameful past, but live all the ten.

Posted by Nana Egyir | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:58 pm UTC

I have read all the post here – and there have been some duzzies…..

“This is why McCain will win this election. The average american people are
seeing just how socialistic Obama is, and how moderate McCain is.”

Jason – exceptionally well done……that – was a point – set – match - homerun!

“If you’ve never carried a child, and would never risk your life for your
country, then shut up and go to bed. Your opinion doesn’t count.”

Shelly - yours made me laugh the loudest – a virtual kiss to you…

Off topic - I have lived and worked in the mid/east for the past 16  
years. I’m no expert, but this to those - who feel today’s war in Iraq is not
justified….

I have looked into the eyes of the enemy – and the enemy is You!!

Posted by Robert T. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:59 pm UTC

I love how libtards get all preachy about "don't legislate your beliefs onto
others" when they consistently legislate their own beliefs onto others. Isn't
it libtards legislating that homosexual marriage must be recognized by
everyone. Isn't marriage founded in a religous belief system? Doesn't that
mean libtards are legislating thier beliefs onto others?

Isn't it libtards that legislated that banks must lend money to people who
cannot pay it back. Didn't this idealistic dream just explode all over the
economy. And aren't the very people the libtards think this was going to help
going to suffer the most?

Isn't it libtards that legislated that prison is about reforming people rather
than punishing them and keeping them out of society. So now child rapists are
routinely set free to victmize more innocent children, theives rob more
innocent people, and murders have the opportunity to kill again. This is why I
support the death penalty, libtards cannot be trusted to keep evil people
locked up.

Libtards just make excuse after excuse for being socialist passivists and have
no moral foundation whatsoever. And I know any libtard reading this will think
I am a religous nut. But I am agnostic and haven't been in any church in over
20 years. I dislike religion. But I disagree strongly with liberal social
engineering as it is selfish, idealistic, and naive and anyone with sense
knows it.

Posted by vj | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:59 pm UTC

Since the bishops have taken a vow of obedience to the pope, one can assume
the bishops are representatives of the holy see which has diplomatic relations
with the US. Therefore any bishop who refuses to cooperate with local law
enforcement and prosecutors re: sex abuse scandal should immediately be
declared persona non grata and will be deported to the vatican.

Posted by JT | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

1:59 pm UTC

So much for the separation of Church and State….

Other than for a SMALL percentage of Catholics, who cares what Rome has to
say.

Read my book, "TRUTH TO POWER: The Pope Has No Clothes"

I'm a BORN and raised Catholic, who has been Born Again.

Posted by michael pinchot | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:00 pm UTC

RIGHT TO CHOOSE! who is ANYONE to cram THEIR beliefs down my throat? if you
don't WANT an abortion when raped, birth control failed (yes, that DOES
happen) then by all means do not seek one out. however, if you DO choose that
route…its YOUR decision. NOT anyone elses.

Posted by Scamprdnz | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:02 pm UTC

I am so happy that our Church is trying to form catholic concience. Most
catholics do not know what our Church teaches and get very confused when some
in the Church do not follow it's teaching. I'll keep praying the our leaders
in the church.

Posted by Patty | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:03 pm UTC

To Tom L.: The Church does teach against artifical insemination and the
intentional practice of creating multiple embryos and killing the "extras".

To those who say that the Church is hypocritical for being against war when it
commited atrocities such as inquisitions and crusades: The Church is made up
of sinners, just like any other human institution (teachers, doctors,
laborers, non-Catholic Christian leaders, politicians, etc.). Many members of
the Church sinned in the past and sin now. Even so, the Church's teachings
never included unjustified war. These things happened because the members of
the Church ingnored the Church's teachings. We are blessed that we live in a
time when the Church's members are more aligned with Christ's teachings than
any other time since Christ walked the earth. Members will continue to sin,
just as all humans do. This is no reason to chunk the church that Christ
founded. God will work things out in his own time and his Church will prevail
against the gates of Hell until Christ comes again at the end of time.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:03 pm UTC

If a bishop said 1+1=2, but then said 2+2=5 would the bishop have been wrong
about 1+1?

Anyone who doubts that a human person is such before 9 months should visit
their local hospital's NICU and see the preemies. See which ones you'd agree
to allow to be killed.

What are the consequences of being wrong about abortion? They could be
considerable for the woman and maybe others too; but, how does that compare to
being killed and being responsible for the killing?

If Republicans and Catholics are wrong to be hypocritical war-mongers,
desiring to kill everything but unborn babies, then surely all that killing
must be wrong. If you're against all that killing isn't it inconsistent to be
supporting letting babies be killed?

Thanks

Posted by Gary Fuchs | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:04 pm UTC

Unfortunately, the Catholic church is only partially correct. The fact is,
that Democrats see children as "unsuccessful abortions" - ones that slipped
past the goalie (AKA Dr. Tiller). The ones that survive are then sent to
liberal re-education camps (AKA Public Schools), then have to run the gauntlet
of constituent groups (NAMBLA, Gay/Lesbian/Transgender grooming, etc.). The
ones that survive and express Good Thinking are then registered as Democrat
Voters - whether they actually vote or not. Rejects of all of the above are
seen as conservatives.

The truth of the matter is that calling the Democratic party the party of
death is a severe understatement. They are more insidious than radical Islam,
by indoctrinating and sexualizing the children they aren't able to kill.

Posted by A. Voter | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:07 pm UTC

>     * Posted by Tom. L  
>  The Catholic Church teaches that wars are possible >provided the
circumstances meet a specific criteria. In >general, in order to be a ‘just
war’ they must be in >defense only (of either ones self or another).

Iraqi civilian deaths since 2003 - 90K

Iraqi civilian deaths due to the 2003 invasion itself - less than 8000.

(Source - www.iraqbodycount.org)

Conclusion - vast majority of civilian deaths since 2003 have come about as a
result of the foreign nationals who came in to fight on behalf of Al-Qaeda.

Conclusion #2 - Decrease in civilian deaths since August 2007 was due to
increased security, thanks to greater troop strength from the US and
indigenous forces.

Iraqi civilian deaths under Saddam were quite a bit higher. 182,000 in the
Anfal campaign alone, and about 30-60K during the Shiite revolts and the Marsh
Arab clearances.

> Frankly  
>  the war in iraq woulsd not meet the criteria of a just >war and Pope John
Paul II was close to saying so before >he died.

Gulf War I met the criteria, though.

And that action never formally ended. A cease-fire was in place instead, as
the Coalition and the UN found it necessary to use the threat of resumption of
hostilities as leverage against Saddam not following the terms of UNSC 687.
Saddam didn't follow terms. Hostilities resumed.

If you disbelieve any of this, feel free to check out the details on your own.

Posted by kunsunoke | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:09 pm UTC

For those of you who want to bring the crusades and the Spanish Inquisition
into this discussion, you better get more informed about the facts. The
Inquisition was a STATE inquisition not completely sanctioned by the church.
The crusades, although sanctioned by the church was not sanctioned for all of
them. The crusades, especially the first, were to liberate the Christians from
Muslim who were being killed in vast numbers (as were the Jews).

The jest of this article is that catholic leaders, who profess their catholic
faith as the most important part of their lives, are being told to live their
faith through their actions. To interject that this is a republican problem
and that we may nuke Iran is absolute nonsense. The duties of every christian
is to first let their friends know when they are wrong and are in sin. If that
doesn't right the wrong, then it is the christian's responsibility to publicly
tell them they are wrong. We need to be constantly told how to get to heaven
and if it is by public humiliation than so be it.

And mikefromnyc, you are a typical 'noreastern liberal who is absolutely
misinformed. Did Sister Rebecca step slap your face during biology?

Posted by arkyump | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:10 pm UTC

How refreshing to finally have the Church speak out. It's long over due. The
majority of Democrates are against life.

Posted by Tracy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:12 pm UTC

Wow, sure is a lot of hate out there for Catholics. All of you with your
condescending comments need to go out and realize what a beautiful life you
have and be thankful for it. If you can't, go get a gun and put yourself out
of our misery of listening to you, although I must tell you the Catholic
Church will be against you committing suicide, so you may then have to stick
around and write how out of touch the Church is.

The Vatican is against anything that takes a human life, be it abortion, war,
euthanasia, etc. No-one here should even begin to explain when the soul enters
the body because nobody knows, that is why the church takes the position it
does. There are only three beings that know: God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Spirit. For all we know, the soul doesn't enter the body until we
are ready to die, so using that argument, most of you here should probably be
aborted as you don't have a soul.

And lastly, those of you that are going back 500+ years and comparing the
churches actions then to now ….. get a life. I would love to see you hold a
medical discussion comparing how 15th century doctors could better perform
brain surgery on a modern day person by drilling into the persons head to let
a demon out.

Posted by Kurt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:15 pm UTC

When did infanticide become a virtue?

Posted by Joe Quinn | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:18 pm UTC

Catholic church has zero credibility. Even ignoring the way they played a
shell-game with pedophile priests, this is an organization that preaches
meakness, and speaks of the ills of wealth and power yet covets both like no
other organization on the planet.

Now doing abject political advocacy? Time to lose that tax-exempt status. The
Vatican is ridiculously wealthy…strange being that Jesus was a simple
carpenter and threw the money changers out of the temple yet the Vatican
itself is decked with finery and gold.

Posted by vince | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:18 pm UTC

Archbishop Birke is doing his job - is he supposed to remain silent ?? I
support him 100%!!

Posted by Joe | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:19 pm UTC

There you go, I totally believe that the Dems are not the Dems of the past,
these are socialists, that are taking advantage of the American people. We
have to wake up, they are criminals, corrupt, Hollywood garbage, emotional
disturb who are out for themselves, and don't really care about anyone else.
The are for abortion and Obama should be ashamed of himself for allowing
partial birth killing of innocent babies. This is not right, where are their
values. I was a Democrat for many years, until I grew up and became mature. I
could not agree with a party, that had loose morals, and whose values lay in
the gutter. GO MCCAIN and PALIN, millions of us our praying for you…..

Posted by CMHinsley | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:19 pm UTC

Well, it's a bout time. The Democrats are so fixated on abortion….for them
it's almost a sacrement.

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:20 pm UTC

So just because somebody is a political leader they are supposed to never
speak out about their beliefs? What has happened to the world today? There are
people actually standing up for the right to slaughter babies? There are
people that actually say it is wrong to speak up for God just because of your
position in society? I feel sorry for all of you the day you stand in front of
the judgment seat and have to explain why your words lash out in blasphemy.
Woe to those who speak such trash. Your day will come. Repent now or suffer
for eternity by the hand of the King of kings.

Posted by Justin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:20 pm UTC

The Catholic Church and all other faiths or non-faiths have every right to
instruct and correct those who lay claim to the membership. In this case, the
Catholic Church was simply correcting two members - Pelosi and Biden - who
claim membership in the Church and yet, deliberately speak IN ERROR as if they
are scholars in church dogma.

Furthermore, Church officials have the right to speak in a cautionary tone as
an example to the rest of the faithful. They have the right to "instruct" the
faithful.

For those of you who react so vehemently against anyone "legislating their
faith," you really should be INTELLECTUALLY HONEST and disagree with the
position or opinion stated rather than rant & rave about people who live what
they believe.

Posted by Jennifer | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:22 pm UTC

Violent advocacy of abortion, is repugnant to God. That's not negotiable, nor
can any pseudo-intellectual drivel change that.

Posted by H. Fellowes | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:23 pm UTC

Take away these people's tax exemption. They've become even more annoying than
the FLDS. And the FLDS pays taxes! The Catholic Church rapes children. We need
to shut these super-clowns up.

Posted by SarahTX2 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:24 pm UTC

Religion has no place in politics until it starts paying taxes. I am tired of
hearing what this bishop or that mininster has to say about it. Put up or shut
up, thats your choice.

Posted by tired | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:24 pm UTC

This article is not about the republicans.

This article is not about clergy sex issues.

This article is not about wars, past or present.

This article is not about past practices hundreds of years old.

This article is not even about a specific political figure.

I could check, but I'm pretty sure we do not burn heretics anymore.

It is an opinion piece about respect for life.

When your party/canidate/views are criticized, if your only defense is
pointing to other things and going "Oh, yeah? What about….", then your
position is weak indeed. Thou doth protest too much.

Sorry, trying to create guilt for actions in the 14th century really doesn't
constitute an argument.

Obama and his party have moved far away from where any of us should be. His
heart may be in the right place, but his views do not mesh with the
mainstream, or with Our Faith.

Posted by just sayin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:25 pm UTC

Biden and Pelosi should be excomunicated to make the point perfectly clear.

Posted by Trep | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:26 pm UTC

It is apparent many here posting comments are not Catholic. The Catholic
doctrine states "thou shalt not murder", which when translated from its
original text to English, came out "thou shalt not kill".

Murder has an entirely different meaning than kill and we Catholics need to
remember the difference and the ORIGINAL text as it was written.

Abortion is murder. War, and all that goes with it, is a necessary evil on
this planet and is in no way at odds with Church Doctrine. Obviously it isn't
praised, but also not condemned either.

So, if you are going to talk about a subject in which you have no knowledge,
at least read a little bit before you comment.

The Bishop is right in this statement (although I have disagreed with him on
many others). Democrats, with their willful adherence to abortion, are the
party of Death.

Posted by Karenina | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:28 pm UTC

People have differing views on when life begins, but God doesn't, and I'm
excited to see catholics stand against the killing of helpless children. I'm
not catholic, but I support the vatican's position here - and they're right
for excluding politicians who and pro-abortion. This isn't about who's the
"party of life;" it's about the church taking a stand against an
unconstitutional, unscriptural, rampant evil that has killed almost fifty
million babies since 1973.

Posted by Leah | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:31 pm UTC

Abortion is murder.

Posted by Julio | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:32 pm UTC

Apparently, the irony of the democrat hypocrisy is lost on the democrats
themselves:

They support pre-birth abortion of the innocent;  
they support partial-birth abortion of the innocent;  
but they DON'T support 'POST-birth abortion' (aka capital punishment) of a
criminal guilty of murder.

Yes, the Vatican is correct on it's view of the demoncrats.

Posted by TheChairman | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:34 pm UTC

I don't consider anyone who has an abortion or someone who performs an
abortion to be "sentient".

We are regressing as a society, yet those who support this barbaric act claim
to be enlightened.

Posted by Don | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:34 pm UTC

Pat's question:

"What would the political landscape in America look like if religion was
totally eliminated from the discussions?"

My answer:

Like Russia. They have done wonderfully in the last few decades. Right.

Posted by Jean | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:34 pm UTC

Who cares? I think it's laughable that the Church thinks the Democrats are
"the party of death" when you consider that abortion rates go up during
Republican presidencies and down during Democratic. Let alone the observation
that abortions go up in countries that ban it completely. I guess they don't
teach logic in the church anymore.

Posted by wET | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:37 pm UTC

Funny, the Catholic church burned untold thousands at the stake for heresy.
The Republicans start a war with lies and kill hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians in Iraq, and thousands more in Afghanistan. And these
hypocrites call the Democrats the party of death because they don't want to
"FORCE" women to have children that they can't afford. God said to be fruitful
and multiply, not destroy the world with over population. No wonder Christ
called church leaders "SONS OF VIPERS".

Posted by R.J. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:38 pm UTC

Archbishop is taking a strong moral stand and I applaud him for that. Killing
unborn babies is a lot different than defending ourselves against evil
lunatics who would destroy the West. The democrats are the party of death,
socialism, whining, victims rights and all the the other bad things that are
tearing America apart. Some of them know what they are doing because they want
to destroy us, but sadly the masses hear Obama make a speech and think if he
is elected they will get a great job and all will be well. It is sad and scary
at the same time.

Posted by Jean | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:38 pm UTC

I dunno…the way democrats have turned abortion into a secular sacrament is
grotesque enough, I think, to warrant the label "party of death." If the shoe
fits….

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:39 pm UTC

The Catholic Church is out of touch and simply does not understand one of the
principles the United States was founded on; the free, unfettered, exercise of
religion. In order to achieve this religion needs to stay out of politics and
out of American laws. A political candidate's personal religious beliefs or
dogma is not an appropriate foundation for law making. In this way, supporting
the abortion right is not incongruent from their own personal beliefs. By Sen.
Biden and Speaker Pelosi are merely exercising their good professional
judgment and keeping their personal religious teachings out of the abortion
debate, they are merely fulfilling their role in representing the whole of
their constituency be it Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, Jewish, or any other
religion. They have to respect everyone's rights, without espousing the
beliefs of one religion.

Posted by Ryan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:40 pm UTC

Abortion is murder, but I'm still hoping that leftists will go extinct so I no
longer must suffer such low quality humans. Democrats please continue to abort
your young and make homosexual the survivors. In a few generations people will
theoretically appreciate life and normalcy again. I do wonder to what extent
someone must loathe themselves to encourage infanticide and homosexuality.
When will your subcultural suicide be complete?

Posted by ZOD!!! | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:41 pm UTC

A WOMAN HAS A RIGHT TO CONTROL HER OWN BODY!!!!  
I propose they do a dna test on all babies about to be butchered in the womb.
If the test comes back positive that the baby's dna is identical to the
mothers dna then she has a "right" to kill, murder, abort, or choose. If
however the dna comes back human and seperate from the mothers dna then it is
not her body and she does not have the right to murder(except in the very rare
case that the pregnancy could cause the mother to risk her life…not her
health…we all know you can't give a loophole to a dem…they would say "mental
health" and then proceed to chop and hack the baby into little pieces)her
HUMAN baby!

Posted by David | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:42 pm UTC

Party of death is guite apparent. It seems his holliness is coming to this
party very late. In any case, 60 million dead babies cannot be wrong. The
stats are deploable. It takes one million rapes to produce one pregnancy. Thus
sixty million dead children are justified for 60 out of six million
occurences. Such stats could easily support the reinstitutionalization of
slavery and the dissenfranchising women. This mess did not just become
deplorable. Like cord wood, these little bodies have been piling up since the
70's. Where was Rome when all these fetus were burned and which party do they
think sanctioned these deaths?

Posted by Thomas S. Stein MBA | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:43 pm UTC

And this from the Child Rape Central?

Posted by Edward M Baum | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:46 pm UTC

To all the so=called Catholics, if you don't like the laws or beliefs of the
church go to another denomination, the priests, bishops, arch=bishops, and
Pope have a right and duty to speak out!!!!!

Posted by Jerry | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:49 pm UTC

And to all those that say remove the Catholic Church's taxempt status…there
would not be a single black church left in the USA. Do you think Obama's hate
whitie, hate jews, hate the USA "church" should be in existance? Or is their
tax exempt position just more political big brother tricks? All you need for
"BIG BROTHER" is a polital party in power to be in bed with the media(CBS ABC
NBC CNBC CNN NYTimes, LATimes, ChicagoTrib, San Fran rag, WashPost, Hollywood,
Television, etc etc etc).

Posted by David | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:50 pm UTC

Comments that bring up events that happened 1000 years ago are just laughable.
For years, Democrats have been getting away with creepy and ghoulish pro-
abortion stance with the logical fallacy that they support a "choice" not
abortion. Absurd. Now they're getting called on it and to judge from the
shrill screeching tone of these comments, the Archbishop has hit them right
where it hurts. Love it.

Posted by Nick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:52 pm UTC

The "culture of life" does mean that we respect all life and although we are
not single-issue voters, we do recognize that some isssues such as the killing
of an innocent baby is different than killing a convicted murderer. Some
things are just "intrinsically evil."  
I urge all American Catholics to review the document Forming Consciences for
Faithful Citizenship: A Call to Political Responsibility from the Catholic
Bishops of the United States at www.faithfulcitizenship.org to enlighten
themselves on the truth about the way true Catholics should vote.

Posted by Marc | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:52 pm UTC

His Excellency is preaching the truth! Keep it up 😉

Posted by DJK | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:53 pm UTC

I'M APPALLED AT THE ACTIONS AND ATTITUDE OF SO-CALLED CATHOLICS IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR. THE CHURCH SHOULD EXCOMMUNICATE ANYONE WHO WOULD AGREE TO TAKE THE
LIFE OF AN UNBORN CHILD THIS DECISION SHOULD ONLY BE MADE BY THE MOTHER TO BE
AND HER DOCTOR. JUST AS MANY INNOCENT MEN AND WOMAN ARE EXECUTED EACH YEAR SO
ARE INNOCENT BABIES.

Posted by DON | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:53 pm UTC

it's never been a secret how the Catholic Church feels about abortion and when
life begins. And people who are worried about a Catholic voting from their
beliefs, I say people do it all the time whether your a catholic, baptist,
muslim or athiest or whatever. I mean hey, you got the Teachers Union and
Teachers wearing Obama pins and encouraging teachers to wear blue in the
classroom and teaching children to sing Obama messiah songs. Jees, Everybody
is a hypocrite!! At least you know where the Catholic Church stands. And if a
member doesn't like it a member can always leave.

Posted by charmeine | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:56 pm UTC

The religion whose rabid antisemitism promoted the Holocaust, labels the
Democrats the "party of death."

Rich.

Posted by Phil Dirt | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

2:58 pm UTC

Why is it that people who are  
pro-abortion live their lives  
making excuses for this  
brutal, life- ending choice?

Posted by Petra | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:00 pm UTC

The only way to make the Religious zealots happy would be to elect the Pope to
be president of the United States. Oh wait…not all religions believe the Pope
is the head of their church.

What to do? Maybe we should form a government that seperates the views of
Church from the laws made by the State.

Posted by Patti | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:01 pm UTC

JJ,

Christ and the Apostles require us to share our beliefs and Christian values
with others. The post-abortion experiences of women are as real as it gets.
You would have us all live in a world without Christ. You do not write as a
Christian, but as a worldly and selfish, shallow man.

You are far from Christ.

Posted by Paul D | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:01 pm UTC

Burke is gutsy and right to do and say what he's done. It is Pelosi, Biden and
other pro-abortion Catholic Dems who are out of bounds, trespassing on Church
teaching, and Arch-Bishop Burke is calling them on that.

They don't get to get away with purposefully misrepresenting Church teaching,
unchanged since the 1st Century. And ita simply a fact that the Dems are the
party of death - they want more abortions, and more euthanasia. That's just
plain choosing death - period. Everyone knows that.

Posted by Obama_in_Wonderland | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:02 pm UTC

The reality of the matter comes down to this: People are of a particular faith
for a number of reasons. Not the least of which is family history.

Unlike Islamic faiths or the Jewish faith and others which are so distinctly
intertwined to the fabric of society in certain parts of the world, faith here
in the US is mostly an ancillary item.

That is our societal makeup is so diverse such to mean that no one faith
uniquely dictates the policies and actions of our government or citizens.

People have the right to disagree with tenets of their faith. That's their
choice. The same thing is true with regard to party affiliation.

Biden and Pelosi can be Catholics and disagree with the Church's view on
certain issues, just as they could disagree with tenets of their party if
their faith dictates they hold a different opinion.

We cannot be terribly surprised to see the Catholic Church decry those who
have a counter opinion to theirs in terms of abortion. However, I find their
words distasteful and inappropriate.

This is why it's always funny to me how intolerant many highly religious
people are, all while claiming they're the only ones who care for peace &
harmony.

It just shows you that people (including Clergy) are too often only tolerant
of views they agree with.

Posted by KevinM | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:03 pm UTC

All of you patriotic, suppose to be intelligent and good Americans got your
heads still in the sand! Catholics and especially those who serve in the
vatican, parishes, and dioceses have abortions. Why haven't you heard of the
stories the reformed nuns tell of the behavior of the rapist an pedophiles who
call themselves priest. Their hypocrisies makes me want to vomit. Mr. Burke
needs to start right in the position he has been appointed to rid the Whore,
Satanic Blaspheming church of its self inbreed sodomites. Further more the
catholic church has no right, none whatsoever to speak for the Righteous Lord
Jesus Christ. The catholic church sits highly in opposition to the word of God
Almighty. It practices what God says THOU SHALT NOT and it does not practice
what God says THOU SHALT. GOD-JESUS CHRIST DID NOT LEAVE A SO CALLED SELF MADE
HOLY SEE TO SEE AFTER MANKIND. We can go to our FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN FOR
OURSELVES,and not by some fake beads called the rosary and confessions.

Posted by Shera | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:03 pm UTC

Hey Obama supporters, the black race is being aborted by black women
everywhere at the highest rate of all races. In fact, research it and you will
find Planned Parenthood promotes it. Just think another Martin Luther King has
probably been done away with in the name of worshipping at the altar of
abortion. I guess we all will find out what Our Lord thinks about taking a
living human being from the womb when we all meet someday. Is it not better to
choose life and let the chips fall where they may? Stop this nonsense and
choose life always!! Adoption is a beautiful and wonderful choice, look into
this option and see what a wonderful future a child could have.

Posted by Mary | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:04 pm UTC

For the purpose of power and greed, the early Catholic Church emacerated the
original teachings of Jesus and started the Christian religion on a trajectory
of devastating misinformation. Jesus would not approve of what passes for
Christianity today. Everyone owes it to themselves to research the early
esoteric/gnostic tenets on their own.

In truth, Life is eternal….beginning-less and endless.

Posted by TwoCents | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:04 pm UTC

God Bless the Catholic Church. Barak Obama and Joe Biden offer the most
liberal ticket in the history of the American Republic. We need to protect
life. Life of the unborn and the lives of those in Iraq and around the world
that face the threat of terror.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:06 pm UTC

It's about time, and where are the American bishops?

Posted by Frank Arundell | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:07 pm UTC

After this election Roe v. Wade will be overturned, it is the will of the
universal church . Women will know who controls their bodies, men do .Wire
hangars are not surgical instruments. Hospital emergency rooms, prepare for
the carnage !

Posted by Jose Maria | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:08 pm UTC

I am personally opposed to slavery, but I would never impose my views on the
slaveowners.

Posted by bugs | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:08 pm UTC

Life begins at conception, period. Those Democrats who call themselves
Catholic and yet endorse ABORTION are not Catholics, for they do not follow
the teachings of the Bible and Church. Pelosi, should attend, as a writer
above stated the "Church of Satan" in San Francisco, as far as Joe Biden and
other Democrats who call themselves Catholics, they lost their way and should
be excommunicated. Many of the statements are critical of the Church's
statement. You have that right. However, we Catholics who firmly stand with
our Church will follow the church that Jesus Christ himself directed Peter,
the apostle to begin, i.e., the rock of which his church will be built upon.
Some of the writers, complain about so-called atrocities over the years, and
emphasize WWII. Evidently, they don't realize, the church was operating in
secret, saving hundreds of thousands of lives by providing places for all the
people Hitler wanted to kill, from Jews to Homosexuals. The church was
protecting life, as it does now. Even though homosexuality is sinful, saving
the life of the sinner is very important to our Catholic teachings, as every
life is a gift from God! Pelosi, Biden, the Kennedys and all Democratics who
call themselves Catholics are lying to theirselves.

Posted by Vorenius | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:11 pm UTC

Isn't it odd that this Bishop found this the correct time to issue this
statement? I guess it's all about timing. And yet, as some of you pointed out,
a deafening silence about the issues of torture and the ongoing war. I left
the catholic church about 8 years ago when the Vatican agreed to meet with the
the warlord W. Even though John Paul read a statement about the war and
torture, no big outcry came from ANY OTHER of the church's princes. A big
change from the parish activism against the Vietnam war.

Posted by marsha brady | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:11 pm UTC

Just for clarification, The bible in the old testament is written in Hebrew.
The commandment, "Thou Shalt not Kill" is the King James translation in middle
English. The word used by God in Hebrew is to Murder, not kill. God was
telling us not to Murder. Murder is to kill someone for personal gain or
satisfaction as in a crime of passion or robbery. War is not Murder.

Posted by Luke | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:12 pm UTC

Everyone is missing the point here. I have more respect for an atheist then a
hypocrit first of all. I used to be catholic and no longer am. If you say you
are catholic and want that title then be a catholic period! Don't say you are
a member of an organization be it religion or political and not expect them to
come down on you for not agreeing to the member rules. You agreed to believe
in your church's view the minute you joined then go on in public about
boasting on being catholic to get their votes. The catholic church has every
right to come down on any member if you don't agree with their core beliefs
then leave as I did period, but to stay and pretend that you can be a public
figure and think you will go uncriticized by your church is stupid,
hypocritical and typical of our politicians.

Posted by willie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:15 pm UTC

People who try to equate abortion with war clearly have no understanding of
Holy Scripture or the personality of the God of the Bible, and they likely
don't care. The God of my Bible commanded Saul in I Samuel 15 commanded King
Saul to go and slaughter the Amalekites…"This is what the LORD Almighty says:
'I will punish the Amalekites for what they did to Israel when they waylaid
them as they came up from Egypt. 3 Now go, attack the Amalekites and totally
destroy everything that belongs to them. Do not spare them; put to death men
and women, CHILDREN and INFANTS, cattle and sheep, camels and donkeys."

The God of the Bible clearly states that the child in the womb is a living
sould. He also, throughout the Bible, authorized war and the killing of
"innocent" people in the process. Sarah Palin's quote has been blantantly
ripped out of context (like an aborted infant from the womb). She prayed that
we were doing God's will in Iraq…in other words, asking God that he help us do
the right thing. Obviously, war should only be a last resort, and I'm not
saying that all the reasons for going to his war in particular were correct.

I would like for someone in the pro-choice camp to give us some Scripture that
would authorize abortion. Some example where it happened in the Bible.

Posted by Robert | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:17 pm UTC

I think most of you are missing the point of the Archbishops remarks. I
believe his intention is to influence Catholic Democrats to be both, not just
Democrats who say they are Catholics.

If life begins at conception, and you believe it, you have an obligation to
fight for the life of those who can't defend themselves. If you don't believe
life begins at conception, you're rejecting Catholic teaching. That's okay as
long as you don't represent yourself as a Catholic.

Posted by PJ | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:17 pm UTC

The Vatican is the Biggest SCAM in the HISTORY of the WORLD…do some google
searches on the SCAMS, Corruption and pure Evilness of the Vatican…I was once
a catholic until I woke up from my slumber…these people are the epitamy of
EVIL!

Posted by Bill | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:19 pm UTC

About time the Church stood up against infanticide. Where have they been?

Posted by LDC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:19 pm UTC

C.D. Walker, please study your Bible carefully and consult an authority. The
Bible does not condemn war outright. Have you read the Old Testament? It's
filled with accounts of war, some more just than others. For those who
disagree with war outright, I respect your beliefs, but do not misrepresent
the Bible. "Thou shalt not kill" is left slightly ambiguous in the English
language, yet if we return to the original Hebrew, "thou shalt not murder" is
a much more accurate translation. Ask someone who speaks Hebrew.
Linguistically, there is a stark distinction between murder and war-motivated
killing. Yes, it's very true that those who engage in unjust war will have to
answer to the Judge. No, war is not pleasant. Notwithstanding, killing the
innocent, those that have no voice, is quite different than engaging in
conflict with the enemy.

Posted by James | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:21 pm UTC

Thankfully, our mothers didn't kill us in the womb so we could live to debate
the morality of killing others. How unfortunate for the nearly 50 million
people whose mothers did kill them in the womb that their voices will never be
heard and their opinions never known.

Posted by Frank | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:22 pm UTC

Great post Mary! I'm right there with you! The doctors and the politicians
that support abortion need to be doing time for murder! They're playing God!

When a person is pronounced dead it is because they do not have a heart beat.
That said, a doctors ability to hear the heart beat of the baby in the mother
at such an early stage in the pregnancy means…. It's alive!

Posted by Brian | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:23 pm UTC

And his church is not responsible for untold suffering because of their
position on birth control?? What a douchbag..

Posted by james | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:27 pm UTC

Where was Archbishop Raymond "Demagogue" Burke back when Pope John Paul
proclaimed that there no moral or legal basis for war against Iraq? Where was
his passion for "life" then? Why wasn't he taking political sides back then?

Hypocrite! Put your own conflicting values in order before pontificating to
others on their beliefs!

Posted by C D | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:28 pm UTC

Pope John Paul II reminds us "Above all, the common outcry, which is justly
made on behalf of human rights-for example, the right to health, to home, to
work, to family, to culture, is false and issusory if the right to life, the
most basic and fundamental right and the condition for all other personal
rights, is not defended with maximum dtermination."

It looks like the Church is finally putting the fundamental issues of our
faith ahead of the collection basket!

Posted by brian | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:28 pm UTC

Hey Michael, its typical of you lefties to try and morally equate two seperate
issues in order to try and make yourself feel better about the facts. You
can't see the difference between standing up for the most INNOCENT FORM OF
HUMAN LIFE and a lunatic islamic leader who wants to eliminate a whole nation.
You can't deny he has said this and you purposely overlook this. As far as
peaceful use of the uranium, Kim Jong Il said the same thing and look what
happened.

Posted by Kirk | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:29 pm UTC

Pope John Paul II reminds us “Above all, the common outcry, which is justly
made on behalf of human rights–for example, the right to health, to home, to
work, to family, to culture, is false and illusory if the right to life, the
most basic and fundamental right and the condition for all other personal
rights, is not defended with maximum dtermination.”

It looks like the Church is finally putting the fundamental issues of our
faith ahead of the collection basket!

Posted by brian | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:30 pm UTC

One small phrase sums it all up.

"End Of Time"

Posted by Betsy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:33 pm UTC

Thank you Catholic Church-even with all your recent troubles- for FINALLY
climbing into the fight to preserve the life of the unborn in a forthright,
public and understandable way. ABORTION IS MURDER-NO QUESTION. In no way can
any so called legalization of abortion supersede the commandment "THOU SHALT
NOT KILL".  
The democratic party can talk all they want about women's right to abortion
but that cannot justify in any way the killing of the innocent unborn.

What has been unleashed on all of humanity is a hideous evil that will
ultimately destroy us all. And the democratic party is seeking a VOLUNTARY
VOTE in the November elections to continue this second holocaust.

So far since Roe v Wade, 50,000,000 lives have been snuffed out. HOW LONG
SHALL WE CONTINUE DOWN THIS ROAD?

GOD BLESS THE VATICAN!!

Posted by marty | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:33 pm UTC

Just for the record, neither the Repub or Dem parties should be labeled as
either the Party of Life or the Party of Death. It is nothing more than
inflammatory and devisive. The discussions(?) on this blog were very
enlightening about the hate and intolerance that still exists fostered in the
name of god.

Posted by marsha brady | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:38 pm UTC

Right on- nice to hear voices not spouting the PC media biases !!

Posted by james v reda | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:38 pm UTC

Those people who do not know Christ are confused by the statements of
Christians, which is predicted by the Bible. They cannot possibly understand
the culture of Christians because their eyes do not see and their ears do not
hear the truth of real life and freedom in our Savior.

Posted by Edward Hedquist | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:41 pm UTC

It's amazing to see the defenders of abortion twist and gyrate to escape the
simple point of the story: the Catholic Church condemns the killing of
innocent an defenseless human life, and sometimes (not often enough, I think)
rebukes those who publicly defend it. It's a simple position. It's not
improper that any church should publicly explain its beliefs in the context of
current events.

But those who think people should be permitted to kill their own children
frequently say that people who oppose elective abortion should keep their
mouths shut and not attempt to engage in the political process.

The "shut up or else" argument indeed was frequently used by those who
defended slavery, later, by those who defended Jim Crow laws… and later by
Nazis, against those who opposed the Third Reich.

Unborn children deserve to be included at the "table of human rights". They
deserve protection and due process of law. We who believe this must not let
the opposition shout them down, no matter how loud or illogical. We must
persevere so that justice will prevail.

Posted by John Robin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:42 pm UTC

The good Archbishop failed to give equal time to the Republicans. McCain is in
favor of stem cell research and so the Republican party is equally guilty of
bioethics violations in the eyes of the Catholic Church. The fact that the
U.S.Bishops are particularly vocal this election should, however, give both
parties pause to re-evaluate their positions on life issues. At the end of the
day it appears that it would be easier to educate the open mind of Barack
Obama to amend his position on life issues than it would be to chang the mind
of that stubborn old dog McCain, especially on his beloved war, which the
Blessed John Paul II and Ratzinger opposed.

Posted by TxCatholic | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:44 pm UTC

Pelosi (a Catholic?!) showed her liberal brainwashing with the Tom Brokaw
interview when she said during the last 50 yrs that there had been a change of
attitude towards the church's stance on the "beginning of life" which left
Brokaw in mild disbelief she did not know any better and more or less told her
so.

The younger generations have been given the green light by the liberal
Democrats to have sex without any consequences, bombarding younger and younger
children with sexual overtones in film and television programing to make sex
acceptable practically at the kitchen table…this lack of responsibility to
protect the young and destroy the fabric of the family is at the core of the
Democratic Party. Planned parenthood is a misnomer….it is anything but about
being a responsible person or a parent!

Posted by C. E. Nelson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:48 pm UTC

Abortion is a terrible practice, particularly when used as a form of birth
control.

However, BOTH sides go to far on this issue. Like most things, it isn't black
or white…but gray. Pro-life wants no abortions by any means. Pro-choice says
free to do what they want.

They are BOTH wrong.

And the Catholic Church has always been one of the most corrupt organizations
on the planet since its inception. Where did I learn this? Catholic theology
courses at Catholic institutions.

Posted by vince | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:50 pm UTC

Scripture says  
" I wove you in your mother's womb"…..

"I knew you before the foundations of the world were laid"

That was God speaking…..Nuff Said!

Posted by Luke | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:52 pm UTC

Good for him!!! It's about time someone started pointing out the obvious. You
can't be a Christian and reject God's Word. You can't profess to love Christ
yet refuse repentance of personal sin. Christ was no government social
reformer - although His love transforms personal lives. Jesus calls for
repentance from personal sin - which abortion and homosexuality clearly are -
if one simply reads the Bible. Christ's call is for changed lives, not for
creation of leftist government policies.

Posted by A Difference | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:52 pm UTC

People are missing the point. The Catholic Church has the right to declare
what they want, if you do not subscribe to those views, then leave that church
--many have left for a variety of reasons. It is the same as being part of
PETA but then going out an clubbing baby seals to death. You can not be "part"
of a club -- you are either for or against the central values.

Posted by Mike Piazza | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:54 pm UTC

Really? The Catholics are the party of perverts

Posted by brian flanagan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

3:57 pm UTC

"About time" is right. Way to go Cardinal Burke!

As to the tax exempt status of the Church, the Constitution is clear.
Government will not interfere with religion. The idea that religion has to
remain quiet on government is crazy. The whole purpose of religion is to lead
its flock within the current system. This is freedom of speech. This is why we
live here.

Posted by Steve - San Francisco | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:03 pm UTC

Abortion is a bad thing which should not happen.

Nuking Iran will not be agood thing but it may be necessary. And if it does
happen it will be done by the next President which could very well be Obama.

I hope everyone here is consistent in their anti-war attitude when it is their
boy who has to give the order to kill people. I doubt they will be though
because being intellectually honest just isn't in the American left's blood.

Posted by Joe | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:05 pm UTC

It is a tragedy that people do not understand that it is a fact as to when
life begins (conception). This is not disputed and is not a religious belief.
The only thing that can be considered "religious belief" is the morality of
killing innocent life. If you "believe" killing innocent life is wrong, then
you must speak out against abortion.

However, using the religious belief argument: The radical Muslims believe Jews
are not human and gays are not human. Since this a religious belief they
should have the right to abort them at any stage of their life. After all we
must have separation of church and state. Right? Now I believe it is wrong to
kill Jews and gays. But I do not want to impose my religious belief on the
poor Muslims of the world. So, Please don't impose your belief system on the
Muslims. They should have the right to kill too - just like you.

Posted by USAforlife | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:06 pm UTC

And take it from me, a person who went to Catholic school for 12 years.
Catholicism is the religion of HATE. The Pope is nothing more than one of
those overpaid CEO's and when it comes to politics he should keep his big yap
shut!

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:08 pm UTC

The pro-abortion fear is not what the Church might say, but that people might
listen. But, because they can't win the people over with their ideas, they try
to stifle the other side.

Posted by Steve - San Francisco | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:09 pm UTC

I wonder how they feel about Capital Punishment? I wonder why he has not
spoken out against that and the Republicans? Mmmmmm…

Posted by Krazijoe | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:12 pm UTC

I expected this. Does anybody have the courage to defrock Father Pflager?  
Every sunday at Mass I look around and I think I see Democrats all over and I
think: how can they be here when they support candidates who believe in the
murder of innocent children?  
I rember early in the Clinton presidency. Bubba went to South Africa and to
show he cared about those people and he noticed the presence of photographers
and seeing people taking Communion he thought I'll do it also. He received
Communion, a mortal sin.

Posted by Carlo Amato | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:12 pm UTC

The Catholic church is a safe house for pedophiles, and now they want to make
a stink about abortion. What a joke. The bible is not, in any way, clear about
when life begins, but they want to align themselves with the Republicans, who
are in favor of the death penalty, invading a country by mistake (250,000
people dead), torturing prisoners, and ignoring science (stem cell research)
which could save many lives. Looks to me like the Catholic church has been in
the death business too long.

Posted by Dennis Sein | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:14 pm UTC

Which is the party of death?

The Democrats Supreme Court judges legalized abortion in Roe v. Wade.
(48,000,000 innocent American lives)The

Democrats de facto started the Viet Nam War- (1st combat troops sent in by
Kennedy, escalated by Johnson, ended by Nixon- 58,000 American lives lost

Democrats bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki (Truman dropped 2 atomic bombs in
these cities- 300,000 lives; 20,000,000 birth defects)

I don't want to be a Democrat.

Posted by schevy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:15 pm UTC

"Palin believes that the war in Iraq is a task from God. Both John Paul II and
Benedict have called the war in Iraq immoral and unjust. So, who do I beleive?
A former Roman Catholic or the Pope?

    * Posted by T. Kruger"

I spent 12 years in Catholic education where I studied St. Augustine at
length. St. Augustine is responsible for the church's theological trajectory
and he articulated a 'just war' litmus. Here's a news flash: in the case of
Iraq, St. Augustine's just war criteria is more than satisfied on every level.
The modern church and both Popes can say what they want, but their position is
based more on caring about public perception than substantive dogma. Maybe
they're too busy heading off the next pedophile priest scandal or obstructing
Federal immigration law to remember their St. Augustine?

Posted by Flasheart | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:17 pm UTC

As if the catholic church has any moral authority…They have molested children
over the past 50 years. Nothing they say can be taken seriously. Hypocrits
just like the rest of the "christians" . "I like your Christ but I don't like
your christians as they don't follow your christ" Ghandi

Posted by frances consalvo | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:18 pm UTC

Why is it that the most high profile liberal democrats in the US Senate claim
to be 'practicing Catholics.' Some of these democrats were once actual
Catholics until the democratic party indoctrinated them into their 'required
positions' on abortion, gay marriage, etc. They might as well form a splinter
group and break away from the pope.

Posted by thornytoes | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:20 pm UTC

I doubt a politician exists that agrees with their constituents on every
nuance of every issue. Sometimes voters have to swallow hard, prioritize the
issues and make a judgment based on the entirety of a candidate's position.
Abortion may well be murder, but so is unjust war.

Posted by Luke | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:21 pm UTC

If Republicans had their way, the U.S. would ban abortions instead of helping
the homeless or guaranteeing healthcare for that same baby that wasn't
aborted. They recently voted on that very issue and decided the children
weren't worth insuring, ultimately. They are a party of glaring contradictions
at a colossal level, the GOP.

Posted by thevealchop | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:26 pm UTC

I am thrilled to see the Catholic Church stand up and speak the truth loudly!!
These peddlers of death,seared conscience and all, should be excommunicated
PERIOD!!!!

Posted by Jingles | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:26 pm UTC

The greatest danger to America today is right wing militarism. A philosophy
that believes in preemptive war, torture, and that has elevated democracy to
the level of religion. Although abortion is undoubtedly a great evil, war is
the ultimate insanity unleashed by unstable minds. The kind of mind that
unfortunately dominates the Republican party.

Posted by dgr | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:29 pm UTC

I've been catholic all my life. It still irks me that the church will not keep
their opinions and rants contained to us (their own congregation). They really
need to stop blasting others for their own beliefs. It's called intolerance!  
Please Vatican, preach to us, stop harassing others about their own ideals,
ethical practices and faiths!  
p.s. By the way, the new age is very intolerant to intolerance. Please
remember this.

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:29 pm UTC

Really if these people cannot follow the religion they should not go around
pretending they are part of the religion. They do all of this for prestige.
Obama couldnt associate himself with his church so we dont Fellow democrats
follow his lead?

Posted by Steve j | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:31 pm UTC

Can someone please answer why this issue derives equal passion on both sides?
I understand that being pro-life, one would be passionate against the view
that it is murder. But why are people that are pro-choice apparantly equally
passionate? Is it that many have committed this act and therefore do not want
to confront the guilt and therefore lash out at being equated as a murderer? I
sincerely dont understand.

Posted by Karl | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:31 pm UTC

The Catholic chruch joining hands with the right wing is really scary. They
are telling Catholics they must vote Republican based on this issue alone. Are
they kidding look at the mess the world is in now because of their support for
George Bush and the Republicans. They are going to send the world into a
ditch. Lets get real when in the histroy of the Republican party have they
ever given a crap about poor babies. Remember this is the party that fought
Roosevelt over child labor laws because they were taking the poor kids off the
street and working them like slaves in their factories. Here is where the
Republican support for abortions ends, tell them we are going to save all
these poor babies and they will have to pay more taxes to help support them.
They will be dumping these babies off in the nearest trash cans themselves.
Abortion is being used to manipulate votes that is the bottom line and the
Catholic Church is falling for it. Money is what talks in the Republican party
not life.

Posted by Marie Reed | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:33 pm UTC

I keep seeing the statistic that 40-50 million babies have been aborted in the
US since the legalization of abortion.  
I guess that stat is supposed to shock and awe me and change my mind from
being pro-choice to anti-choice.

But that stat made me think, well how would the US look if all 40-50 million
of those babies were born.

Unemployment would be 5 times worse than it is now and it is reaching all time
highs. Social Security would be obsolete. The healthcare problem would have
become a crisis.  
Deaths from illegal abortions would have increased tenfold. The economy would
be horrendous as poor families struggle to support their children. Welfare
would be draining from the economy an enormous amount of cash.

Upsides would include more troops to go and continue the US' history of slowly
taking over the world. More parishoners to line the pockets of religions
everywhere.

I totally understand why certain groups are so demanding on returning abortion
to an illegal act now. It's all wrapped up under the guise of "preventing
murder", but it's really about money and furthering their own doctrine.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:35 pm UTC

I can't believe someone on this board actually said that the U.S. is waging
war on Muslims. Have you lost your mind? How do you ignore Muslims' calls for
jihad? All Muslims seem to do is kill people, each other included, over
cartoons, books, minor disagreements, etc. They have promised to kill you, and
you ignore it. I will give the Muslims credit, though, at least they're honest
- they call for your death, and doggone it, they mean it!

Posted by al | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:36 pm UTC

yeah, Like the Vatican has ANY room to talk  
http://www.arcticbeacon.com/articles/26- Sept-2007.html

Posted by Bill | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:38 pm UTC

I have had family members sexualy abused by catholic priests. The Pope's words
are meaningless to me. The vatican is worse than congress.

Posted by Brendan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:42 pm UTC

United States attacks Vatican as church of pedophiles.

Posted by BigDog | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:44 pm UTC

The constitution was thoughtfully crafted to protect the practices and views
of religious and non-religious persons. What has become recently known in the
past forty-something years or so as the “separation of church and state”
provides equal treatment under the law regardless of our religious bend or
practice, while protecting the pursuit of the belief system of our choosing.
The view that morality that finds itself derived from a religious institution
is somehow invalid in comparison to those derived from a secular institution
is mystifying. The constitution allows all groups to have legislative opinion
and to critique any and all parts of the government . No single group can make
governmental laws religious or secular, only the congress for and by the
people can. That being said, the American Arch-Bishop Burke has the same
inaliable right to freedom of speech as we all do. He also has a
responsibility to correct doctrinal err within public a public forum. Whether
any of us agree or disagree with his view is not germane to the discussion.

Posted by Doug | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:47 pm UTC

We all have to face God someday…and the Church is merely warning the
politicians who do not follow God's law but rather their own egos that they
will be judged accordingly.

And that goes for all of you liberal haters out here…

Get your house in order.

Posted by dantheman | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:47 pm UTC

Look at all of you…this is the 2,000 year old Catholic church…the one that
survived Rome, Byzantium, Ottoman Empire, Attila, and so on:  
1) What makes you think they are so wrong in denouncing your Democratic Party-
actually specific people within that Party?  
2) Unlike your secular vision for the world, Catholics, Muslims, Hindus, Jews,
animists, etc., see the world through the lens of their religions. As you see
they are plain wrong-they see you as plain wrong.  
3) That Church (the Catholic one) has had it's share of problems-yet there is
stands with it's second-to-none avenue of helping the poor (note Mother
Teresa) and shedding it's blood in countless countries-something I don't see
Alec Baldwin and Nancy Pelosi doing (but they can sure tear down your
country).  
4) It is quite amazing to the lengths that the world over has had to learn
about the USA, yet all we see is your ability to tear one another up or find
the next shiny object to paw at. At least in most countries around our world,
the deck may be stacked but the players are well known: your election, for
example, is in the bag by all parties, yet all are independent or whatever.
And yet, the Catholic Church is taking a beating. Wow….

Posted by Tim | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:49 pm UTC

"and for being a proponent of stem cell research." Do they even know how stem
cell research is perfromed today? It's drawn from a donated umbilical cord
from a birth. I'm kinda tired of still hearing about this since the technology
has changed, and thanks to this new technology my father is still alive and
will get to watch my little brother graduate and see my sister, his only
daughter, have her first child which is also his first grandchild…

Posted by Cody | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:50 pm UTC

Abortion and capital punishment are not the same before God. It's murder of
the innocent (which God forbids) vs. killing the guilty (which God commands.)
God endorses capital punishment in the NT saying "rulers do not bear the sword
in vain - but for the punishment of evildoers"). Liberals always errantly
compare the two to justify this evil.

Posted by A Difference | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:50 pm UTC

Whenever I read about one of these Catholic pronouncements, I thank God that
I'm a Protestant.

Posted by Texun | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:58 pm UTC

The narrators of this site did not want to post my comments about Planned
Parenthood and its founder Margaret Sanger.  
So folks, please do a Google search yourself folks or go into a library and
find out yourself what she wrote in her book how she envisioned aborting the
black race out of existence, a la Hitler vis a vis the Jewish people.  
And consider how Democrats including Barack Obama, himself African American,
take campaign contributions from Planned Parenthood.

Human life starts at conception. Already with all its characteristics of
specific Gnomes as a full grown person. Science says so. So don't come with
that "it ism not a baby" nonsence. Look at the pictures these days of 3 week
olds in the womb sucking it thumb!

And no, a fetus (Latin for "little child") is NOT part of the woman's body
like an arm and a leg. Only connected to a small cord for depending on the
mother for nutrition.  
And even if she wanted to have her -normal, healthy, arm or leg amputated
would we not try to talk her out of it?  
How much more so when it involves a baby!

Estimates are that almost 1 million babies are aborted each year.  
This, while almost the same number of infertile couples spend a fortune
eagerly trying to adopt a baby.  
Is GOD trying to tell us something, you think?

Posted by Buccaneer | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:59 pm UTC

Are you kidding me? The Catholic Church wants us to follow the Republicans as
they take the world into a state of complete chaos. Never in the history of
the republican party have they given a crap about poor dead babies. It is a
ploy to manipulate the hillbilly vote. In the end ask any Republican if they
would be willing to pay more taxes to support all these poor babies they are
going to save. That will be the end of their prolife views. What the
Republicans really care about is their money not poor babies. Huh, the whole
thing is laughable.

Posted by Marie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

4:59 pm UTC

So…….. what about the Republican Party? What does the Vatican say about it?
Hum….. let's see now….. at least 500,000 Iraqis have been killed during the
war in Iraq. Perhaps as many as 4,000,000 Iraqis are now homeless as a result
of the war. The infrastructure of the country has been destroyed…. Is this
pro-life? Be honest in your so-called God-inspired pronouncements, or, better
yet, why not keep your rather biased (religiously-bloated) opinions to
yourself!

Posted by Doug Soderstrom | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:02 pm UTC

War is not necessarily murder. There are ample examples in the old and new
testaments which affirm that the civil government has the right to wield the
sword, not just in war but for capital punishment. The Roman Catholic Church's
positions on war and capital punishment are not in line with biblical
precepts.

Posted by Stewart | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:05 pm UTC

Far more have been murdered in the name of "choice" and "privacy" than in all
the wars for the last 100 years. The Democrats are the party of death, but
they market it in a wayt to make it all sound nice and pleasant. Abortion is
censored as well. Maybe we need to have "Choice Awareness" week at public
schools and show videos of abortions in progress. Or should we continue the
censorship?

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:05 pm UTC

[…] continues to take the lead on life issues, speaking boldly on the matters.
Reuters has a story here on the Vatican's denunciation of the Democratic Party
as the "party of death." I […]

Posted by Democrats 'Party of Death' « Bean Brain's Pod | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:11 pm UTC

Jesus said, "…and whatsoever you do to the least of these, my children, you do
unto me."

Jesus also said, "…for those that do this, they may as well have a millstone
around their neck and be thrown into a sea of fire."

Don't you think it strange that Roman Catholic democrats are pro abortion in
any form? They defy their own church teachings.

We must pray for them to see the errors of their ways and become Christians
again.

Posted by Lelande | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:11 pm UTC

A note to Catholics…With your churches unbelievable brutish, mad,
pathological, and utterly satanic history, might I suggest you KEEP YOUR
VALUES FOR YOURSELF AND STAY OUT OF MY RIGHT TO PRIVACY!!! THIS IS NOT ABOUT A
RIGHT TO AN ABORTION, ITS A RIGHT TO KEEP THE CHURCH AND THE EQUALLY CORRUPT
AND PITIFUL STATE FROM TELLING ME WHAT I CAN AND CANNOT DO IN MY RELATIONSHIP
WITH MY DOCTOR. Why is this so hard for you to understand? The church has lost
any and all respect I would ever give it credit for telling me how to behave.
A bunch of enabling child rapists want to tell me what MY CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS ARE?!  
How dare you?! Who do you think you are? NO NO NO NO! CENTURIES OF VICTIMS OF
YOUR ATROCITIES CRY NO!!!!

Posted by Laura | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:13 pm UTC

[…] was a Reuters article that I don’t want to go under the radar. Joe “Lunch
Bucket” Biden has said repeatedly […]

Posted by The Democrats Abortion Problem | TRUNK REPORT | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:14 pm UTC

"Pedophile priests."

The phrase has such a great ring to it – for journalists, that is. It's hot,
punchy (with that double-p alliteration) and short enough for headlines. All
in all, a great tag for summing up one of the most sensational news stories of
the year.

The only problem is – it's a lie.

It turns out the vast majority of the Catholic priests' offenses do not
involve "pedophilia" – sexual contact between an adult and a pre-pubescent
youth. Rather, they amount to sexual seductions of teen-age boys by predatory
homosexual men who have abused their position of authority and trust.

Funny how those that complain about gay priests molesting boys also want more
gays to be Boy Scout leaders as well. The problem isn't that they are priests,
but that they are gay. How about banning gays from the Priesthood? No wonder
the Boy Scouts don't want to be forced to have gays as Scout leaders. Who
wants the same problem? And then if gay scout leaders started molesting young
scouts the liberals would start criticizing the Boy Scouts as a corrupt
organization. What a joke.

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:15 pm UTC

The opposite of "Pro-Life" is "Pro-Death", not "Pro-Choice" which is much more
politically correct and an easier pill to swallow. Rather like referring to
the death camps and palnned extermination of the Jews as the "Final Solution".
Sounds so much nicer, doesn't it?

Posted by DonMac2 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:16 pm UTC

I love the way the Catholic church decides who is and who is not good enought
to commune with them. I firmely believe that the Catholic Church as an etity
is the anti-christ. Wolves in sheeps clothing they are and the pope is Evil
incarnate on earth. Ever notice the upside down cross on his robes?

Posted by Doug | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:17 pm UTC

"I am glad to see that the Church is beginning to take a bolder stand for the
rights of the unborn. The American people are stupid to think that all aspects
of American culture are not affected by poor moral choices. (For instance,
Social Security is directly affected by abortion! Do the simple math…

Women do have a choice, the choice to not have sex outside the confine of
marriage. As a teacher for 30+ years I cannot think of a sigle student that
should have been aborted. All are special in unique ways!

I would hope that the Church would begin to be even more vocal about what use
to be a strong Democratic Party here in the U.S. I abandoned the party several
years ago because of the moral depravity they are pursuing."

Posted by Bob | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:17 pm UTC

Look, this is not an issue. For Catholic, while the war, hunger, Gay Marriage,
the poor, are important issue, the preeminate issue is ABORTION. We have
candidate who publicly support abortion. What the Catholic Church is saying is
that if you are going to be Catholic you can't support ABORTION. Pick…Catholic
or Abortion. You can support both.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:19 pm UTC

In one respect the Catholic church is correct to state its clear position
regarding politicians who claim themselves as Catholics, and then differ
fundamentally on the church's issues. But to what extent do politicians differ
from the church. Biden has the same view. Also Pelosi. They just state that
the legislation of a state should be 'hands-off' for any organized religion.
The State, any state, should be hands off for an entity, that once was a
formidable political entity itself. The Catholic church, if the US credibility
in the world today is being challenged, lost it 'sense-of-purpose' for many
millions a long time ago.

Posted by Ferg | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:21 pm UTC

It's startling to see the Catholic Church call some other organization a
"party of death." Am I missing something? Wasn't it the Church that killed
millions (many millions) over its long and storied history?

Posted by Wil | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:23 pm UTC

Let's see. isn't it 48 million aborted babies since roe v wade? That's more
than Hitler (8 mil)and Stalin (20 Mil)put together. Maybe even throw in Pol
Pot (2-3 mil). But there is no argument, both Hitler and Stalin where Ruthless
and Blood letting rulers of Nations, where the people of those nations were
just too frightened to do anything about it. We ALL know how they have been
judged. That would probably make USA and Europe the perpetrators of the most
heinous elimination of the most defenseless human beings on the planet, and
the democrats and lefties both here and abroad own it. 48,589,993 They were
killed because they were inconvenient. So, hearing any bullshit trying to
defend abortion is worse than insane, you just go ahead and placate your
conscience; you will not escape judgment.

Posted by Bim | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:25 pm UTC

I think its time to tax the crap out of churches.Enough!

Posted by truthynesslover | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:25 pm UTC

Can you really accept an organisation with such a botched handling of its own
sexual crimes to be a 'moral authority' on such matters? Their under the
carpet response amounted to little more than an act of complicitly, while
their abuse of minors still went on. Willingly or not they were little more
than a pedophile ring.

Posted by Ferg | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:26 pm UTC

To Michael Cecil -- I would be interested in hearing your comments after the
first mushroom cloud appears over the Zionist state. My oh my!

Posted by Chris Greenwoos | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:28 pm UTC

Is there any doubt that a fetus is alive????? If anyone says that a fetus is
not alive, that person has no creditability. Abortion kills the living fetus.
Does a woman have a right to kill?

Posted by Mr Jones | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:30 pm UTC

Following up on Luke, I think that it is absurd not to support a politician
because you disagree with ONE of their beliefs. What about all of the other
policies that the candidate has? Is abortion really the most important issue
when the economy is struggling in epic proportions? To let your religion get
in the way of the success of America is absurd. Selecting a leader is a
culmination of MANY things, and separation of church and state is a must. Are
you really not going to support a leader because he/she votes for abortion?
REALLY? What about everything else. Why is ABORTION the most important thing
to look at during the voting process? Is it because it is tied to your
religion? Many people above have stated that they would never support a
candidate who supports pro choice. That's it? What about their plan to fix the
economy, their plan on Iraq, their plan to free us of fuel dependency. Please,
for one minute, take your religious views out the door, and focus on what
matters, the Unite States, not yourself. You go to church for a reason.

Posted by Amanda | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:31 pm UTC

[…] you read it correctly. This just in from the Vatican - the Democrats are
evidently agents of extinction. You know, in case you didn't know that. […]

Posted by Vatican: "Dems are the 'Party of Death'" « The Writing on the Wall |
Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:34 pm UTC

If Democrats are the party of death I guess that makes Catholicism the
denomination of Child Molesters.

Posted by Lulz | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:34 pm UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as 'party of death'… The Vatican
finally gets one right. […]

Posted by Today's Tidbits | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:35 pm UTC

Good Christians have waited for exactly this type of pro-active attempt to
stop the hypocrisy. Yes, the Church has been attacked from within by horrible
people. It is NOT what Christ created, and worrying about the whiplash of
excommunications has allowed the evil to grow. But now that it is finally
being addressed, don't accuse all of us who know "the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against us". I am a Catholic, and I'm not alone in trying to live my
Faith as it was handed down by Christ.

Posted by Marykat | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:38 pm UTC

“Please!”

An acorn’s not an oak tree.  
Nor the coconut - a palm.  
An egg is not a chicken.  
The atom-not a bomb.”

Posted by Peter Cavanaugh | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:39 pm UTC

The Vatican needs to get its own nukes!

Posted by dave r | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:41 pm UTC

Since churches enjoy tax freedom, we just need to start taxing all religions
and churches for the political instruments they are - especially as they
further venture into the public sphere and political arena. Besides, who cares
what an organization that protects child molesters over the public good states
anymore, anyways…

Posted by LucasB | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:42 pm UTC

Thank God the Church is finally standing up and speaking God's position. My
husband and I have considered leaving the Church because politicians have been
allowed to go unanswered on this vital issue. Pope Benedict addressed our
concerns on the sexual abuse scandal. Please continue to meet these
politicians head on.

Posted by Linda | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:46 pm UTC

Party of death? If that's the case, then Catholocism is the religion of death.
Crusades anyone? What about the inquisition? Good times.

Posted by Jonathan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:49 pm UTC

When we compare war and abortion and say that they are equally evil we make a
huge mistake.

During the American Civil War hundreds of thousands gave their lives and over
a million were maimed in order to uphold the "inalienable" right to Liberty. I
don't hear anyone now saying that was a wrong war or that it should not have
taken place.

LIFE is another and more BASIC "inalienable” right. Not speaking against it we
become complicit in its evil and our own hands become soiled with the blood of
the “innocent” who are being slaughtered daily right in their own mothers'
wombs.

Why have we hardened our hearts to the plight of the most innocent and
defenseless in our society? Are we silent or indifferent only because we can’t
hear their cry? They do cry and their blood cries out to God.

Posted by Marie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:50 pm UTC

Zionist? What? Ahmadinejad has openly declared that Israel must be destroyed.
Besides, isn't Zionist sort of anti-semetic? I suppose now African Americans
are going to take over the world too and "kill whitey?" Or maybe those darn
irish people will flood the world with beer and end all civilization. Will
American Indians engage in depravity against the civilized man from their
reservations? Ok…

"Oh, I see.

The Republican party’s willingness to wage _nuclear_ warfare against Iran in
violation of Iran’s legal right to pursue uranium enrichment for peaceful
purposes (and based upon the Zionist calumny that Ahmadinejad has stated that
the Israel ’should be removed from the map’) signifies that the Republican
party is the party of LIFE.

-Michael Cecil"

Posted by Jack | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:51 pm UTC

I haven't read all the comments completely, but I would ask each side to be
respectful of the other. After all, Joe Biden said in the debate last night
that he respected the motives of all people, even those he disagreed with.

The Catholic Church has consistently opposed abortion. The debate about the
beginning of life is a biological debate; even before science proved that life
begins at conception, the Church opposed abortion. If you believe that
abortion is the taking of an innocent life, are you not obliged to stand for
life? Some people believed that black people from Africa were not human. Did
the liberals of the day say, "I believe that they are human, but I won't
interfere with your right to have slaves." No. They opposed slavery and
imposed their will on others.

What kind of person believes that innocent children are being slaughtered but
refuses to speak up? A person who is afraid. A person misled by the false
values of our society. A person who can not tell the difference between
beliefs that are strictly religious and beliefs that derive from the laws of
nature and of Nature's God. (See the Declaration of Independence.) I feel
sorry for Joe Biden. He is confused and perhaps fearful of standing for truth.

Let's pray for those who can't see the truth -- that their eyes will be
opened.

Posted by Terry Miller | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:52 pm UTC

Why doesn't the Catholic Church mind its own business. The clergy can't even
say a mass the same way from one parish to another, state to state, country to
country, just one of the messes they have created. Archbishop Burke needs to
watch his comments. They are not very appropriate despite his beliefs. I
suggest the church, since it is anti-abortion, agree to pay for all of the
children who are born rather than aborted. Are they willing to do that? If
every woman agrees to have their child, will the church pay for its care for
life? Until they are ready to do this, then they need to stick with cleaning
up their own internal messes.

Thank you.

Sam

Posted by sam | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:54 pm UTC

I am a life long catholic and I could not disagree more about this issue.

You look at one party- the republicans that has always ignored the Vatican's
calls for peace.

I will tell you how republicans are really the party of death.

They are against helping genocide like the one that is happening in Darfur

They themselves start unnecessary wars killing thousands of people and let
thousands of Americna soldiers die in a vain mission.

The Republicans have caused more death in the world than the democrats.
Period.

Posted by Isaac C | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:54 pm UTC

It's quite ironic how democrats are open to abortion but opposed to the death
penalty. From the outside looking in, it looks like they've already sentenced
these innocent children to death for a crime they didn't commit. I would much
rather put to death an accused criminal rather than an unborn baby. I choose
life, therefore I choose the Republican Party.

Posted by Grant McMillan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:57 pm UTC

War is a completely different issue than abortion. As for Pelosi/Biden saying
they can not push their views on others………that's just plain crap.

Every individual that is of a religious faith and is a true believer is guided
by their faith. All decisions they must tackle are dictated by their beliefs.
Your morla character and religious faith defines your life and how it is
lived…..PERIOD!!

Posted by Susan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:59 pm UTC

I wonder what would happen if an active pro-abortionist doctor dies, and
stands before the Creator. And the Creator says to him:" You are not deaf, nor
blind nor illiterate nor dyslexic. So, tell me why you thought killing unborn
babies is fine? My bible is very clear that its wrong, My commandments too,
and all of the ministers too?"  
The culprit, a Dem, can be expected to try to avoid culpability; Pelosi said
so, or Reid, womens rights etc etc.  
The Creator would give short shrift to such lame excuses. "So you rate Pelosi
etc on a par with me? I don't think so! I'll deal with them in due course. As
for women's rights, I sent the babies. My wishes override any human rights.
Right now, its you on trial. You've committed the cardinal sin of the
coldblooded murder of innocent babies. Not once, but repeatedly. For that you
have to go downstairs for eternity, I'm sorry to say. Take him down!"
Interesting.  
Wonder what Pelosi would say when her turn arrives?

Posted by Jackj | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

5:59 pm UTC

Well, the Vatican Officials "hit the nail directly on the head" when they
deemed the US Democratic Party as the Party of Death!

It is one thing to quietly believe in the right to kill the unborn without
condescension to alternate opinions/beliefs. However, to overtly spew
condemnation, rant, rave and begrudge the life of a little baby boy because
the US VP Candidate chose "Life" for her "Downs Syndrome Baby" is the most
wicked, vile, despicable, loathsome attitude known to man.

This little boy is no threat nor burden to these demented Democrats. The fact
that they would deny him "LIFE" post "BIRTH" is the lowest form of mental
criminality.

GET THIS……..Unfortunately, this little baby boy will grow up only to
eventually read that these extreme, mental indigents regarded his life
superfluous, thus, felt he should never have had the chance to live at all!!!
WHO and WHAT are you vicious freaks??? May God forgive you all!

Amen to the Vatican Officials and their intuitive insight into the venomous
mentality of the US Democrat.

Posted by Axel | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:00 pm UTC

The Democrats are the party of death. The war in Iraq is a task from God. Get
over it.

Posted by BlueMax372 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:01 pm UTC

Abortion IS being singled out as the greatest evil of this time…and for good
reason. In this country alone, almost 50,000,000 (50 million) future citizen's
lives have been terminated before they have had a chance to choose for
themselves. Worldwide, the numbers approach the 1,000,000,000 (billion) mark.
This is an evil beyond imagination!

This does not sanction war, poverty, crime, the death penalty…etc. They are
also great evils…however, if taken in their totality do not compare to the
evil of abortion.

Let's spend the money being utilized to snuff the innocent on the women who
feel they don't have a choice and provide them with a happier option than
feeling their 'only way out' is to kill their unborn baby.

Posted by Chris G | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:03 pm UTC

The comment "Regardless of one’s religious views on abortion, it is unethical
to legislate your religion on others." is a ill-conceived (s'cuze the pun)
idea.  
This is not 'unethical.'  
Every law is 'religious' in that it imposes a penalty based upon a set of
values/views/beliefs that a group of people have about right or wrong.  
Rather than describing this as 'unethical' you might simply state your belief
that abortion does not really kill a living human. That would be better than
hiding behind the false argument of religious legislation.

Posted by Momma Teresa | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:03 pm UTC

Where was the vatican when JEWS were being slaughter right outside his window

Posted by Peter Tosh | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:05 pm UTC

I am a Democrat and a Catholic. I am pro-choice - how can that jive? I'll tell
you. I would never ever have an abortion and hope no one else does because it
is against God. But God gave us a choice, free will. He allows us to choose.
We glorify God by making the right choices. To disallow choice doesn't make us
better people, we would be unable to do the right thing in the face of a
choice between right and wrong. We would not be able to glorify God.

Posted by TS Mommy | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:12 pm UTC

Wonderful to finally hear a Church leader speak out.

Now if the NY Archdiocese would get some courage !

Maybe Edward "Cardinal" Egan could dis-invite the abortionists to his AL SMITH
Dinner.

Posted by William A. M. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:13 pm UTC

[…] "Democratic Party risked “transforming itself definitively into a party of
death…for misrepresenting Church teaching on abortion." […]

Posted by Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” |
Sex+Metropolis | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:15 pm UTC

Too bad the "Church's" teachings go so far beyond Christ's teachings that even
Christ would not recognize what is being done or said in his name.

Posted by JIM | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:17 pm UTC

For more than fifty years of my adult life, I have been an Evangelical
Christian. My relationship with the Lord had guided my life. Despite my
heartfelt and often-stated objections to abortion and homosexuality, my
Christian beliefs were challenged because I was a Democrat. I have had
statements made to me such as “come out from among them: or “you can't be like
Christ and be a Democrat”. I realize than many Godly pastors and Bible
teachers with good intentions and true sincerity have held ferociously to
their beliefs about Democrats for years. Some have pounded the pulpit claiming
that abortions in the United States started through actions by the Democrat
Party. This offends me greatly because it is simply not true. I have never
questioned anyone's own personal Christian relationship because of where they
worship or their political leanings. Now, for Democrats like myself who are
also Evangelicals, it is time to set the record straight.

A 1973 Supreme Court decision, Roe V. Wade, legalized abortion by a 7-2 vote.
Six of the seven Justices in the majority were Republican appointees. The only
Democrat appointee, Byron White, voted against Roe V. Wade.

In fact, in every year since 1969, the United States Supreme Court has been
controlled by a majority of Republican-appointed judges. There has not been a
Democrat-appointed Chief Justice since 1953.

Currently, there are seven Republican appointees and two nominated by
Democrats. Obviously, If the Republican majority has wanted to overturn Roe V.
Wade at any time since 1973, the had the votes to do so. Why haven't they?

In 2003, the United States Supreme Court in Lawrence V. Texas overturned a
Texas law against sodomy. Once again, in the 6-3 decision, four Republicans
voted to overturn the law.

Recently, the California Supreme Court overturned the State's ban on same sex
marriage. Six of the seven California judges were elected Republicans.

From 2000-2006, Republicans controlled both houses of Congress and the
Presidency. In 2006, the FDA approved an “over the counter” abortion drug
known as “Plan B”. The head of the FDA serves at the pleasure of President
Bush.

My point is clear. For religious leaders to continue to blame Democrats for
Republican actions is wrong.

Posted by Jim | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:20 pm UTC

Yes, a fetus is alive. So is yogurt. Let he who is without sin cast the first
stone.

Posted by Jason | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:21 pm UTC

Would TS Mommy recommend legalizing murder and rape, so that people have a
choice? I agree that we have free-will, and that is in part what makes
christianity's view of the World special, but one has to protect life as well.

Posted by Karl | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:22 pm UTC

I am sick of reading that no one has the right to impose their religious or
moral view on others. If one follows this line of reasoning then upon what
moral basis does one rely for denying advocates of depraved practices (such as
bestiality, cannibalism, sex with children, female circumcision, etc.)?  
There are moral absolutes. There is right & wrong, there is truth and
falsehood. Choose to rely upon the truth proclaimed by the God of the universe
in the bible and earnestly seek His will and your confusion will cease.

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:22 pm UTC

How could the Vatican and say anything about anyone. They have a long and rich
history of lies and deceit themselves. The ignorance and arrogance of these
people has proven them to be just as "evil" as they claim others are. Now in
2008 they are still speaking out against individuals who differ from them, not
learning at all from their biggest bout of ignorance regarding Galileo. Too
bad the allied forces in WW II didnt take out the Vatican along with the Third
Reich.

Posted by nick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:24 pm UTC

TS Mommy, you have excommunicated yourself by your implicit support of legal
abortion. Check the Catechism of the Catholic Church. Anyone who assists
someone in procuring an abortion is automatically excommunicated.

Posted by Pat L. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:25 pm UTC

Abortion can never be justified, because it is the direct intentional killing
of an innocent person.

War can be justified, say for example in defense. Note that the Church did not
consider either the Gulf War or the Iraq War as necessarily justified. In war,
to maintain justice, you must never iintentionally kill innocent bystanders.
This is the same as in the case of police activity: sometimes bystanders get
hurt. But that must never be the intention. This is also why it is never
allowed to kill ordinary prisoners of war.

In an abortion, the doctor actually intends the death of the child, and tears
his/her body limb from limb, without anaesthesia.

That is the difference between war and abortion. In war innocent people may
die accidentally, while in an abortion an innocent person is targeted for
destruction. Soldiers can be good, although some may not be. Abortionists
cannot be good.

The Church's teaching is very clear and concise and, I think, very convincing.

Posted by Glen B | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:25 pm UTC

I can't see a single Dem here who has actually defended baby murder.

Give it up already. Rejoin the human race.

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:29 pm UTC

Michael, not only is the comment not about your post you are ignorant enough
to believe that the Iranian Midget has the right to enrich uranium. This is a
man who will destroy the Jews as soon as he can. He has stated it time and
again. The Republican Part has not waged nuclear warfare against Iran. And if
anyone votes Democrat they can not be Catholic, they would be non believers.
The bible defines exactly when life starts. God said that all days are planned
out for you. This tells us that your life is planned before conception. So if
you vote Democrat it is simple, you keep in power the people that have passed
laws saying that Murder is ok. And Obama is the worst of the worst. He voted
to make sure that no medical help would be ok if the abortion was batched and
the life was outside the mom.

Posted by Alan P | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:29 pm UTC

In response to Dave's point, "Each person has a freedom of choice, and the
decision a pregnant woman has to struggle with about either having the baby or
having an abortion, or giving it up to adoption, or etc. that choice is hers
and hers alone."

Do you agree that there is a difference between "choice" and "right?" I have a
choice to kill the next person who comes in the room. Does that mean I have
the right as well?

In the end, I think our country's notion of freedom has changed from being
free to do the right thing to being free to do whatever you want.

Posted by Marty | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:31 pm UTC

If life occurs at conception then why does no federal organization recognize
this.  
The IRS doesn't  
The Census bureau doesn't  
Even your church doesn't as they don't perform funeral services when you have
a miscarriage…do they ?  
Do we celebrate the day of conception or the birthday ?

Posted by FB | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:32 pm UTC

The Church has condemned the current wars that the US is waging. Therefore
they are not being hypocritical. Also, the Church does state that some wars
are OK if they are necessary to prevent evil(WWII for example). Killing
innocent babies is never justified, and misrepresenting this position is a
terrible thing.  
As it says in the Bible: Tis better to have grindstone attached to your neck
and thrown into the sea than to lead the flock astray.

Posted by mike lew | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:35 pm UTC

For the record, I'm not Catholic, but I think John Paul II was right on the
money when he said:

"The Holy See insistently proclaims that the first and most fundamental of all
human rights is the right to life, and that when this right is denied all
other rights are threatened. The assumption that abortion and euthanasia are
human rights deserving legislative sanction is seen by the Holy See as a
contradiction which amounts to a denial of the human dignity and freedom which
the law is supposed to protect. A society will be judged on the basis of how
it treats its weakest members; and among the most vulnerable are surely the
unborn and the dying. A materialistic view of the human person will concede
little value and dignity to either. What is then claimed as a victory for
human rights is really the sanctioning of a freedom sundered from truth. In
the end, that is no freedom at all but a descent into arbitrariness and the
dominion of the strong over the weak."

Posted by Miami Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:35 pm UTC

"Why doesn’t the Catholic Church mind its own business…Archbishop Burke needs
to watch his comments. They are not very appropriate despite his beliefs. I
suggest the church, since it is anti-abortion, agree to pay for all of the
children who are born rather than aborted. Are they willing to do that?" -Sam

Sam, there are resources out there for fathers of aborted children.

http://www.fatherhoodforever.org/

Posted by Tom H. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:35 pm UTC

May we all recognize that through the saving grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we
are forgiven. I think all of us should look in the mirror and recognize that
we are sinful. The Lord commands us to rebuke sin. The Bible is filled with
recognition of life at conception. The Lord knows us, we are born in sin and
that includes our politicians. We need to pray for them and ask the Lord to
turn them from the sin of abortion. If they don't, they will stand before the
Almighty and have to given an account as to why they did not believe in God's
word and follow his commands. If they don't repent and confess Jesus as Lord
then they will be doomed to everlasting destruction. I pray that we all heed
the warnings of Jesus and come to Him. I suggest that you read Romans and
learn from it - God speaks to us - all of us people in authority and under
authority. Woe to those who dismiss the God of the Bible and refuse to believe
in his authority as sovereign Lord!

Posted by Solomon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:37 pm UTC

DOES DEAD SPERM AND DEAD EGG MEET TO MAKE A DEAD BABY,  
NO, I DON'T THINK SO. AS SOON AS THEY CONNECT, A LIVE  
LIFE IS FORMED. HAVEN'T YOU EVER SEEN AN ULTRA SOUND?  
DEMOCRATS ARE TRYING TO CHANGE THE NAME OF ABORTION TO  
WOMAN'S PRIVACY ETC. ALSO, PELOSI AND BIDEN HAVE EVERY  
RIGHT TO BE DENIED COMMUNION.HENRY HYDE WAS ALWAYS PRO-  
LIFE AND GOT ELECTED EVERY TIME HE RAN. GET YOUR HEAD  
OUT OF……………………………………..

Posted by m. sartore | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:38 pm UTC

It's funny how the Catholic Church does not say how Republicans are FOR
Capital Punishment! A life is a life and nobody is "for" abortion but in time
of rape, incest, or the mother's life is on the line they may be a need for
it. Also if abortion is made illegal in the States backshops with unlicensed
or revoked licensed doctors would be endangering our wives and daughters for
unsafe medical procedures. I am all for trying to keep a child but there
should be more counseling and adoptions to help women make a very, very
difficult decision. Finally, to all the expected posters that would say well
an unborn child is innocent whereas a death row inmate is guilty, remember
there are many on death row wrongly imprisoned, an unwanted born child has a
higher risk to committing crimes. If you are pro-life who are you to decide on
who lives or dies, by the very statement that you are pro-life you are
therefore for ALL life, otherwise you are playing God in who lives and dies!

Posted by Dan Carnevale | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:44 pm UTC

THIS is the real issue:

The Democrat Party will 100% endorse and support state-funded abortion…they
have no qualms of allowing babies, who have done NOTHING to harm anyone since
they aren't even born yet, to be killed…however, they OPPOSE the death
penalty, for adults who made the decision to take human life for their own
selfish ends…with the Democrats, troublemakers are victims…this is the result
of that party being taken over by leftists, who are founded in cultural
marxism and moral relativism…look at what socialists have done to Europe,
where the "natives" of several nations can't even replace their own dying
citizens, due to low birthrates and most likely, abortions. I do not want to
see the USA down that path…

Posted by Kirk | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:45 pm UTC

There is no question that life, a totally separate life, begins at the moment
of fertilization; or rather, mitosis commences. At that point, an organism
with completely unique DNA exists and is replicating. Do deny that it is alive
is contrary to fact. The question is, does the organism have a human soul at
this point, not is it alive… This can be argued any number of ways, but
abortionist liberals err by not choosing the action that exterminates humanity
(if it exists) rather than preserves humanity (if it exists). Of course,
liberals are largely atheistic anyway, which is their true justification for
discarding human life – they do not acknowledge any soul or spark of divinity
within humans. Which, finally, explains why liberals have such a significantly
lower self-image than conservatives do. They consider themselves (and everyone
else) essentially valueless. This is why liberalism, the modern face of
socialism, is such a base and disgusting philosophy; it is, as the Bishop
says, a philosophy of death.

Posted by Gary M | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:50 pm UTC

For all those that are pro-choice, do you agree that 1. If a woman that is
pregnant, and she chooses to smoke drugs during pregnancy and deliver a crack
baby, that society should say nothing, after all its her body? 2. If someone
decides to kick a pregnant women in the belly until the fetus is dead, is that
also just the womans body and therefore the equivalent of kicking her in the
leg? I believe that the pro-choice position, is not only wrong morally, but
also illogical. Kudos to the Catholic church!

Posted by Karl | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:56 pm UTC

Everyone is free to choose their religion, if I remember correctly. If you
want to be a Catholic, follow Church doctrine and don't dispute it. The Church
is not a democracy.

If you don't like it, go find yourself another Church that supports your moral
philosophy, or become an atheist. And stop criticizing other peoples' faith.

It's so simple that I don't understand what the big deal is about.

Posted by Aileen | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

6:57 pm UTC

The bishop is right on. It's just too bad that the Vatican doesn't speak out
about the pervasive spread of socialism (the bailout) in the U.S., which is
nearly as damaging as the lack of regard for human life. Maybe when the
economy gets bad enough and their donations dry up, they will realize that it
is the free market that is the most moral economic plan.

Posted by FL Libertarian | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:02 pm UTC

Its about time someone stood up to the fools in the deomcattic party. I use to
be a democrate and I left the party because of their support for
homosexuality, and late term abortion. People have a choice when they are
having sex, and they should use protection, and that way they can stop
unwanted pregnancies before conception. Democrates think they are above God
and Country but they are not. Judgement will come to them sometime.  
Dr Ryan

Posted by Jack Ryan (Dr) | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:02 pm UTC

The soul enters the body at the moment of the first BREATH - that's when a
HUMAN BEING's LIFE begins!

A human species FETUS is not a human BEING!

Read about how God gives LIFE through the use of HIS BREATH in the Bible!

Posted by St. Paul | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:09 pm UTC

Right on Bishop!

The truth is the truth is the truth…

The Church has always and will always pray for the entire world and the
salvation of everyone.

Abortion is ALWAYS wrong!!!  
May God have mercy on us for allowing it.

Posted by Vic | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:12 pm UTC

Its simple people.Some mistakes you cant turn around and fix.Getting pregnant
you can obviously fix in the eyes of pro-choice.No ONE is held responsable for
there actions anymore.IF YOU DONT WANT TO GET PREGNANT DONT HAVE SEX!Its that
simple.Catholics are blaming dems because they stand for every thing the
church is against.Boohoo poor Dems (get some morales)

Posted by realtruth | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:15 pm UTC

Every living animal on this planet has a heart beat.Wouldnt it make sense that
when the baby has a heart beat it is alive?

Posted by realtruth | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:20 pm UTC

I cannot believe that anyone tries to justify abortion - there is no
justification. Do not make the mistake of bringing in anything else about war,
or what the Church has done in the past - it does not matter - 2 wrongs do not
make a right. Abortion is still wrong - period. A women does not have a choice
- God places a soul in a baby upon conception, who are we to interfere? How
can anyone abort a child - why, because it is not convenient, timing is wrong?
There are so many who want to adopt, give the baby a chance at life. Who will
stand up for the rights of Baby's? Pro-life does.  
I am proud to be a Catholic - here is a church that is taking a stand. Has the
Church made mistakes - yes. Does that mean that it cannot stand up and take a
stand against Abortion - NO!

Posted by Pat | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:20 pm UTC

Amen Archbisop Burke, as a recent convert to Roman Catholisism, I am
encouraged and affirmed in my decision to join The Church when its leaders
make a principled stand.

Posted by Reasoned | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:27 pm UTC

Bishops are right. Christianity protects life and forbids murder. You either
have pie or eat pie, you are either a Christian and protect innocent life or
you murder for your own convenience in which case you are not a Christian.

Posted by Margaret | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:28 pm UTC

I applaud the Archbishop for his stand against what Pelosi and Biden have
stated. But what good does it do when these people are so high up in the
government that they dare not change their position on anything. That would
require being humble and that is not in either one of them. Minus some
conservative Democrats, the Democratic Party IS the party of death. Look what
they've done to our economy with this scam bailout. There wasn't any need for
a bailout. What is was, was the representatives who've blocked regulations on
Freddie/Fannie wouldn't do anything about these two failures until they were
bankrupt. Democrats and management in general cannot allow themselves to admit
fault or that what they said do was a bad idea and it caused a failure. The
higher up the ranks a person goes the less they can admit fault. Until they
finally reach the top of their profession where the damage they cause by not
being able to admit fault causes the loss of livlyhoods for thousands of
people under their control. The church has always taught being humble is not
to be feared, and will not cause loss of respect from people. But evil teaches
these people in high positions, that if they admit fault they cannot stay
aloft above the people you control. Admitting fault makes people equal and
people in high positions believe they are not equal with anyone except those
in the same position they are in, and even then some will pick apart what
those equal to them do and say trying to make them look bad and themselves
good. To us those that do that are bad as well, but they do not believe that
about themselves only about others. Archbishop Burke puts it right in that
taking a position supporting abortion is wrong, and when these people who've
made their careers passing the blame onto others, don't face the facts about
killing the unborn as murder but rather attack those who state that, are in
danger of damnation. The story of Jesus' life tells us that when he was at a
town and the children came running up to Him, the adults tried to shoo them
away. Jesus said not to do that, but to "suffer the little children to come
unto me, for those who deny me to them, I will deny you to my Father." Pelosi
and Biden need that read to them, for if you kill the little children, you do
that unto him who is the Father. The Democrats need a serious humbling to take
place. Their hearts may be in somewhat of a good place about wanting to take
care of those who can't take care of themselves, but when they promote
abortion as a way to lighten the burden on the poor, is not only ignorant, but
influencing people to commit sin themselves as those who talk them into
sinning.

Posted by WillofLa | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:33 pm UTC

It seems the angry left misses three points:

One, the Bishop did not say the Republicans were an approved party by the
Catholic church. He was speaking to several specific positions that the
Democratic Party supports. If you recall the Catholic church has been
repeatedly critical of the Bush adminisration for the war in Iraq.

Two: To read the commandment "thou shalt not kill…" in it's original language
you will find that it says more accurately "Commit no murder" a very specific
reference to premeditated murder. After the commandments were given God told
Israel to go to war. It's one thing to quote a verse (in English). It's
another thing to UNDERSTAND what it means.

Three: The scripture "Judge not…" refers to pronouncing a person damned to
hell. We are called to mercy, but we are not called to ignor evil and sin.
You're allowed to point out someones sins so that they might repent of them.
Lord knows we all have them, so don't get so angry when someone points them
out. If someone says "go to hell" well that's another story. That is what the
"judge not" scripture is addressing.

Posted by DL of Mif | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:34 pm UTC

AS A NON PRACTICING CATHOLIC, I THINK THE CATHLOIC CHURCH HAS LOST IT'S
MARBLES. THE OLD BOYS CLUB LOST IT'S CREDABILITY FOR MORALS AND ETHICS NOT
LONG AGO

Posted by DAVE ROY | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:35 pm UTC

Dave,  
Wow until I read your letter, I never would have thought  
that it wasn't my responsibility for producing three children to provide for
their needs.  
Wow, it is people like you that propogate all of these  
women who keep having children all the while knowing that  
they are not going to be the ones providing for them, but it is I, the
taxpayer, who will pick up the bill,  
because of all of the stupidity of people like yourself.

Posted by Sharon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:38 pm UTC

You gotta find it funny how Priest who have never been in that position let
alone a relationship or have a family e.g single mother etc can judge someone
who has?

Was it not Jesus who said  
"Let them who have not sinned cast the first stone?"

The church's history is full of sin so they should stop interfering with the
US political system.

Posted by fisherman27 | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:45 pm UTC

Wow, it is people like you that propogate all of these  
women who keep having children all the while knowing that  
they are not going to be the ones providing for them, but it is I, the
taxpayer, who will pick up the bill,  
because of all of the stupidity of people like yourself.  
- Posted by Sharon 

That's the problem with socialism, if you work 2 jobs or never work you still
end up poor, so why bother?

Posted by john | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:48 pm UTC

It is a fact that George Washington died a Catholic. It is a fact that
Washington was a advocatestudent in the writings of St. Robert Bellarnine and
St. Thomas Aquinas (Catholic Saints), specifically on political philosophy. It
is a fact George Washington, James Madison, and other "Founding Fathers" used
the ideasconcepts of these "religious people" to form this great republic.
Thomas Jefferson included concepts of these Saints in the writing of
Declaration of Independence. It is a fact that George Washington had a bible
in his possession when on the Senate Floor. It is a fact that the President of
the United States is sworn into the office with his hand on a bible. It is a
fact that this country that you love so much is built on the foundation of
religious ideas. If you remove them, the foundation will eventually fall. I
love my country and I love my religion (Catholic). You can't define good and
evil without it. Abortion is evil. PERIOD. It is a fact that George Washington
loved this country and would not believe how backwards it has became, and that
is the facts. So for all you pro-abortion advocates and atheist…Stick that in
your pipe and smoke it.

Posted by Stephen | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:50 pm UTC

"Fetus" is just a given name for the early stage of developpment. Fetus is a
human being not yet fully developped, the same way as the "newborn" or "baby"
is in our lexicon not yet a fully developped child, and a "child" is not yet a
fully developped man or a woman. The unborn panda is as small as a bean, yet
it is still a panda and we await panda's birth from beginning of pregnancy.

Posted by Margaret | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:50 pm UTC

Archbishop Burke, like so many in the Church Hierarchy, ignores the Churches
own teachings when it comes to the definition of pro-life. Pope John Paul II
stated that, and this is not exact as I did not look it up, to be pro-life one
must reject the violence of abortion. One must reject the violence of the
death penalty. One must reject the violence of poverty.

He was quite eloquent on it. The bottom line is that the Republican Party is
no more pro-life than the Democrats, they are just anti-abortion. Both parties
have a long way to go. Executing prisoners and dropping cluster bombs and
missals on villages is taking life as surely as abortion.

The Church needs to stay out of politics and try and re-establish the moral
authority it squandered in scandal. This is not helpful.

Posted by Dean | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:50 pm UTC

As an athiest I strongly support the Catholic church on this. Science
indicates that at conception the single cell has the genetic plan necessary to
form a human being enclosed within a single membrane. Fed and protected it
will become an adult, just like a new born or a toddler will become an adult
if fed and protected.

Posted by me | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:51 pm UTC

Wow, Mr. Cecil. It amazes me how people like you can still, in this day and
age, get away with such blatant anti-semitism. You write: "and based upon the
Zionist calumny that Ahmadinejad has stated that the Israel ’should be removed
from the map". Are you for real? The "Zionist calumny"? So you're telling me
that Israel made up Ahmadinejad's comments about wiping Israel off the map?
He's on record saying that himself! Go look it up. It's an undeniable fact.  
And, in regard to Republicans being the party of LIFE. That is absolutely
true. The fact that republicans want to defend the United States against a
real, demonstrable threat, one that has already claimed nearly 3,000 lives in
a single attack alone, does not negate their position on defending life. The
difference is, in general, the philosophy of conservatives is to defend
innocent life while the philosophy of liberals is to defend the guilty, the
depraved and the immoral, though of course, they would never admit it.

Posted by Jon Jones | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:57 pm UTC

Its about time. I've always felt that its the job of all clergy to speak out
forcefully on these matters. Right is right, and wrong is wrong, and the
democrat party is wrong on everything important.

Posted by james | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

7:58 pm UTC

"Thou shall not murder" is what the word used in Hebrew means, not kill. Are
you truly trying to say there is no difference between a soldier killing to
defend his country, and a 'doctor' and woman aborting an innocent baby? Even
if a soldier accidentally kills a baby in a battle, there is a difference,
because of intent. Abortion is a targeted killing of an innocent baby. Very
similar to a terrrorist's targeting of innocent children. Of course, I notice
that those who support abortion, also tend to put a moral equivalence on
terrorists, so it doesn't surprise me that you would try to call American
soldiers murderers, while never admitting that an abortion has killed a human
being. You are doing the will of our enemies, Osama himself couldn't hope to
murder 30 million American children, yet we have done it to ourselves with
abortions, all supported by fellow travelers of those who hate this country.

Posted by Joe Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:03 pm UTC

Horay Vatican. the Catholic Church is soooo awesome. Just look at all of the
virtue and good it has done down thru the centuries to people through it's
saints. And this is yet one more example. When it comes time to make an
accounting for abortion in society as the Germans had to for their war against
the Jews, will anyone remember our voices? That we did cry out for the
innocent and helpless victims of abortion?

Posted by paula hall | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:04 pm UTC

How can those of you compare fighting a war with killing innocent BABIES?

You are the ones that make the Democrat Party DANGEROUS!!!!

Posted by MaverickCoast | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:06 pm UTC

Who cares about a Raymond Burke?? People like him sickens me.

Catholic Church which stood by and encouraged thousands of child abuses over
the years has no moral compass to talk about anything. This is another ploy
from Burke and his cronies to collect more money from Catholics to pay for
their sins.

What a disgusting bunch of people these clowns are..

Posted by Jim from OC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:11 pm UTC

" Vatican Supreme Court Prefect Attacks Biden and Pelosi"

Is That All That Bishop Burke finds About The CHURCH Teachings ?? Just
ABORTION??? How About SATANIC Bush International MASS MURDERER???

Posted by Leon Bernotas | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:14 pm UTC

it is amazing how they want us to have children … but let the strave around
the world …they could take some of the gold they have decorating the vatican
and trade it for food … and it also a wonder to me how they can say have these
children , i guess so they can molest them all

Posted by derrick corley | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:15 pm UTC

Not legislate religion? In that case, my religion states "thou shall not
committ murder", I guess we should scratch all laws against murder. Same with
stealing and other laws based on Judeo-Christian beliefs. Let's have a world
laws, because most have some basis in religion.

Posted by Dave F | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:15 pm UTC

I applaud the Catholic Church for speaking up to protect innocent life. When
our political leaders, and pseudo Catholic leaders, seek to mislead and flat
our lie, the Church must stand up and set the record straight. This is not
politics by the Church, but standing up for the principles it believes in,
especially when others seek to distort them. For those who criticize the
Church, so be it, enjoy. However, that does not take away from the fact that
the Church should be, and properly is, standing up for the rights of innocent,
unborn life. Thank you Catholic Church, and we along with other Christians
(and Jews) will do our part to support unborn, innocent life come election
day!

Posted by Rick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:18 pm UTC

For me it comes down to the fact that the democrats think it is morally
acceptable to allow partial birth abortions - you know those - the ones where
they crush the skull of the fetus and suck out the brain. Where are their
brains?

Posted by WalesJames | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:19 pm UTC

Michael, Bella Logosi & Joe Bidden were telling people how the Catholic Church
interprets life & when it begins. The only problem is, that they were
completely wrong about their interpretation. It's ok to be wrong about
something as long as when you fine out you were wrong admit it. Of course
that's not a democrat trait. Your dough may still be quite soggy.  
Norman

Posted by NORMAN PAZOL | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:19 pm UTC

Archbishop Burke should be Pope, so that we can have outspoken leadership on
important moral issues. Pope Benedict seems to be a great guy, but I don't see
strong, outspoken leadership emanating from him on this issue and many others.
Why are most of the American Bishops silent? Where is their leadership? The
only issue that I hear them leading on is encouraging people to violate the
immigration laws of the United States of America. And why do most of them seem
inclined to favor the immoral, socialistic, Democrat "party of death"?

Posted by Tom | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:22 pm UTC

To Michael Cecil,

A direct quote cannot be a calumny. To quote Ahmadinejad himself:

"The skirmishes in the occupied land are part of a war of destiny. The outcome
of hundreds of years of war will be defined in Palestinian land. As the Imam
said, Israel must be wiped off the map."

As to your reference to "hundreds of thousands of Christian fetuses in the
United States", this grossly understates the tragedy. There have been nearly
50 million abortions in the United States since the Roe vs Wade decision.

Posted by Marc Sulfridge | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:25 pm UTC

creeps like burke will not only hand communion to known child molesting
priests but will also stand on the same altar and believe that a child
molester priest has the power to change bread and wine into the body and blood
of Christ. in fact given the huge number of child molesters and child molester
appeasers in the current catholic church it's likely been rare that communion
has been served to anyone (as I doubt God would grant the powers of
consecration to such disturbed individuals)

Posted by Orenthal James | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:27 pm UTC

A few quick (hopefully) points:

1) The term "Catholic" means universal. Universal means everywhere and
throughout time. Therefore, the Catholic Church is going to maintain a
consistent set of beliefs. Many people on this thread are going to spout off a
number of errant statements of how the Church has changed its doctrines. Fine,
but history has ways of being contorted by its current authors (Howard Zinn,
anyone?). The Church has always maintained the evil of any abortion, and has
always taught the virtue of chastity. A Catholic who disagrees with the Church
on the issues of abortion and chastity has therefore broken with the
consistent teaching of the Church. They therefore cease to be Catholic and
cannot recieve the Eucharist. With repentance and penance, they can enter back
into the fold.

2) The role of a Bishop is to be the chief teacher of the faith in a
particular locality. In this capacity, a Bishop has the duty to correct and
warn those under his care of their spiritual state: to do so is considered an
act of Spiritual Mercy. When a prominent person publically mis-represents the
faith, it is the Bishop's duty to correct them. Likewise, when a person
associated with a particular organization (say a sports team) speaks
incorrectly, their supervisor must correct them. That is how it works.

3) The Democratic Party is mentioned simply for two reasons: both its primary
candidates are ardent supporters of abortion and embryonic stem-cell research,
and during its Convention, it modified its platform from having abortion be
safe, legal, and rare, to being safe and legal. Plus, its primary spokesman
had taken public steps to ensure that he not only supported all abortion, but
he would also allow an innocent baby who survived abortion to be killed merely
because that baby represented a threat to abortion. Thus, the party publically
established itself in stark contrast with the teachings of the Church.

4) The Church has the right to preach on moral issues during an election year
and still remain tax exempt. Religious institutions are allowed to preach on
the various issues, inform people of candidate's stances on the issues,
register voters, and encourage people to vote. The Catholic Church has never
endorsed (nor ardently opposed) any specific candidate by name. Archbishop
Burke's comments were actually quite legal: he never endorsed any candidate
(nor does he oppose Obama in his comment). Quite simply, he states the truth
that in relation to Church teaching, the Democratic party is moving
considerably farther away from respecting and promoting life.

Posted by mrteachersir | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:31 pm UTC

Dear OJ,

I understand your anger at the wrongs committed by the church in the past.
Does this really undermine the Truth that the church represents though? Can
the faults of human beings ever truly damage the perfection of creation?  
Answer Key: No, NO.

Posted by WalesJames | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:32 pm UTC

Thank you, Archbishop Burke, for standing up for truth. No other argument or
issue matters if we do not have the opportunity to take that first breath once
we have been conceived. He is not "imposing his religion:" he is PROPOSING
truth. We must stand up for "the least of our brethren," those who have no
chance to speak for themselves. Those who believe otherwise have lost their
way, and since those words are in the Democratic platform, they deserve each
other: the lost and the Democrats.

Posted by Catherine K. | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:34 pm UTC

Regrettably, today politicians from both parties, such as Nancy Pelosi, Joe
Bidden, Rudy Giuliani, Ed Kennedy, Newt Gingrich, John Kerry, and many others
claim to be Catholics, when in fact by their actions they live outside of the
Catholic Church. We shouldn’t expect that church would change just to
accommodate us. It looks rather that politicians want to use religion for
political gains. Barrack Obama obviously chose Joe Bidden, as his running mate
to influence Catholic vote. In reality, that action did not produce effect he
desired. In US, unlike Saudi Arabia, Pakistan or Iran we live in the society,
with many religions flourishing in harmony, therefore we have almost unlimited
choices, and we may pick religion that fits our beliefs and values.

Posted by Waclaw Borcz | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:34 pm UTC

I am a convert and to this day I have never understood how people can
criticize any church, let alone the Catholic Church, which is the oldest, and
that almost all other christain churches, have things in their liturgy and
creed taken from the Catholic Church. To blaspheme against any Christain
church is unforgiveable. All of you who have put forth your criticism with
such vehemence, obviously know absolutely nothing about the church, its
history, or its teaching! It is made of human beings, just like you and me.
Human beings make all kinds of mistakes and often err, so why would you think
that the Catholic Church or any other church would not make mistakes,
especially when it goes back to the 1st century? It seems to me that a lot of
you have nothing else to do but spew out rotten rhetoric, which is harmful to
you and to anyone else who reads it! It is a terrible thing to be so hateful
and infect everyone else with it! The bishops and the priests teach us to pray
for people like you. I will try, but it is very difficult, especially when you
seem to think that it is okay to murder a helpless small human with every
physical attribute that you, yourself have. As far as having a Downs Syndrome
child I have known them to be very loving,  
and capable of much more than people often think they are. To most families
who have chosen to have them, they are a blessing!

Posted by Marilyn Morris | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:36 pm UTC

So many people can justifiy "Killing Inocent Life" It's so sad. They try to
justify it (abortion) by pointing out other bad behaviour. It sickens me. Wake
up you fools and re think your position.

Posted by Donald | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:37 pm UTC

Michael Cecil, how informed you are! You muist have the inside information
about US govt. plans to "wage nuclear war" against Iran, since no such plan
has ever been proposed or articulated by the Bush administration! Or were you
just making that up? And just because the Iranians, the world's foremost state
sponsors of international terroroism, who have all the energy resources they
need without nuclear power are enriching uranium to weapons grade, and vowing
to wipe Israel off the map, that's no reason for US intervene in their "right"
to develop nuclear technology, right? Given that Iran is a terrorist theocracy
bent on destroying the only relaible ally the US has in that region of the
world, and the "Obama-ssiah" would sit down and negotiate with these thugs and
murderers without preconditions, then that makes the Dumbo-craps some kind of
party of LIFE? Give it up jerk! You must be as stupid as you sound!

Posted by Dan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:39 pm UTC

I am a Catholic and I am pro-life. My thoughts are this:

Even though it is legal to have an abortion, it does NOT MANDATE that a woman
have an abortion. Do you see the difference? It's free will.

I believe it is our responsibility as Americans, as Christians, as Catholics
to educate people the best we can. Knowlegde is power.

I agree with the ones who wrote about God giving us free will. He will judge
us. I agree with the ones who wrote there needs to be better support systems
out there for these woman if we are going to make abortion illegal.

To some degree it doesn't matter if abortion is made illegal or stays legal
because either way, abortions will still happen. Murder still happens even
though it's illegal. Drug's still happen even through they are illegal and so
on. We need to keep straight what are GOD's laws and what are man made. Even
though American has abortion as legal it doesn't make it right in God's eyes.
We could take this to other topics such as pre-marital sex too which isn't
right in God's eyes. It could go on and on. So again, the judgement will come
down between God and that individual.

Sandi

Posted by Sandi | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:42 pm UTC

Comparing the lives of homicidal maniacs to an unborn children. Maybe Obama
was right "who should be cursed with such a thing?"

Posted by Former Democrat | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:45 pm UTC

The USA has never threatened nuclear war with Iran. But Iran has threatened
Israel and the whole western world with destruction. The hate America first
croud is at it again.

Posted by Joe Gerardi | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:46 pm UTC

There are so many things I would like to say but, having been brought up
Catholic, I know how tunnel-visioned Catholics are. However, I would just like
to point out that this so called Almighty God gave us the right to freewill.
He gave us the choice to do what we want, whether good or evil. Obviously if
we choose evil we will suffer the consequences, but we have the choice
nonetheless. These Democrats are not supporting abortion, they are supporting
the woman's right to choose what to do with her body. Someone can be against
abortion but pro-choice. The Catholic church (keep in mind that this is a male
run institution) has absolutely no right to say that a woman has no choice.
The more I see of the Catholic church the more I am disappointed in it. It is
one of the most hypocritical establishments in the history of man and I am
ashamed to have ever called myself a Catholic.

Posted by Kara | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:56 pm UTC

War is not part of the platform of the Republican party. No party has a
monopoly on the occasional use of military force. The Democrats, however, are
indeed the party which consistently endeavors to maintain a ruling by 5
unelected people, which has resulted in the deaths of 20 million of our fellow
Americans since 1972. Life begins at conception (science has proven this, and
the democrats are living in the dark ages.) Life should be protected. These
are not religous beliefs. They are scientific facts and universal,
humanitarian, beliefs.

Posted by L Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:56 pm UTC

So if the Republicans support abortion in the case of rape or incest does that
make the the "quasi party of death"?

What about capital punishment? I believe the church has a strong stance on
that as well, but do not see anyone being refused communion based on it.

We have "separation of church and state" for a reason in this country.

Posted by Wade | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

8:56 pm UTC

Nothing comes out when they move their lips but a bunch of jibberish..

If you like the Church scene good for you..If you don't, good for you too. But
why is it the bible thumpers that seem to take issue with non bible thumpers ?
is it a cult thing ? You are electing a president to run a country, of which
bible thumping issues represent a small fraction of the issues. yall bible
thumpers better start focusing on much more than abortion or else you won't
have a home to thump your bible..

Posted by natas | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:04 pm UTC

Mr. Cecil, you've exposed yourself as an anti-Semite. Ahmadinejad has said he
wants to wipe Israel off the face of the map. He also participated in a
conference denying that the Holocaust happened.

Posted by PB | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:06 pm UTC

It is time that people in America take a close look at this issue. Forty-two
million abortions and counting. Someone needs to speak for those who have no
voice. People need to take pause and reflect on this issue. The term silent
holocaust is appropriate. The issue should not be relegated to a democratic or
republican fault finding. We all as humans have been given the gift of life.
We must look at ourselves and answer the question. Why am I silent. Why do I
at least reflect on what abortion is; what types of abortions occur; what
happens when a aborted child is born alive and left to die. Slavery did not
find its way into the American conscience until the scars and wounds were seen
and people saw behind the word describing the issue directly into the depths
of inhumanity turned inward against itself.

Posted by johnm | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:07 pm UTC

Michael Cecil are you glad your Mother was Pro Life? Think about it!

Posted by Jim Blasko | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:08 pm UTC

Hey, I'm not a Catholic but I am totally with Archbishop Burke. FINALLY, the
Catholic Church is speaking out against EVIL - the MURDER of unborn children -
life.

GO ARCHBISHOP BURKE & THE CATHOLIC CHURCH!

You have the support of millions of Believers. Don't be timid about speaking
the truth and calling out immorality everywhere you see it.

PEOPLE ARE LOOKING FOR MORAL LEADERSHIP. PROVIDE IT!

Posted by Valerie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:08 pm UTC

This is about abortion which has killed over 40 Million children - that is
40,000,000.

You cannot compare this to the possibility of a response or preventative first
strike.

And what is worse, we have done this to our own people.

Posted by Steve | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:11 pm UTC

CATHOLIC CHURCH:

By the same token, speak out against the gross immorality of
sodomy/homosexuality.

Take a stand against all immorality, in word and deed.

Posted by Valerie | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:12 pm UTC

Hey Michael Cecil, The development of the Nuclear Bomb was started by FDR and
the decision to drop it on Japan was made by Truman….both Democrats. The only
current candidate openly talking about attacking another country is Nobama.
You really need to open your mind and check your facts.

Posted by Scott G | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:18 pm UTC

Good. I'm glad someone in the Catholic church is criticizing Biden and Pelosi.
I'm not a Catholic, but it sure seems like Biden and Pelosi do not uphold the
Catholic church's teachings. What hypocrites! I can't believe they still
consider themselves Catholics. I guess they're Cafeteria Catholics -- pick and
choose what you want to practice. Kind of like Liberals now that I think of
it.

Posted by Lauren | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:20 pm UTC

I doubt you have any figures to back that up. The secrets out, and it's not
likely that molesters are being harbored by the authorities anymore. The
church is simply policing up their image. If you had people from your
particular party/city/family/gang, saying things that didn't properly
represent the views of your group, you would likely want to correct them. As
for stopping war before stopping abortion, there will never be an end to war.
There will always be people willing to die for their beliefs. Am I right?

Posted by rick | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:21 pm UTC

All you pro choice murderers should have been aborted! Eh!

Posted by Anthony | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:26 pm UTC

Not fair! He should have said that the democratic part is "A" Party of Death
instead of "The" Party of Death. Of course the democratic is a party of death
and proud of it but there are many movements around the world that are just as
deadly. Diane Pediculosis and Joe Bidet are primarily Marxists instead of
Catholics and you know the Marxist slant on religion.

Posted by mec | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:29 pm UTC

I like how you guys talk about a nuclear war with Iran yet you guys believe
that it is ok to kill a child in the womb the war with Iran which we aren't
having right now has been provoked by Iran, we are being provoked right now so
if we do have one it will be their fault second of all it's better to strike
first then strike last

Posted by trey | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:37 pm UTC

When did abortion become only a matter of religion? The Pro-Life philosophy is
supported by catholic religious doctrine but is equally discovered using basic
human reason and philosophy. At best, Biden's "I won't impose" comments are a
cop-out; the beginning of a human life is not a question only of religion, but
of science and reason. And science supports the life-at-conception stance. At
worst, his comments are blasphemous - does he not believe in "truth" as taught
by his church?

Posted by Peter | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:38 pm UTC

Just another reason to separate from the Catholic Church because of the
hipocrasy. Among the many things I believe that have been taught to me in my
12 yrs of Catholic school are the sanctity of life - all life, to be a good
steward of the earth, to serve the poor and less fortunate, etc. I think these
values are most closely aligned with the Democratic Party.

The Democratic party is not forcing abortion on anyone - only preserving the
rights of the secular society. Abortion is a personal choice. And Roe v Wade
is a matter of privacy, not a support of killing a fetus. Imagine there is no
Roe v Wade and you've just had a miscarriage and your mother-in-law decided
that it was because you were regularly exercising and decided to bring charges
against you. Again, it's a matter of privacy.

Killing in war and the death penalty ARE state sponsored that are forced upon
our population. We pay taxes and they are using the monies that we pay to kill
those on death row and to fashion weaponry.

Posted by Cheryl | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:39 pm UTC

A soldier in war is carrying out his orders. I guess our police officers are
sinners too! Oh and don't forget that drink or two you have before you drive
you could kill someone, and all the grease you eat you're killing yourself and
don't go kayaking, swimming, hunting, fishing, sailing, skiing,sky diving,
bungee jumping, biking cause thats all risky behavior and someone could die.
I'm a catholic and I see the Churches and the Liberals view. People make this
abortion debate such a big thing. Abortion is a cover for someone making a
mistake. If they want an abortion go right ahead. One less low life in the
world!

Posted by Tony Fernandes | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

9:55 pm UTC

This guy Burke sounds like a right winger to me.

Posted by Danno | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:02 pm UTC

It's about time.

Posted by Alfred Riccomi | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:03 pm UTC

The founding fathers put the "establishment clause" in the Bill of Rights to
prevent a church from using secular power to shove its doctrines down our
throats. Despite that clause it took a couple of centuries to get rid of the
enforcement of church rules by he government. It wasn't all that long ago that
most stores could not be opened on Sunday, that you could be fined for mowing
your lawn on Sunday, etc.  
If a believer wants to follow the rules of his religion, that is fine, but the
government has no right to force me to follow them.  
It is even more disgusting that the the church of "Pedophile Central" has the
guts to preach to us. The church that did their best to keep pedophile priests
from jail. The church that gave Cardinal Law, one the most egregious protector
of pedophiles a wonderful position in Rome.  
I'll make a bet that if a cure for a disease is created using embryonic stem
cells, the priests and bishops that have that disease will line up to get the
cure.

Posted by Cathbad | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:06 pm UTC

70 million American Catholics ,if truly convicted of the tennants of their
faith, could change the barbaric nature of killing the defenseless unborn. How
can we expect God to bless America when we have laws that allow the killing of
the very life that he creates? How? Life is precious and fragile and
wonderful. People wait with arms open to embrace and love the unwanted child.
It is a great stain upon our nation.

Posted by Jack Reynolds | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:19 pm UTC

As a lifelong agnostic, I'd like to know why the pro-choice side assumes pro-
lifers object to abortion on religious grounds.

I have no clue if there's a God, or a herd of Gods, or a pantheon of revered
ancestors, or nothing, or whatever. I have no idea where the universe came
from or why we are here.

I did pay attention in sixth grade biology class, so I know when the lives of
nearly all animals begin, whether they are fish, rats, or people. Those lives
begin when cells contributed by parents merge to become new individuals.

Call it a fetus (latin for child or offspring) or whatever else you want, but
the simple, technical, religion-free fact is that it's a person.

That the person may be inconvenient for other persons does not change that
simple reality.

Posted by Mike Nowland | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:21 pm UTC

I had to stop reading the postings. So much hatred thinly veiled as commentary
or psudo-insights. Another alcoholic told me not to drink - because he drank
are his efforts invalid? Why isn't a voter or a country equally responsible
for the death of an innocent baby equal to the licensed doctor/murder? The
voter who contributes to political causes that destroy the inner city family
(great society) or a feckless government 'education' system that turns out
soulless dull imbecilic robots without a nodding acquaintance of the great
books - that voter must be held equally responsible. I have yet to hear anyone
who cashes a government paycheck be a man, stand up and take responsibility
for obscene failures in America. The fortune stolen from those who create
jobs, expand the tax base through personal, real risk and piddled away on
social engineering and frivolity is a national sin.

Posted by Chef David in NC | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:23 pm UTC

This is long over-due. We are one Supreme Court vote away from over-turning
Roe vs. Wade. While both parties will justifiably endorse war (Woodrow Wilson,
FDR, JFK & LBJ were all Democrats), only one party will nominate the type of
judge who will make this a reality.

Posted by Dan | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:27 pm UTC

NARAL is also a religion of a type with certain moral views as is Planned
Parenthood.

If one believes as Catholics do that man is a creature composed of body and
soul and made to the image and likeness of God that has certain consequences
for one's ethical outlook which in turn affects the way one looks at politics,
and candidates for public office.

The maddening thing about the likes of Pelosi,Giuliani, Biden and Kerry is
that they all maintain they are Catholics in good standing, particularly at
election time or when there is a papal visit, while all the time espousing
views that are identical with NARAL and Planned Parenthood.

It's o.k. to crush a viable baby's skull. It's o.k. to watch it die, if
despite one's best efforts she is born alive. It's o.k. to press for these
wonderful benefits for society. Dare I say posterity?

If abortion on demand is such a good thing then by all means argue for it, but
don't claim that what you are doing is consistent with Catholic belief.

The gospel according to John after all differs from that of John Stuart Mill.

If the practice of Catholicism becomes a crime in the USA these folks needn't
worry, there'll be no evidence to convict them.

If Roe v. Wade is overruled one day it will not be the end of abortion on
demand in the "enlightened states," but there will be many places in the USA
where people will choose to restrict it, democratically, acting through their
elected representatives.

Criminalization is not al that far fetched. In Massachusetts, Catholic
Charities which will not do "gay" adoptions is now out of the adoption
business.

So much for liberal 'tolerance.'

I feel a sense of loss for the old Democratic Party. My first political memory
is that of my mother and father and aunt staying up all night at the radio to
find out if Harry Truman won.

It was hard to leave the Democratic party, but Ronald Reagan was right. I
didn't leave it; it left me. I have great misgivings about the Bush version of
Republicanism ("41″ and "43")I despise the empire we've become.

But abortion is the litmus test for Democrats. It is their most important
issue; it defines what they stand for. You can be a heretic on economic issues
like Clinton but don't tread on abortion or gay marriage. Those are csacred
canons of the party.

Ah the unalienable rights espoused by our deist forefathers, who would
probably be regarded as papists today.

Endowed by the Creator with the unalienable right to life. That's really
strong stuff! But don't worry they no longer impose their religion on us.

Posted by Don Martin | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:34 pm UTC

To all the people that think abortion is a personal choice: You probably would
say that slavery is also a personal choice.

Posted by James Mon | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:41 pm UTC

Following the Dred Scott decision, it would have been common to hear Democrat
politicians stating that they personally believed blacks to be fully human and
deserving of freedom, but that they did not believe on imposing their beliefs
on others, or on taking away the property rights of slave-owners. The southern
states seceded from the Union in order to protect their slavery rights, and
the north, led by the first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln prosecuted a
war, eventually banishing legal slavery from the nation. Yes, the Democratic
party was the party that divided humans into full humans and less-than-humans
prior to the Civil War. From the beginning, the Republicans have been the
anti-slavery party, the party that believed that all humans were created by
God with equal rights that include Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of
Happiness. And the Democrats have not.

Roe v. Wade is the Dred Scott of the last 50 years. It is a horrible decision.
It takes a class of humans and defines them as less than human, promotes the
privacy "rights" of a different class of humans, and allows the second class
to deprive the first class of their right to life, guaranteed, among other
places, in the Declaration of Independence. This class warfare is reflected in
the Democratic economic, judicial, and other positions, amounting to a kind of
tribalism that divides the people of America into small, disparate, mutually
antagonistic tribes that are rendered powerless to unite and resist Democrats'
usurpation of power.

Political power is the be-all and end-all of the Democratic value system.
Divide and conquer, pitting mothers against their children, men against women,
young against old, rich against poor, military against civilian, employers
against the employed, those who work against those who suckle at the public
teat, and dark skinned people against light skinned people, is the tactic they
choose. Every single Democratic policy goal supports tribalism. Think about it
and you'll see I'm right.

Posted by Wolf Pangloss | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:50 pm UTC

The Church hasn't changed its position, as misstated by one of the mentioned
politicians. If the politician cannot abide by the Church's teachings, that
politician should be prinipled enough to leave the Church. Considering the
politicians mentioned, its no suprise that they lack the integretity to simply
leave the Church, they want the votes that are attached to their calling
themselves Catholic. They only go to mass when its election time for the photo
ops.

Posted by Joel Thomas | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:50 pm UTC

I think both parties don't care about abortion, otherwise it would be outlawed
by now !!!!!

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8A7tftOfL dg

Posted by rich | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:56 pm UTC

MR. Savage  
I am finishing up your book, "The Liberal mind…."  
I really connect with your books. I have to flip a page or two sometimes
because I don't like your rantings but I believe nearly every truth you bring
out. But you and all of the others who are talk radio caregivers do not have
any answers, with all due respect. You really don't understand the God you
talk about sometimes,either. I think you really believe in Him but you don't
know who he is. It would take a very long time for me to tell you of the
beauty in the Bible concerning the Jewish people and what God is doing in the
earth today. But I know that you really care about issues and people and on
those days that you are depressed your depression is real I will always listen
to you and Rush but I wish you would give somebody a break when they do
something that is pro-America and good for the people because you literally
have nothing good to say about anyone (The day you criticized Rush was a bad
day for me. My my) That is unless they are brain children. You are an
intellectual snob. But you could do worse. I don't judge you for that. I love
my children and they are "intellectual" One doctor, one personal health
fitness trainer, one seller of modular homes and a 24 year old teacher.  
I think so many times when I am listening to you that I would like to help you
to understand spiritual principles about our world. If you want me to I'll
begin to send you units of teaching starting with a timeline of creation and
God's will and purpose for us. I've taught it to women. It's actually simple
and I am concerned that your unregenerate(not a criticism; a bible truth) mind
will think it is complete foolishness. I am sincerely concerned about your
mental health  
One day I was listening to you and I thought, "This is a lonely, old man". I
felt compassion for you. Again, I believe everything you say but I don't like
the way you hurt some folks who call you and I would like to hear you say
something good about someone. I appreciate your mind. If you are happy with
your understanding of God then just file this somewhere. Mary Ann Colter

Posted by Mary Ann Colter | Report as abusive

Oct 3, 2008

10:56 pm UTC

If you found out tomorrow that your father raped your mother when she became
pregnant with you, would you wish you were dead?

Posted by Answers | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:00 pm UTC

The dems are automatically for any evil that comes along: abortion (over
40,000,000 murders so far), embryonic stem cell experimentation, sodomite
marriage. They were also the party that defended pornography back when it was
an issue - its not an issue anymore - they won that one too, condoms to the
kids, Suzie has two mommies in kindergarten etc etc the list goes on and on.
And many so called Catholics blindly follow whatever the party dictates
forgetting that we were baptized into  
Christ, not the democratic or republican party!

Posted by Joe Lombardo | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:02 pm UTC

I have but one thing to say…. What Would jesus Do! Love the sinner and hate
the sin! To deny access to communion or any other sacrament is NOT what Jesus
was/is about!

Posted by Roger | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:13 pm UTC

Of course the Democrats aren't the party of Death! Everyone who is smart knows
they just want abortions for poor low-class people whose life would stink
anyways! It would help the envirobnment too.

And thank the goddess there was no "molesting altar boy" type scandal and
cover-up by democrats. I'm sure there is no such thing as a paedophile
democrat.

Afterall, a man and a child having sex is an alternative lifest=yle we should
celebrate!

Viva democrat family values!

Posted by Mr Lefty | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:15 pm UTC

Abortion is MURDER period. If you are not practicing Roman Catholics your
comments do not count!

Posted by Diane B. Stack | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:18 pm UTC

God bless him. It's time to confront these people. Amen, Amen.

Posted by sharon sapp | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:19 pm UTC

THe holy Roman emporer has spoken. Bow down or be burned at the stake.

ABortion is a fake issue. If condoms were passed out in quantity to everyone
over the age of puberty around the world… abortion would decline dramatically.
BUT NO!!!! the holy emporer would prefer DEATH!

The Holy Roman Emperor wants to control the entire population at the most
fundimental biological level. No sex without his approval (marraige license).

Posted by ginsu | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:21 pm UTC

Dems are the party of hate and discontent. They thrive on confusion and
promote destruction. Obama is the anti-Christ. The Book of Revelation is a
preview of things to come. We all have a front row seat!

Posted by Michael Simms | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:25 pm UTC

I vote that it's the vatican who lead some of the greatest purgings of human
life, hatred of other religions, and destruction of hope for millions for
hundreds of years. The democratic party members look like angels on earth
compared to the long and bloody history of the roman catholic church. Learn
some history pope. Go forgive a child molestor or something.

Posted by dude | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:26 pm UTC

Pelosi, Biden, Kennedy et al. should leave the Catholic Church. How can one
belong to a church, when that church considers them to be accessories to
murder ?

Why be a Cafeteria Catholic, when in lieu of that, one could find a church
that considers abortion akin to trimming your toenails ?

Perhaps it is more of a sin for them to leave Catholicism, than to be an
accessory to murder ?

I left the Catholic Church for other reasons. I think the Catholic Church gets
it right on abotion. Go Figure!!!

Posted by John Barnes | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:27 pm UTC

There is no hypocracy. Abortion is the taking of INNOCENT life. Our troops are
ridding the world of evil just as St. Michael did!

Posted by Rojosoho | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:28 pm UTC

I thought aborted fetuses would go to hell because they did not accept Jesus
as their Lord.

Or perhaps aborted fetuses go to the same place that billions of pre-Jesus
humans went. (Where is that, exactly?)

Posted by Jazzy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:29 pm UTC

I'm always amazed at the hypocrisy of the Left. They say "don't legistlate
morality by banning abortion", yet they have no trouble legislating THEIR
morality. When it comes to welfare, food stamps, nationalized health care,
(the list goes on and on) they're quite willing to collect other's tax dollars
at gun point and use it for whatever cause they feel in their moral view is
"just".

Posted by Brad | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:36 pm UTC

There is no hypocrisy. Abortion is the taking of INNOCENT life. Our troops are
ridding the world of evil just as St. Michael did!

Posted by Rojosoho | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:38 pm UTC

God is the great abortionist given the tens of millions of miscarriages there
are every year. Life hangs in the balance all the time - the question is where
to draw the line. Does that cigarette and glass of wine which may predate a
miscarriage mean the Mom meant harm to the child? And if the focus is on the
feotus, why the emphasis on prohibiting contraception? Roe v. Wase presented a
plausible and realistic way of making distinctions. The same distinctions when
theologians talk about just wars and when men and women are allowed to act
barbarically. The funny thing is that all the Catholic hierrarchy is doing
here in attacking Democrats is helping the rich in the United States
aggrandize more money, despoil the planet further and play games with the
lives of millions of people acroos the globe. Religion truly is the opiate of
the masses when it is allowed to be used to suppress the demcocratic process

Posted by Jake | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:38 pm UTC

The pope and the GOP agree:

If you are a fetus; God bless you.

If you are a baby; God help you.

If you are not rich; God forgive you.

And if you can see through the sham that is religion; Godamn you.

Posted by Jan | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:44 pm UTC

Killing, eh? How about heretics, everyone affected by the Inquisition, Knights
Templar, Dr. Constantine, William Gardiner, shall I continue?

Yes, the Catholics are like every other big religion out there; free to point
and accuse, but on the defensive when the accusations come full circle.

Not the spiritual, mind you, but the organizers and followers of big
religions.

Posted by Yo Mamma | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:52 pm UTC

Ahh yes, paedophiles for McCain! A perfect fit.

Posted by Danny Morris | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:54 pm UTC

The Catholic Church, being a multi-million dollar corporation would probably
fit better under the republican corporate umbrella. Let's see now, the church
has threated to withhold the sacraments from people who are pro choice, but I
haven't heard any such threat about people who are pro death as in capital
punishment, war, poverty, withholding medical care, etc. Just another
hypocritical corporation, the catholic church is.

Posted by Jim Lamb | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:55 pm UTC

The whole issue has been spun to death. The abortion issue isn't about "a
women's right to choose". It's about WHEN is the choice made? To put it
bluntly, Does she choose to risk creating a life before or after she has sex?
Does a drunk driver choose to be a DUI before or after they drink & get behind
the wheel? Religion aside, neither side can scientifically prove "when life
begins". So why does society not give the same benefit of the doubt to unborn
children that they do to convicted murderers on death row?

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:00 am UTC

Abortion isn’t legal genocide and should never be compared to it.  
People have different views on the creation of life.

Some people believe life begins the very moment of conception, some like
myself feel that true life doesn’t begin until you are born into the world.

Genocide is the deliberate and systematic extermination of a national, racial,
political, or cultural group.

I’m sorry but unborn fetuses don’t fall under that definition of genocide. It
would be more accurately described as a medical act.

You might not agree with abortion, but to decry it as legalized genocide and
force millions of others to obey your point of view is ignorant.

People need to quit trying to legislate religious beliefs and views and keep
them to discussions with your church buddies.

Greg,

As you state: "Abortion isn’t legal genocide and should never be compared to
it." I disagree. There are more than one million babies aborted in this
country yearly. In addition, you go on to say: Some people believe life begins
the very moment of conception, some like myself feel that true life doesn’t
begin until you are born into the world." That is your opinion. Many knowledge
people feel much differently. So you would kill an unborn baby minutes before
it was delivered alive? If it is not murder then why if the baby dies along
with the mother in murder of the mother, why is the person charged with
killing two? It doesn't make sense.

What if my opinion was arbitrarily that life doesn't begin until you are 60
years old? So for me to cut a hole in your head and suck out your brain with a
vacuum would just be a "medical issue," huh? Stupid logic on your part. Life
should be respected and revered.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:04 am UTC

For the "Iran/Abortion" analogy, I've never seen an unborn child/fetus
indicate that they want me dead or my/allied country wiped of the face of the
earth. So I understand a response that would turn Iran into glass while still
preserving the life of an unborn child. The mothers & fathers in Iran of
unborn children should get their government & religious leaders to quit
threatening other countries. We didn't start it, but we can end it.

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:07 am UTC

My wife and I taught our children that it was a woman's right to choose
whether to have an abortion or not. However, we also taught them that abortion
was a serious act, not be decided on lightly, and that the fetus was clearly
alive and was consciousness just as fully as all life is consciousness. We
didn't teach them abortion was a "sin" because we didn't frame it in religious
terms. We also taught them that whatever our own beliefs were, it wasn't our
place to tell others what to believe or do. We thought we were very
reasonable.

Our daughter got pregnant a couple of years back, from an affair with a
married man, actually. She told us about it and, while we were concerned about
her and her lack of good judgment, we were very supportive and understanding.
She told us she was going to get an abortion. We were supportive and
understanding.

Our daughter got her abortion at the local "women's clinic." She offered to
pay but was told that she didn't need to. "The government will pay for it."
(This, even though she had the money and offered to pay.)

Later that day, before going clubbing that evening, my daughter went out with
one of her girlfriends and bought a pair of beautiful spiked heels that she
calls her "abortion shoes". She thought it was funny.

I am ashamed that my daughter apparently didn't learn more respect for life -
or even a modicum of common decency - growing up. Hers was an abortion of
convenience - birth control by abortion, if you will. THIS is what the
Democratic Party fights for and defends. The right for men and women to get
rid of that damn inconvenient baby they made. It's not about raped women,
women who are in danger bringing a baby to term, women who can't afford
babies, the poor, the minorities, the victims of whatever, etc. etc. It's
about modern, young, white women wanting to have their fun, f*** who they
want, when they want, and not have to deal with the inconvenient being that
results. Talk about an inconvenient truth!

The Democratic Party IS the party of death. It is also the party of the self-
indulgent. People who aren't willing to accept the consequences of their
actions if something "goes wrong." You might say they're the party of the
adolescents of our society (regardless of their age), wanting their "freedoms"
but not willing to grow up and accept the responsibilities of adult life.
Whether it's an unwanted pregnancy, an unwanted fight against the Hun, an
unwanted need to earn a living, an unwanted real-world marketplace that
demands that you get an education (or training) and work hard to make a life
for yourself and your family. No matter the challenge, the Democrats are first
in line to whine about life being "unfair."

Abortion is just one more way we can f*** our way through life and not have to
pay the piper.

And I don't even care what the Church says.

Posted by Gene | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:10 am UTC

Is amazing to read the writings of some bloggers. It does not take a rocket
scientist to determine who are sheep (blind dumb followers) and who are people
who think for themselves, in other words, use their gray matter (free
thinkers). Sheep can not think for themselves, therefore to them, there is no
truth other than their own belief and they will blindly follow the sheepherder
off of the cliff if that is where the sheepherder leads them. In order to
constructively debate any issue, the debater must understand all sides of the
issue and discuss it with an open mind. When someone can present a human baby
that was grown by any means, without the fertilization of the female egg by a
male sperm, then and only then will I be convinced that life does not start at
conception. Science proves that life starts at conception, is not just the
teaching of christian churches.  
Further I will qualify my statement further, no one can say they believe in
God and at the same time accept abortion on demand. Has to be oxymoron belief.  
Since records have been kept, all civilizations have believed in a superior
being, Gods, or a God. They also believed their Gods gave to them and took
away from them, accordingly. The greatest minds, one being Albert Einstein, in
their writings have all believed in a God. One thing hard to understand is the
supreme court justices that ruled in Roe vs Wade that decriminalize abortion
for the doctor turned 180 degrees and ruled that doctors could not assist a
patient in committing suicide in the Dr Kevorkian case. In the case of the
baby, no one is listening for its' voice and it can be killed at will, in the
case of the suicide wisher, no one is listening either, however it can not be
allowed to die.

Posted by Tiger500 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:24 am UTC

First of all, my sincere thanks to all my friends and 'admirers' (not);
especially those who accuse me of being, horrors, an "anti-Semite".

The word simply no longer has any real meaning to me.

Zionists have accused the Orthodox Jews of Neturei Karta of being "anti-
Semites" for rigidly adhering to the ethical tenets of the Torah and the
Prophets in condemnation and violation of the immorality and demands of the
Zionists. And I could lift several comments directly from the prophets Isaiah
and Hosea, without attribution, who the Zionists would _swear_ are indicative
of the vilest "anti-Semitism" imaginable.

I've done the research for more than 33 years:

"Anti-Semitism' originates in the misinterpretation of the Doctrine of
"resurrection" as the physical raising of a dead body from the grave rather
than a Doctrine of 'Rebirth'. This Pharisaic doctrine was the reason for the
crucifixion of Jesus; was expropriated, via the Pharisee Paul, as a
fundamental Doctrine of the Roman church (named in honor of those who murdered
Jesus); adopted by the witless Muslim theologians in violation of the
Revelations received by Mohammed; and resulted in the extermination of the
Albigensians.

And, for reasons too complicated to explain here, such a doctrine also plays a
significant role in the issue of abortion; which is why, no matter what the
Roman church claims, it is NEVER in complete disagreement either with abortion
or a nuclear war against Muslims.

Posted by Michael Cecil | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:24 am UTC

Some years from now historians, philosopher and scholars will look back upon
the era of abortion on demand and ponder how on earth could nations that
consider themselves civilized legalized nearly unfettered institutionalize
infanticide. They will correctly catagorize those that supported abortion with
slavers, those who responsible for concentration camps and gulags and all of
history's monsters who would deny another person their basic humanity.

Posted by consultofactus | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:25 am UTC

TO follow Biden's line of logic, he believes then that it is murder to abort
an unborn child since he states his belief that life begins at conception. He
then believes it is not his place to impose his belief on others. The Biden
philosophy would logically then say that the question of whether murder is
right or wrong is up to an individuals belief system. Noone is guilty of
murder. We can kill who we want. And damned are those who judge that person.
The next time you are witness to an adult abusing a child…you best not say a
thing….Biden as stated that it is up to individual beliefs of right and
wrong……

Murder is murder. The argument of "choice" is a shell game that makes it
easier for one to swallow…… What is it that they are choosing… Pro life or
anti life?

Posted by mike | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:27 am UTC

Michael Cecil - I don't see any nuclear war being waged between the USA and
Iran. Why are you such an extremist trying to invoke rage against the
Republicans? Is it because you are a LEFT WING nutcase???

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:27 am UTC

Hurray for the Vatican, who finally said enough is enough. The Catholic church
is now practicing what it preaches. American Catholics are sick of Catholics
not following Church doctrine and getting away with it. Including that radical
hate mongering Pfleger. If the Catholic church does not stand up for what it
preaches more and more of the devout Catholics will fall away from it.  
It continues to amaze me that those who call themselves democrats think it is
OK to murder over 100,000 babies by abortion,yet are in a uproar when it comes
to executing one murderer in prison, truly they are the party of death. The
church does not presume to dictate to politicians but if they continue to
refer to themselves as Catholics then they must follow the doctrine of the
religion or change religions.

Posted by Ann | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:34 am UTC

Abortion used as Birth Control.  
Using abortion as birth control means that abortion is being used as a back-up
method to ineffective or improperly used contraception, or no contraception is
being used at all. Of women having abortions, 46% did not use contraception
during the month they became pregnant, 8% never used a method of birth
control, and  
47% have had at least one previous abortion.  
Although there are situations in which abortion is in response to health
concerns of the mother or fetus, or in response to pregnancy arising from
abuse, the majority of abortions are obtained for social and financial
reasons. The primary reasons given for choosing abortion are given below.  
75% say that having a baby would interfere with work, school or other
responsibilities, about 75% say they cannot afford a child, 50% do not want to
be a single parent or are having problems with their husband or partner. Using
abortion as birth control is not healthy physically or psychologically.

Posted by Tiger500 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:47 am UTC

OBAMA sees accidental survivors of botched abortions as MEDICAL WASTE,
undeserving of a doctor's help, undeserving of life. Though he isn't Catholic,
he deserves singling out by the Vatican as MANIACALLY EVIL. I picture him
drooling as he pushes an old wooden cart heaped with corpses. Such may be his
fate for eternity.

Posted by PKDARNALL | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:07 am UTC

The CHURCH has had more deaths in the name of religion than all the abortion
clinics in the world.

Posted by al mayfield | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:14 am UTC

not only does the catholics believe the demonrats are the party of death BUT
ALSO many other Christian groups..  
the demonrats are not the party of FDR JFK or even ole Jimma Carter..BUT are
now the party of Soros, Pelosi and man-child Obama!..with over 50 million
catholics in the USA and many in high political office with the power of
government at their disposal.. the Vatican is not going to be silent on
another HOLOCAUST!

Posted by dumdems | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:15 am UTC

Democrats are anti-life. Republicans are pro-life. It's the most basic and
fundamental black and white difference between the two competing political
philosophies. I would vote for Democrats if they were pro-life. But they
aren't. They are anti-life. Life trumps all other issues. 1.3 MILLION innocent
babies are murdered every year in America largely because of the Democrat's
clinging to a culture of death.

Life begins somewhere. Democrats contend that the point at which human life
begins is ill-defined. Even more reason to default to the earliest point at
which human life MIGHT begin - conception. Can any of you out there tell us
definitively when life begins? Can you tell us with enough evidence and
authority to unanimously convince a jury of your peers beyond a reasonable
doubt that life does not begin at conception…that it instead begins at some
later point. If you can't, then you are sentencing what very well could be a
human life to a death sentence because that life imposes in some way on your
own life. So…you kill the baby. Nice.

Posted by Matt | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:25 am UTC

It is interesting to see all the mention of nuclear war. This seems to be an
odd thing bringing this up since it has only been used twice in the history of
the world for purposes of war and that was more than 60 years ago. Besides
which last time I checked no one was planning on nuking Iran. (Bombing maybe)
Let us also not take Iran out of context they are being led by an man who
denied that the Halocaust happened. A person like that is not mentally stable
to say the least, not to mention all the times that he has lied and misled the
world, by saying that he was going to "be good." (Kinda reminds me of another
guy hmmm..oh yeah HITLER) I am not saying that the president of Iran is
another Hitler, but I will say that if he had the chance he would kill
everyone in Israel not to mention any American he could get a hold of.

This all distract from the main issue however and that is the Catholic Church
publicly reprimanding several of its members for supporting a believe that the
Church has made clear it does not support. In my estimate if you are not
Catholic, you should not be posting.

Let us also not take the quote out of context the article did say that the
Democratic Party did risk becoming the party of death on bioethical issues.
That is a far cry from every Democrat is evil. As many people have pointed out
the Catholic Church also condemns actions that the Republican party is
responsible for. So here you have the Catholic Church expressing an opinion
and encouraging its members to do the same. so…what's the problem? Don't most
organizations want its members to stand for what the organization believes?
NRA, MADD, DARE, MOVEON.ORG, should I go on. Let's also not be so naive to
think that we don't all, to a degree, want our morals to be legislated. I know
I want murder, rape, robbery, theft, etc all immoral and all legislated. So
should we stop trying to legislate something just because not everyone
believes it is immoral? For myself I can say, by no means will I stop fighting
for what I believe. Yes you have a right to disagree, but I have just as much
right to likewise disagree.

So here I am posting any way dispite the fact that I am not a Catholic, but
still find myself sticking my nose where it doesn't belong. I do apologize. =)

Posted by Jimmy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:29 am UTC

Abortion is not a religious issue, but really is part of under the natural
law. Natural law is imbedded in human beings to help them discern right from
wrong. Everyone understands that it is wrong to take the property of another
without his permission. It is the same with abortion: it is wrong to take the
life of an innocent human being. Hippocrates, the Father of Medicine, who
lived in 600 B.C., wrote: "I will not aid a woman to procure an abortion,
though I be asked to do so." Hippocrates was a pagan and yet he understood the
natural law.  
Religious institutions, such as the Catholic Church, often incorporate the
natural law in their teaching.  
Thus, the Church teaches that stealing and abortion are both wrong. Would the
critics suggest that the Church not teach that stealing is wrong because it is
attempting to force its beliefs on others?  
God bless Archbishop Burke for his clear thinking and  
courage.

Kathleen Reid

Posted by Kathleen Reid | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:30 am UTC

Abortion is not a medical procedure. Medical procedures are ordered toward
health. Killing a fetus does not contribute to its health. Moreover, the fetus
is genetically human-not just genetically human tissue, but having a complete
genetic code of its own, it is a living human being. Anyone who claims that
killing a conceptus is not killing a human being is in need of studying
genetics. There is no doubt that the being that is killed in abortion is
genetically human.

Posted by alan | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:37 am UTC

Burke and the Catholic Church love life so much thet actively fight in court
to protect pedofiles who have ruined the lives of men and women through out
the world. They actively hide them to this day. His Diocese harbored the
refugees from the pedofile camp for priests in New Mexico that had to be shut
down because of the problem caused by priests who had been stashed secretly
there but allowed to prey on young people during weekend furloughsn for parish
work. Lecture me later.

Posted by Nathan | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:40 am UTC

It was not always Catholic doctrine that life begins at conception, true?
Augustine, Acquinas, and Gregory XIV all wrote that personhood really starts
at "quickening" or thereabouts, often 40 days. Not until 1869 did Pius IX
definitely peg "personhood" at conception and consider abortion to be killing
a person if occuring after the moment of conception.

Anyway, where is concern over "culture of death" expressed by indulgent
notions of when war is justified, or the deaths caused by destitution, neglect
in the health care system, etc, in a country that doesn't have universal
health care and a fully functional safety net like almost all industrialized
nations?

rosebunny

Posted by Neil B | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:43 am UTC

Great, I hope he gets all the Roman clergy to take to the pulpit and preach
politics then the Government can tax the Roman Church Instead of leaching off
of local Governments for services It's about time the Church paid its fair
share!

Posted by Rob ewing | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:43 am UTC

There is no "gray area" about abortion when a living breathing baby is
delivered alive and taken to a laundry area and laid on a table for a couple
of hours to die. That's disgusting beyond belief. How about delivering a
healthy baby breach and then, when only the head is still inside the mother,
cutting into it's head and sucking the brains out. why? The mother finds it
inconvenient to have a living child today. It's murder plain and simple of the
grossest and most disgusting kind.

Posted by moronpolitics | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:49 am UTC

[…] Faithworld […]

Posted by Small Whispers » Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party
of death” | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:50 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” […]

Posted by Obama News Roundup | Obama States Of America | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:50 am UTC

To all who have commented in this blog who are standing up for life, I commend
you. For all of you who have commented and have professed that you are in
league with the culture of death. . .I pity you. For what goes around will
come around.

Posted by Doris Bond | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:00 am UTC

[…] October 3, 2008 Vatican calls Democrats "the party of death". In other
news, all other men in dresses aren't taken this seriously. Posted by hillbuzz
under Uncategorized Regarding: Vatican Official Attacks Democrats as "the
party of death" […]

Posted by Vatican calls Democrats "the party of death". In other news, all
other men in dresses aren't taken this seriously. « HillBuzz | Report as
abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:03 am UTC

when abraham kicked ishmael (sarahs first son)out of his house for picking on
isaac, the split in religions began - jesus from isaac - muhammad from
ishmael. its all the same story, there is no true or false to this b.s., they
are both true and they are both b.s. and they are both responsible for most
everything, and they both suck and neither of them behaves in a manner
befitting truly god-fearing people.

Posted by murphy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:03 am UTC

I don't understand why folks take this cult and it's leader so seriously. Read
your King James Bible and see the truth, and don't listen to men whom wear
skirts and funny hats. Pray to Jesus, not Mary, he listens, she is dead.

Posted by Jugg | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:05 am UTC

I'm proud of the Vatican official from St. Louis! The vile slow-motion spread
of the culture of death at the hands of brainless Hollywood self-serving jerks
and the ethically challenged weaklings in our populace is exactly what the
world-wide marxist murderers of humanity need to do to the sanctity of our
society for them to win against civilization.

The ones who try to equate war with abortion should be ashamed of themselves.
The Biblical admonishment, "Thou Shall not Kill" is really "Thou Shall Not
Murder". Warfare to protect your family, your village, city, Nation, way of
life has never been admonished. The people who have made this argument are
actually murderers by proxy in service of the seventh century Moslem
extremists.

Posted by Miguel | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:06 am UTC

The Vatican consistently sticks to it's principles. It speaks out for the
sanctity of life, not just in the case of abortion but also in regard to the
death penalty and wars. I am a Democrat and a Catholic. I am disappointed that
the party that wants my vote would also mock my convictions. The convictions
will win out in this election.

Posted by mark | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:08 am UTC

Women have been TAUGHT by the abortionists that this is an issue of "control
over their own body", but this is just words. No doctor in any state in the
union would allow you to have your healthy legs removed surgically. That IS
your own body. A baby is just living in the woman's body until it can function
on its own. DON'T let someone talk you into murdering your own child so they
can make money.

Posted by moronpolitics | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:09 am UTC

Oh DAAAAVE (athiest from above )

I believe that ALL morality should be subjective as you do..It's a personal
choice right Dave. YOU see it as ok for you to let people kill innocent
helpless infants in the womb. I have equally subjectively decided that all
people named Dave should be used for my shark chum line.  
You see Dave….it's a personal choice of mine. How dare you even think your
morality is superior to mine. I mean this is a deeply helf belief I just came
to after reading your post. Without a set of immutable rules (Thou Shalt Not
Murder) for example any one can do as they please. All you need is enough
strength or number or both and you can do as you please.  
In America we are good people Dave. We protect the innocent Dave. Yes
outlawing the completely unnatural act of infanticide will create problems.
Tough, we are Americans Dave. We had honor once. We would not kill the
innocent for convenience or profit.  
Human life from conception in America is precious Dave. Even one so clueless
as yours. BTW…………….  
I heading out shark fishing this weekend….busy?

Posted by Toasted Turbins | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:14 am UTC

What exactly is the benefit of being tax exempt to the Catholic Church? Free
stamps? The Catholic Church opted out of social security and thus medicare.
The priests and religious don't even enough money to pay any taxes! Look it
up.

Posted by momcasmi | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:14 am UTC

The Democrats know that if they can make you approve of killing the most
innocent of life as a convenience with out a pause of conscience. Then
anything goes no matter how evil. No lines to cross no barriers to forge all
is allowable. For nothing is more evil than a mother killing their own child.
It lowers the bar for all evil.

Posted by Jackie | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:18 am UTC

if there is one organization that should "leave ceasars things to ceasar and
gods things to god" you would think it is this one. given their track record,
the self righteousness is amazing.

Posted by murphy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:20 am UTC

Where was his outrage when priests were molesting children? I'll listen to the
Vatican when it returns Cardinal Law to Boston to stand trial for his crimes
against children.

Posted by Joanne S. | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:21 am UTC

Judge not, lest ye be judged thyself…Bishop.

Posted by Niko | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:25 am UTC

Number one kindly quit reffering to him as a mistake as I never said that. I
said a "mistake" happened, meaning the condom breaking.

You nut job religious freaks instantly attack me simply because I disagree
with you and don't share your "values".

I never once said I was for partial birth abortions, yet that's the ONLY
abortions used to support your idea that Roe V Wade needs to be over turned.  
In fact, partial birth abortions should be illegal in my opinion.

However the majority of abortions done in this country are during the first
trimester. The least performed abortion is the partial birth abortion, yet you
portray all abortions as the same which is untrue.

It is like you feel it is ok to attack me, distort the truth, all to further
your ideals. You're all such wonderful "christians".

Using the argument "Thou shalt not kill" as a reason to overturn Roe V Wade is
insane. That is your religious doctrine, not mine.

Our ideas on what "murder" is differs.

I urge people to read this.  
http://www.elroy.net/ehr/abortionanswers .html

Posted by Dave | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:38 am UTC

To C W Walker,  
The Bible does not say "thou shalt not kill". It says "thou shalt no murder".
I goes on to explain the difference.

For those of you who will "never kill for any reason, period". Keep in mind
that the only reason you can take that position is that there is and have been
people that would take a human life to allow you the freedom to speak at all.

Posted by Alex | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:40 am UTC

Thou shalt not kill.

It's black and white and that simple; all else is quibbling before God.

Posted by Mark Evans | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:41 am UTC

i love these comments. great debates going on.

First, it is unethical for any human being to claim certain ethical
convictions while refusing to defend them in any way that affects his/her
popularity.

that is exactly the predicament a pro-"choice" Catholic politician is in.

Non-Catholic may not understand this, but its very simple: you dont get to
pick the doctrines and teachings you like the most.

A Catholic who promotes the unstitutionalizing of abortion, & does nothing to
promote alternatives to women who find themselves "choosing" them are standing
squarely against their own Church.

Pelosi and Biden should get it right & quit speaking on issues they know
nothing about (especially when they ought to know better)

Second, yes, it is merely "popularity" that motivates them. No one heard
abolitionists in the 1840's chanting "I'm personally opposed to slavery as a
'religious matter', but I dare not impose my religion on others. Church &
State!"

No, you see, abortion, slavery, murder, rape, theft, oppression, unjust wars,
and the degradation of other human beings are not things you get to play
Ponitus Pilate with.

Yes, my Church stands in oppostion to abortion. That doesnt mean, that
everything my Church supports and rejects but be conversly rejected and
supported by my country.

that argument is based on abject lunacy. supporting alternatives to abortion
and finding solutions that help women avoid them and yes even legal
restriction on them, is not a violation of the separation of Church and State.

Posted by Robert C | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:41 am UTC

Funny to see all the anti-Catholics in the comments, as they don't want to
play by rules foundated by Jesus H. Christ himself. So here's one: If you're
not Catholic, then don't comment. If you don't vote, don't complain. Learn
some rules and limits and learn to shut-up. Also, for the Bush bashers, get
over it. That ship sailed and left, and all I see are it's distant sails near
the horizon. Morons with a mental condition.

Posted by Programmer #A-5 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:19 am UTC

I've read way too many posts here bashing the Catholic Church. I don't think
that Archbishop Burke has told anyone how to vote. More specifically, he did
NOT tell Biden or Pelosi how to vote.

He DID tell them how to be good Catholics. If they don't want to be good
Catholics, if they want to give public scandal concerning the teachings of the
Church, they don't have to stay in the Church.

They should leave the Church if they don't like its teaching or have the
fortitude to show even a modicum of personal courage for standing up for their
personal beliefs.

Posted by IXLR8 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:24 am UTC

Excuse me, but most Democrats are pro-CHOICE, not pro-abortion. There is a
distinct difference whether you want to believe it or not. I don't believe
abortion should be an automatic solution for unsafe sex, but if a woman
becomes pregnant through rape or incest, or if the health of a fetus or its
mother would be in jeopardy, then yes, they should have the right to an
abortion without people who don't even know them passing judgement. Judge not,
lest ye be judged.

Posted by Annietano | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:29 am UTC

Who could possibly care what the Catholic Church says or thinks. They have
absolutely no control over anything I do and will never. These pedophile
protecting fools are just out of touch with reality and function with a 10th
century mind. Deny all, control all, take the gold and run -- for centuries
this has been their attitude and it never changes. To Hell with them.

Posted by dpb | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:32 am UTC

But I feel that the greatest destroyer of peace today is abortion, because it
is a war against the child, a direct killing of the innocent child, murder by
the mother herself.

And if we accept that a mother can kill even her own child, how can we tell
other people not to kill one another?

How do we persuade a woman not to have an abortion? As always, we must
persuade her with love and we remind ourselves that love means to be willing
to give until it hurts. Jesus gave even His life to love us. So, the mother
who is thinking of abortion, should be helped to love, that is, to give until
it hurts her plans, or her free time, to respect the life of her child. The
father of that child, whoever he is, must also give until it hurts.

By abortion, the mother does not learn to love, but kills even her own child
to solve her problems.

And, by abortion, the father is told that he does not have to take any
responsibility at all for the child he has brought into the world. That father
is likely to put other women into the same trouble. So abortion just leads to
more abortion.

Any country that accepts abortion is not teaching its people to love, but to
use any violence to get what they want. This is why the greatest destroyer of
love and peace is abortion.

Many people are very, very concerned with the children of India, with the
children of Africa where quite a few die of hunger, and so on. Many people are
also concerned about all the violence in this great country of the United
States. These concerns are very good. But often these same people are not
concerned with the millions who are being killed by the deliberate decision of
their own mothers.

And this is what is the greatest destroyer of peace today - abortion which
brings people to such blindness.

Mother Theresa

Posted by IXLR8 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:57 am UTC

It is rare when I agree with the Catholic church. I personally don't consider
anyone who is pro-abortion or supports a candidate who is pro-abortion to be a
Christian.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:59 am UTC

You and I and All are contemporaries on the EARTH at this time as well as ALL
those who preceded us are/were CONDITIONED ANIMALS.

Unless, one realizes this phenomenon - he/she will have their being as a
CONDITIONED ANIMAL.

Posted by Casimir Champion | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:07 am UTC

Those who seek to render religious figures as irrelevant, while raising their
own political ideologies and political figures to religious heights, are the
epitome of hypocrisy.  
The democrats scream "CHOICE", without defining their choice; "CHANGE",
without defining their change, and "HOPE", without defining their hope beyond
taking power.  
The miasma of the democrats' rhetoric, notably the been-nowhere, done-nothing
Barack Obama, is a dark, dark chapter in the history of American politics.

Posted by c'est moi | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:37 am UTC

Here they go again. The Republican Party at its best propaganda. I have been a
ctholic now for 73 yrs and I swear I have heard it all now. If this were true
of Priest and Bishops telling us how to vote mind you the Catholic Church
would hav a lot of empty pews EH? Here's the way the lord would put it "He who
is without sin please come and cast the first stone" To you Republicans it is
also a sin to fabricate lies so cleanse your mouth. So please clean up your
own act before accusing others. It is also the sin of the woman who aborts her
baby and not yours. So please let GOD be the desiding Judge Okay? Not you
Republicans who bring up abortion on every election.

Posted by tony wilkie | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:40 am UTC

The Vatican is not in any way endorsing the Republican Party or any other
party for that matter. They are simply warning Catholics that it is immoral
and sinful to be affiliated with the Democratic Party. The Democratic Party is
so far gone on issues of morality that it is dangerous for people of the faith
to subscribe to their intolerant, anti-religion, left wing ideologies.
Democrats in positions of power seek to redefine the mores of society which
have represented the wisdom of the ages and the foundation for the laws of
most civilizations. Redefining accepted morals so as to welcome the immoral
will ultimately lead to the downfall of our civilization. Corruption, greed,
immorality and evil are symptoms of this moral bankruptcy infecting society.
At least somebody in a position of moral authority is speaking out.

Posted by Charles Bates | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:41 am UTC

The real issue here is that IF good christians weren't going to abortion
clinics they would be out of business. We can not shove our religion down
another persons throat jsut because we bellieve it is the ways things should
be. The non believers have a right to get abortions. The constitution protects
them from people llike us. Hmmm sounds like what we are fighting for in a
Muslim country. We in Wisconsin know the Bishop Burke from La Crosse is a wack
job and were glad to see him assigned to St. Louis.

Posted by T Paul | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:47 am UTC

I believe that the Catholic Church and Protestant Churches have remained mute
to long and should make they voice heard. The Catholic Church position and
statements concerning their teachings are right and proper. Politician’s
seeking to sway voters by compromising their religious tenants for selfish
gains is not criminal but a good definition of evil. In the Old Testament the
first words given man from God were the three Great Blessings of Be Fruitful,
Multiply and take dominion. Evil was created when individuals sought to
fulfill those blessings for selfish reasons.  
Individuals seeking to argue when life begins are far too often unwilling to
recognize that even in the womb a baby is a live. The New Testament scripture
has the story of Elizabeth’s baby while in the womb responding to the presence
Jesus’ mother. New innocent life needs protection and nurturing. Choice by
adults should be to defined as to how they are responsible for their actions.  
The U.S. Democratic party has shifted to far to the liberal spectrum and does
not value life. The Liberal Democratic Party uses any means necessary to gain
and hold power and does not honor nor respect life. World history has seen to
often political movements claiming to be working for the people. Hitler,
Stalin, Mao and Pol Pot all spoke about creating worlds of prosperity. All of
these mad men were elegant speakers who were gifted in pointing out the
problems in the world. Their solutions always brought misery and death because
they evil.  
The world still has evil men seeking to prosper by using even the people of
faith to achieve their goals of power and position. Religious men and women
and they institutions have a voice and responsibility to see God’s work done.
We all fall short of the glory of God but his work is stilling waiting for us
to accomplish. The body of Christ needs to show everyone the correct way in
finding peace and prosperity.

Posted by Mike Wilkins | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:03 am UTC

You're quite the Lefty Michael, and not a very bright one at that. You
wouldn't understand spiritual ramifications of infant abortion if it slapped
you upside the head. I pity you.

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:04 am UTC

Joe Biden and Barack Obama say that they are personally against abortion, but
they cannot impose their beliefs on others. What about stealing, lying,
murder, false witness, slavery, child molestation? Where does their lunacy
end? Is a fetus human or not? If Joe and Barack think it is wrong, then have
they no courage of their convictions? If one believes in something, then one
should stand up for his beliefs. What about the Constitution of the United
States of America? Barack and Joe say they believe in that? Aren't those laws
an imposition of morality? Will they waffle and not protect and defend it?
They are really pathetic cowards masquerading as leaders. There is truth, but
Barack and Joe don't have it. Sorry to burst your intellectually vacant
bubbles.

Posted by Zapp | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:04 am UTC

Often times people make the mistake of saying because of the separation of
church and state that church are not allowed to have a stance on political
issues nor should we vote based on what we are taught at church. Both are
outrageous misinterpretations of the truth. We are to vote according to what
we believe is right and wrong and we go to church because we believe was is
being taught is right. I have no problem with a priest of any faith having a
position on a moral issue to have it made known and furthermore to say that
those who attend their sermons should feel that way. After all, don't we go to
church because we believe we are being led by men of God?

Posted by Neighborhood Politics | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:25 am UTC

I am a person struggling to follow the example of Jesus Christ through the
teachings of the Catholic Church. I have read many comments and I am saddened
by the lack of love shown by those supporting life. It seems that many writers
who fair well as the Pharisees Jesus confronted. You know the Law, but have
hardend Hearts. I wish that the bishops would speak to the politicians in
private about these issues and not be so arrogant as to politicize these
questions. Jesus refused to be politicized in His life and He is our Leader
and Model.  
I have not always been against abortion. But I do believe it is wrong. I
equally believe that war and capital punishment is wrong and Jesus taught
against all killing. It is ironic that people who support capital punishment
forget that Jesus was one of many innocent victims.  
Often people who misuse the word Christianity forget this and this is a
historical fact. From the Crusades to Iraq, Christ name have been used to
justify murder.  
My point is that as Christians we must be consistent. Yes, we must stand
against abortion, And Capital Punishment, And War, and World Povery(slow
death), and All the conditions that lead many poor people to abortion. We must
also remember and live the Beatitudes spoken by Jesus. Many of us forget
Blessed and the Humble…and Blessed are the Peacemakers. Who are we to throw
the first stone. I am not sin-free and I do not judge anyone abortion that is
for Our Lord, but I do not support it.

Posted by Richard Royster | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:06 am UTC

The Holy See was against the war in Iraq before Joe Biden was for it. I got
news for these "Catholic" politicians: Christians who don't follow the
teaching of the Vatican are called "Protestants". Joe, Nancy, the Kennedys,
Kerry, Durbin…are all Protestants who attend Catholic services.

Posted by Buzzman | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:58 am UTC

Annietano,

By,

"if a woman becomes pregnant through rape or incest…then yes, they should have
the right to an abortion without people who don’t even know them passing
judgement"

you mean,

if a child is conceived, allegedly through rape or incest…then yes, that child
has no protection under the murder laws - which normally protect millions of
people that you and I don't know.

BTW, Are you saying that abortion outside the "exceptions" you list is
unconscionable murder? Are you campaigning to clamp down on these
unjustifiable killings?

Posted by Kevin | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:04 am UTC

Well, finally someone besides Republicans recognize the truth…. Democrats must
go or be converted.

So Sayeth the Impaler!

Posted by Impaler | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:15 am UTC

I have read too often about not being able to legislate your religious views
on anyone. I have two points on this. When you legislate in favor of abortion
youbhave already imposed your view on the unborn. What chance did the child
have to speak its mind? Second, the gentlemen who wrote the us constitution
certainly imposed their view on the document. They knew power should be
separated because human beings have a tendan y towards corruption when they
are too strong. They also wrote extensively abouthow an immoral people can not
be governed. They also envisioned a country run on principles that are then
written into law and the basis of these principles were the ten commandments.
This document, has served us well. In the one instance where these principles
were violated the row vesus wade decision on abortion, it has left a permanent
scar on America.

Posted by A Arroyo | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:21 am UTC

[God said that all days are planned out for you. This tells us that your life
is planned before conception.]

This tells us no such thing but is a lot of wishful thinking on your part.

[It was not always Catholic doctrine that life begins at conception, true?
Augustine, Acquinas, and Gregory XIV all wrote that personhood really starts
at “quickening” or thereabouts, often 40 days. Not until 1869 did Pius IX
definitely peg “personhood” at conception and consider abortion to be killing
a person if occuring after the moment of conception.]

This is true to a point. There was a broader spectrum of theological views on
this matter prior to the seventeenth century when the view of conception (and
based on faulty cosmological views) first took root in Catholic thought.
Furthermore, this view was not in the majority until after 1869 -indeed there
are many Catholic saints who viewed matters differently including St.
Alphonsis Ligouri as late as the late eighteenth century.

There is no actual Catholic doctrine on when life begins -indeed the Church
has admitted to as much though that does not get anywhere near the
advertisement as all the "from conception to natural death" statements. And
anyone familiar with Catholic doctrine knows that the idea that life has to
perdure until natural death is contrary to Catholic teaching pertaining to the
right of the state to execute within certain parameters. Also, as this is a
scientific answer predominantly, there strictly speaking cannot be. It is true
that the predominant view today amongst Catholics is that it begins at
conception but that foundation is not as solid as many on this thread so
confidently postulate. Indeed rationally it has no shortage of problems to it
but I am not about to delve into them right now.

I for one tire of the false dichotomy that somehow the only options for this
are either "at birth" or "at conception." There are other options as well and
taking that view does not make someone more or less a Catholic even if they
are in the current minority admittedly.

Posted by Barry Publius | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:51 am UTC

Anyone in this blog who continues to use blasphemy against the Catholic church
is simply uneducated about church history. Remember, Jesus picked His own
betrayer. The actions of a few does not mean it is endorsed by the church.
Sure we've had bad popes but that does not mean their actions represent the
teachings of the church. Regarding abortion: plain and simple. It is murder.
Stop trying to sugar coat it. If you are Catholic, you must take a stand and
not vote for candidates who are pro-choice. You say that you are against the
war and yet it is ok to terminate a life in the womb. Unbelievable.

Posted by lola | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:56 am UTC

I was going to vote for Obama and I encouraged others to vote for him; but now
I see how wrong this is.  
Obama encourages the death of innocents.  
I pray for Joe Biden and I pray he will no longer serve as the VP nominee.

Posted by Chris Matthews | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:01 am UTC

@ Jonathan, who wrote: "Party of death? If that’s the case, then Catholocism
is the religion of death. Crusades anyone? What about the inquisition? Good
times."

You should try researching history rather than repeating the same, tired
argument that atheists have been using for at least the last several decades.

The First Crusade was a reaction to Muslim encroachment into Europe
(specifically Spain) and the predominantly Christian territories of Palestine
and Syria. While further Crusades may not have been as noble an undertaking,
they were, in general, usurped by the secular powers as an end to justify
their means.

The Inquisition most often referenced as a slight against the church is more
specifically called The Spanish Inquisition, and this was largely perpetrated
by the Spanish King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. The Church only authorized
an inquisition when Ferdinand threatened to withdraw military support from
Rome at a time when they were threatened by the Turks. The Pope himself later
accused the monarchs of overzealousness and greed and attempted unsuccessfully
to stop the inquisition.

It's my hope that next time you think to perpetuate a slanderous myth which
has done far more harm than good over the years, you'll know your history a
little better. Just remember that if you decide to repeat it again, it will be
a lie rather than an error.

Posted by Jonathan | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:38 am UTC

Most U.S. polls for many years found that most Americans admit that abortion
is murder. Legalized abortion has thus, so far, murdered 49 million people in
the U.S., and many times that many internationally. In those countries that
are controlled by dictators, the people are obviously much less responsible
for these mass murders. But in the democracies, the people will someday
ultimately each answer for any assistance they gave by their votes for each of
these many millions of murders. We should pray for them, ourselves, and for
all of the world's afflicted.

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:54 am UTC

Obama spoke at Planned Parenthood (the U.S. group with hundreds of abortion-
for-profit centers). Obama told them that he would make "reproductive health"
(abortion) the "heart" of his national health system. Making abortion the
"heart" of a health system must seem a bit of an abomination even to most
hard-core "pro-choice" voters.

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:01 am UTC

The catholic church has to look at all sins the same way.

Posted by Gary | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:28 am UTC

Just fyi - Since life begins at conception, as every reputable biologist has
said since conception was discovered, this is a factual issue affecting
everyone and not limited to one particlar faith. It is illegal to kill
innocent humans in the United States.

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:31 am UTC

For catholics, there is no issue as to when life begins because every life has
a soul and this apparently, just appears at conception. Why a sperm does not
have a soul, or an ovum does not have a soul, is not clear. Perhaps each
cancer has a soul. Why do humans have a soul and not apes, or starfish? It all
smacks of a blindingly crude hypocracy and arrogance. Man in god's image? Bah
,that's one unimaginative god. Parochial, medi-evil mores are all these
'truth' peddles have to offer. Barging in on other people's lives is the best
they can do when 'their' bizarre take on life is the one that fosters and
protects predators.

The ultimate arrogance is the claim to ultimate truth. Luckily enough, should
this miraculously be the way things are, they we were all screwed before we
came into this world anyway.

Posted by Stephan Gyory | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:59 am UTC

Many comments are coming in containing vicious personal attacks on readers who
have given their opinions here. We appreciate a lively debate -- which this
certainly is -- and responses to other readers are OK within limits. Calling
someone uninformed or illogical, for example, is part of any debate. But some
of the responses are simply hate-filled personal attacks that add nothing to
the debate. We cannot let these through. Go right ahead and tear apart any
argument you don't agree with; that's what makes these comments so
interesting. But please show some basic respect for the people who post them.

Posted by Tom Heneghan | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:53 am UTC

catholoism like all satanic mystical cults should be banned and the clueless
evil clones who run it jailed for spreading their filth around the world.

Posted by howie hedley | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:57 am UTC

Any political party who would nominate for President of the United States, an
individual who has in their political past, advocated infanticide should give
anyone pause for concern. Such an advocacy is no different and as horrific as
the deeds of Joseph Mengele. The Bishop is SPOT ON. Now I hope the rest of the
Catholic Bishops in the United States grow some stones and take a firm and
vocal stand against these liberal Catholic politicians.

Posted by FM | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:03 am UTC

This article makes it very clear that the Catholic church should be a tax
exempt organization. IRS--Are you listening?

Posted by Kurt Van Tassel | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:05 am UTC

Don't you love when Catholics pretend to be superior in moral issues but after
all, all you see is priests molesting innocent children.

Posted by Daniel | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:14 am UTC

Go bless Bishop Burke. As a practicing catholic who attended catholic schools
for 16 years I am proud of his outspokeness on this issue. If american
catholics followed the church teachings on abortion they would never support
the democratic party or platform. It is unfortunate that most catholics I have
met in my life, here in New Jersey support the democratic party. It is time
they rethink thier decision to constantly back the democratic party and its
view on abortion.

Posted by Rich | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:38 am UTC

Already living in our Country:

Nearly 10 million children age 18 and under are uninsured. * More than 90% of
them have one or more parents who work. _  
60% live in two-parent families._  
70% have incomes below 200% of the federal poverty level (1997). *  
They make up 70% of all newly uninsured Americans (1996), while the number of
children without private insurance grows by roughly 3,000 every day. *

Make sure your political endorsement cares for the babies that are already
living in your city or town. Make sure that our system is prepared to provide
care for these children. If you haven't seen them - I challenge you: drive to
the poor side of town, get out and talk to these families. The problems they
are facing are tremendous.

Vote with your heart AND your mind. You can't build a mansion on a broken
foundation and expect it to stand.

Posted by Amy in Indiana | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

11:52 am UTC

I love how liberals talk about forcing morals on others as being 'wrong'. That
in itself is a self-refuting fallacy. Liberals force their own particular
morals on others all the time. The whole concept of wealth redistribution is a
morally motivated policy.

So, really, liberals have no problem with some sort of morality being imposed
on others, as long as it is a humanistic, socialistic, statist morality versus
a traditional morality from any religion. It's acceptable in the book of
liberals to use government agents to force one group to pay for the charity of
another group, or to use the schools to indoctrinate students to their
morality code. In the USSR, even the communists had their own morality code.
Anything that was seen as not beneficial to the state was immoral. Both Cuba
(still) and the USSR imprisoned homosexuals because that was seen as immoral
and destructive to the state (communism being where liberalism was derived
from).

Oh, by the way (to the person bent out of shape about wars), the Vatican has
been very critical of the actions of the right in terms of Iraq and other war-
mongering issues.

Posted by KrsnaDas | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:12 pm UTC

Wow! I never thought I would found myself on the same side as the pro-lifers
but Obama is bringing us all together for the Republicans!

Posted by Ralph | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:17 pm UTC

Truth doesn't sit well with these libs. They truly don't see the big picture.

Posted by Tom | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:19 pm UTC

Please do not use the "casting the first stone" as an offense or defense of
your position, until you get used to taking Jesus in context. He finished the
incident by telling the woman, "Go and sin no more". She had been forgiven,
shown mercey, and enlightened, and is now expected to work out her salvation
with change. Politicians who continue to shun the truth about killing unborn
Americans, euthanizing the old and sick like Nazis, and their Communist
twisting of scripture for wealth redistribution are crying about cast stones
and ignoring the lesson of the story. Go and sin no more.

Posted by bruce | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:25 pm UTC

From a secularist perspective: If innocent human life cannot be taken in a
civilized society, then abortion should not be allowed. Science has proven
that life begins at conception. Any termination beyond the point of conception
is the taking of a human life. It is simply logic.

Posted by Chris | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:38 pm UTC

My views have been either unintentionally or maliciously misconstrued by other
respondents here.

In order to clarify:

1) I am more opposed to abortion than either the pope, the Roman church, or
the Christian Fundamentalists.

2) I consider the abortion industry (and the weapons industry) as being
elements of a Satanic process for the extermination of both Truth from the
earth and the human race itself: While the Jewish, Christian and Muslim
religious establishments-with the full complicity of the media-are doing
_everything_ they possibly can to exterminate _Truth_ from the earth
(discussed in more detail on my website); the abortion industry is doing
everything in its power to prevent the 'rebirth' of the _messengers_ of Truth;
while the weapons industry (especially the nuclear weapons industry) is doing
everything it possibly can to exterminate the human race itself. (The purpose
for making those weapons is in order that they be _used_. And the censorship
of the Truth about the "resurrection" is a NECESSARY element of the incitement
for the use of those weapons; with which the Roman church is FULLY complicit.)

3) If the Roman church and the Christian Fundamentalists in the United States
were _serious_ in their opposition to either abortion or war, there would be
thousands rather than millions of abortions in the United States, and the
United States would NOT be on the verge of a nuclear war with Iran (Look at
what Mahatma Ghandi was capable of achieving in India.) Conclusion: they are
not really _serious_.

4) Although I have no evidence whatsoever, my suspicion is that, behind the
scenes, money is changing hands in order for the Roman church to be _less_
opposed to both abortion and war than it could be. The fact that the church
has had to pay BILLIONS of dollars in damages for the abuses of the pedophile
priests (where does this money come from?) has presented a situation in which
the Roman church could _easily_ be bribed by the millionaires of either the
abortion and/or the weapons industry to be less 'oppositional'. After all, the
media has been WELL paid to censor the Truth about the Doctrine of
"resurrection" which would threaten the economic interests of the Roman
church. Thus, it is not unreasonable to assume that the Roman church itself
could be bribed by the abortion and/or weapons industry for _their_ self-
preservation.

5) Although the Republicans have paid lip service to their 'opposition' to
abortion, that 'opposition' has had no _practical_ significance. If the
Democrats are the originators of this evil-and I haven't done the research to
establish this-the Republicans have been complicit rather than completely
innocent. If the Democrats can be construed as the "party of death", then the
Republicans can be construed as the _enablers_ of the "party of death". And
the same goes for the _unconditional_ support of both the Republicans and the
Democrats for the Zionists of the Israel in their warfare against the Moral
Law and the Revelations received by Moses, Isaiah, Jesus and Mohammed.

Posted by Michael Cecil | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:41 pm UTC

ahhhh the libs don't fail to reinforce their sterotype. that is, when a
position is indefensible, just relate it to something, anything they think
they can hang a 'moral relativity' hat on.

feh.

Posted by ShyAsrai | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:42 pm UTC

So, Republicans are Pro-Life - and then what happens when the child is born?
They could care less what happens to the child. Cut off assistance that is
needed for the child to receive proper care, food, etc. It seems to me that
they only care about the child until "they" need to pay for it.

I do believe in the right to life. I am anti-abortion. But, if they truly
believe they are pro-life, then they need to be throughout the whole life.

Posted by Patricia | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:51 pm UTC

Isn't this the same bad joke of a religious leader who tried to steal St.
Stanislov's money in order to pay the judgments against his diocese for the
practice of covering up for child predators?

Isn't this the same man who tried to go back on an agreement held in writing
between the parish of St. Stanislov's and a former Archbishop of the diocese?
Then when they didn't roll over and allow him to steal their money, he threw a
temper tantrum and finally had some of those good Catholics excommunicated.

If there is a hell Raymond Burke would be a good place for God to start.

Posted by Anthony | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:55 pm UTC

Burke is exactly right. The Democrat/Liberal position is both morally and
intellectually indefensible. Pelosi is an airhead who makes up her own
doctrine and history to suit her needs (and I guess to sleep at night). The
Church should call these phoney Catholic politicians out.

Posted by JohnnyQuest | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:57 pm UTC

Well, that's it. According to the laws of the United States, the Roman
Catholic Church has just given up it's rights to their tax exemption.  
If the Bush regime was still interested in upholding the law of the land, the
IRS would be directed to act immediately. But just as they haven't gone after
the evangelicals preaching politics from the pulpits, it is unlikely that they
will uphold the law on this either.

Posted by Niniane | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:58 pm UTC

Wow, Bishop Burke sure touched a nerve here. Plain fact: The Democrats are the
party of DEATH. Abortion, Euthanasia, etc, etc. But then isn't this part of
the manifesto that the current far left models itself after? Serve the state
by working and when you can work no more you're no longer worth anything and
now you must die. Oh and those that try to compare going to war haven't a clue
of what's written in the Catechism which is why you so blindly and foolishly
follow and support the party of DEATH in the first place. Abortion vaporizes
1.2 million souls per year in the US (mostly blacks, hispanics, and poor
whites) and THIS is what Obama stands for?

Posted by J | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

12:59 pm UTC

Oh, poor, poor anti-Catholics and ex-Catholics, when will you open your minds
to the one, true Faith. Having said that, now post all your beefs accordingly.
The more you gripe, the more you prove how powerful the Church is, and how
weak empty your souls really are. Go on, now, gripe on, and show the world
your feebleness.

Posted by Len | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:00 pm UTC

[…] I can say is, it is about time that the Church called them out: Vatican
officials seldom single out political leaders who differ with the Church on
issues like […]

Posted by Democrats - The “Party of Death” | | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:06 pm UTC

[…] official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” Reuters | Phil Stewart
| Oct. 1, […]

Posted by OrthodoxNet.com Blog » Blog Archive » Vatican official attacks U.S.
Democrats as “party of death” | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:07 pm UTC

Because this statement comes from a church it is mired in religious
overtones….In reality it is a moral issue, always has been. It has never been
morally right to murder an innocent life in the womb. Just because it is
unborn does not change the fact it is a living human being. When a wanted
child dies in the womb we mourn, yet when an unwanted child is aborted some of
us give it no more thought than roadkill. To support this kind of thinking is
little different than those who marched millions into gas chambers. Innocent
life is either of value or it is not….We already know the value system of the
Democrats.

Posted by Brett | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:12 pm UTC

Burke has done more to set Catholicism back in the St. Louis area than well
over 100 years of predecessors. Make no mistake, all of his proclamations have
everything to do with control and power, and nothing to do with bringing light
to people's lives. For him to conceal the routine sexual abuses of priests; to
not speak about about genocide in the world; to support Republican positions
on death penalties, wars, and corporate greed; and to steal property from
locals, through the condemnation of the pulpit and the the threat of eternal
damnation is inexcusable. This man is a joke and should spend time in
purgatory….oh wait, they just decided to rewrite that whole concept in
2006….so much for absolute clarity of doctrine.

Posted by TomInStL | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:25 pm UTC

The Democratic Party the party of death? It was not the Democratic Party which
killed thousands of dissenters over the centuries, taught murderous hatred of
Jews, and did much to inspire the Nazi genocide of the Jews. It was the so-
called Holy Church.

Posted by norman ravitch | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:28 pm UTC

I believe its a womans right to choose. Whats funny is that the whole cover up
with priest molesting children within the church really makes me sick.
something needs to be done about it.

Posted by nikki | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:39 pm UTC

arguing with someone who doesnt understand nor care to understand the
underpinnings of the theology they hate… well, it is laughable.

there is such a thing as invincible ignorance… and no one group in the entire
US can be attacked with impudence like the Catholic Church. We are aliens in a
Protestant country. Even after all of these years.

The mal-educated are loud, poorly read, and proud. None can seem to understand
that only those who seek Christian Perfection in this lifetime can be
hypocrites. The bar is necessarily too high to be attained in this lifetime.
Still, we are called to try.

Here I see the same old and tired of the lesser arguments:

1) so-called separation of church and state - check  
2) Catholicism as the anit-science anti-christ - check  
3) moral relativism - check  
4) assumptions re the Inquisition - check

yep, in the US, Dan Brown and Michael Moore are the standard-bearers of the
lay "intelligentsia"

give me a break and send the wayward albino monk living under the streets in
the catacombs of the Vatican to the fiction racks.

Posted by Enoch | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:42 pm UTC

[…] Reuters Blogs via Drudge: Vatican officials seldom single out political
leaders who differ with the Church on […]

Posted by Pelosi and Biden in the Vatican Doghouse at No Man's Blog | Report
as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:46 pm UTC

Democrats are well schooled at fabricating lies that are convenient to their
morally bankrupt positions. Being constrained by the truth is just more than
they can handle. How can anyone even hint that the Catholic church has ever
been anything but solidly, vocally opposed to abortion and homosexuality. It
is scriptural truth and not debatable.

Posted by Charlie | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:46 pm UTC

I did not know Republicans were willing wage _nuclear_ warfare against Iran,
seems to me they are the ones working to avoid it while the dems are hoping it
will go away if they sit down with radical muslim leaders with tea and
crumpets. The dems generally do not mind the murder of 1,300,000 unborn human
babies each year in the US, or about 46 million since 1973. In fact they quite
encourage it. Lefties, don't even start, your position on this is
indefensible.

Posted by Vern | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:48 pm UTC

In my opinion religion not politics has been the engine that has fueled the
killing. While we argue over the abortion issue… over when life begins… we go
about killing innocents whether they be Vietnamese or Muslims and the church
does nothing. It's as was spoken in the documentary "Constantine's Sword", if
we had been dropping contraceptives on vietnam instead of napalm, you would
have heard all kinds of outcries from church officials. The same with the
Muslims… we have painted them as a religion that wants to rule the world. Look
at us. In the name of God we go out to kill those who are not believers.

Posted by Joe Stephens | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:51 pm UTC

Abortion is not a religious issue it is a moral/social issue. As any
interested party knows the, as a scientific fact, that there is life when
cells can divide, move around… . This is the fact for plants, animal, fungi
and humans. To deny this proves person ignorance (willful or otherwise).

The true question is when to people give the child full human rights. The
Democrats argue that while the child is in the mother’s womb it has no human
rights. This is proven by there actions and deeds if not there words. The
Catholic Church argues that the child has human right from the moment of
conception. Neither of these positions are religious but moral/social issues.

The majority of rational people can agree that if it a baby is moving,
laughing, and smiling it is alive. They can also agree if it looks like a
duck. walks like a duck and sounds like a duck it is a duck. When added
together the logical conclusion is that long before birth the pre-born child
is human. And if it is human, it should be give human rights of its own but
with a degree of preference given to the mother. That is the rights must be
balanced with greater regard given to the mother.

There is also a point while the baby is growing that it does not look like a
human and some people may rational argue that it is not entitled to human
rights.

This is the discussion we should be having "When should the pre-born be give
human rights and how much should those rights be subservient to the mother"

The Democrats Party platform is that the pre-born child has no human rights
and that the mother has full control over it. This is the same as the argument
give in defense of slavery; slaves were property and did not have any human
rights. In my opinion this is where the Democrats are wrong, if they defended
the human rights of the pre-born after the time most people would agree it was
human and defended the mother’s superior position before that time the party
would have greater moral standing.

Posted by Bruce P | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

1:54 pm UTC

Michael,  
The Vatican is not a political party!

Posted by Stephen | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:07 pm UTC

Read your Bible, please.

It doesn't say ANYTHING directly about abortion.

The Bible says A LOT, very specifically and repeatedly, about how bad it is to
be wealthy. But somehow the Catholic Church manages to overlook that fact.
Otherwise they would be chastizing the Republican party.

Posted by Lau | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:10 pm UTC

Religion has always been part of American political process. Religion informs
our core value systems. Would we have been rid of slavery (abolitionists), jim
crow (Dr. King), or the great progressive social movements of the 19th century
with out religiosly influenced and motivated people? I think not. Even the
revolution stems much from the 1st great awakening in the colonies in the
decades prior. People must read their history. De Toqueville had it right, the
strength of America is a citizenry whose lives are grounded and influenced by
a vibrant spiritual tradition.

Posted by Tom of Can tuk e' | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:10 pm UTC

I'd hardly call Biden a practicing Catholic. Let's see, over the past 10 years
Biden has averaged less than $7. a week in all donations or .12% of his annual
income. The last time he went to a Catholic church was probably for a funeral.
Where are his morals? Does he only want to help people with other people's
money? This fits into the pattern of other high Democrat officials. They are
the tightest of the tight while Republicans of all religions have recently
shown to be much more generous giving 10% or more to their churches and
charity. I don't believe in tithing to a church, but spreading 10% of your
income to all types of charit1es is probably a good thing to do.

Posted by Bruno Bornino | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:17 pm UTC

Michael Cecil claims that the Republicans are threatening to nuke Iran(not
true) but apparently he is failing to keep up with what Mr. Obama has said.
See attached article where: Obama: Iran threatens all of us -- Won't rule out
force in speech in Chicago to pro-Israel group.

The reason he states this is because Iran is a threat to the world. There are
actually some things worth fighting for. Freedom happens to top the list,
which is why I oppose Mr. Obama's policies of bigger government. Bigger
government takes away my ability to contribute as generously as I want to
charities such as Smile Train, Wounded Warrior, St Jude Children's Cancer
Research Hospital and my church who supports among other things, pensions for
African ministers and their spouses. How much money did you contribute to
Africa from your personal bank account last year?

I'm not a wealthy conservative, I'm still theoretically not going to get my
taxes raised under Mr. O's plan, but I do not support his defense of letting
babies die with no care who have survived botched abortions. Nor could I ever
support killing a baby whose projected birthday is a couple of weeks away.
Can't you see how utterly Hitler-esque that kind of thinking is? And if you
want to go there, how about the Terry Schaivo case? It was the Democratic
party who supported her "humane" death of starvation and dehydration, not the
Republicans. There actually is little doubt that Democrats are the party of
death.

P.S. If you want a good laugh this weekend, go see "American Carol". It shows
what our country would be like if President Lincoln had chosen not to fight
the Civil War. Might open your eyes a bit. Of course maybe you aren't as open
minded as you think you are…

Posted by Maj | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:18 pm UTC

Sheesh, who cares what these bishops think. They don't live in the real world.
Look at the membership of the catholic church. Down, down, down.

Posted by Derek | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:19 pm UTC

First, thanks to all who have read this far.

Second, the amount of vitriol against the Catholic Church in many of these
posts is sad and staggering.

Why is it that those who say they are "tolerant" and "accepting" (most of whom
are anti-Catholic, anti-Christan, and anti-Liberty, but certainly not all) are
the first to pull out the long knives when someone disagrees with them?

While I don't expect that you who disagree with the Catholic Church would take
the time to actually _read_ her official documents (especially the Catechism),
I think it was Bishop Fulton Sheen who said, "ninety-nine percent of those who
hate the Church do so because of what they think the Church teaches,"
inferring that when people actually read what the Church believes and teaches,
the hate is (at least) replaced by understanding.

Why Jesus Christ founded the Church on Peter, a fallible human being (as are
all human beings -- bishops, priests, and you and me) is a mystery. However,
the truths the Church teaches are just that - Truths !

(Note to the poster who mentioned the terracentric/heliocentric argument:
understand that faith and reason work together, and consider the state of the
world in those days. Then see if you can understand why the Church took a
little longer that we "enlightened" moderns to accept heliocentricism).

Truth is absolute. Those who say it is not have defeated their own argument.

Shame on you for your hypocrisy!

Posted by ITB Conservative | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:37 pm UTC

This "church" encourages the molesting of children yet takes what the
catholics call "the high road". Pope, sell you hat and give the money to the
poor like Jesus would have done.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:39 pm UTC

This is silly. The eradication of dogma has led to more evil in the European
continent in 30 years (1915-1945) than all the previous evil in all previous
centuries. You dolts who claim ignorance about the obvious, when life begins,
are no doubt repulsed because I club baby seals just to hear them squeal! Oh
yeah! I make omelets out of bald eagle eggs because they are not yet a life!
The best thing about mindless, immoral liberals is that they are a self-
exterminating lot. Most of my friends reproduce like they have hope and
something to live for. My pagan sister and gay brother are childless though.
Abortion is the best idea for liberals to practice. Although I pray the
INNOCENT who are lost. I wish that America had listened to its
noninterventionist Republicans and let Hitler slaughter the lot of Europeans.
The perfect abortion. You are right, we should have stayed out of that war in
Europe and let the abortion loving freaks argue with the Nazi's about how war
sucks.  
God Bless, even you heathens,  
Chris

Posted by Chris Nelson | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:49 pm UTC

there's death seekers in both parties. what they fail to realize is that their
own mothers were ALL pro-life !!!!!!!

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7vb1ZtmM IE

Posted by rich | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

2:55 pm UTC

This is the leadership we in St. Louis have valued during Archbishop Burke's
service here. March on, noble Champion of the Lord!

Posted by Jim | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:09 pm UTC

I've always thought of the Vatican and the Catholic Church as the "party of
pedophilia".

Posted by Cash Billings | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:12 pm UTC

Both major parties are already parties of death.

Posted by Doug Brenner | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:13 pm UTC

It’s hard to take this seriously when the Roman Church refuses to discipline
members of its clergy who were convicted of genocide in Rwanda or discipline
those of its clergy who promoted the Cambodian Genocide (and mass murder in
South Vietnam and Laos) by supporting the Communist victory in Indochina. It
is also a direct assault on American sovereignty as well as a vindication of
principled anti-Catholic sentiment. The Roman Church pretends it has moral
authority despite the fact that the pedophile priest scandals has definitively
shown that it hasn’t.

Posted by Ark Ashamed of Bill | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:19 pm UTC

Beautiful !!!  
We have been waiting for the church to speak out boldly!  
Pray for Pope Benedict & Cardinal Burke. The church has a divine
responsibility (higher than man's law) to proclaim truth… we will all be
called one day to account for our actions, or lack thereof, in defending the
children (born & pre-born). As Jesus declared "It were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he
should offend one of these little ones." Luke 17:2

Posted by Dr. Kevin Norton | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:25 pm UTC

sure, we as americans go out and napalm and kill alot of innocents. sure,
things could be alot better and some guy with a video camera can prove anyone
with any opinion is in the right. Yes, we should be walking a better path with
our lives, i agree. but lets face it..napalm is pretty when it blows up and
all these conflicts we fight make for great video games.

Posted by Evil neocon guy or so you say | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:25 pm UTC

Yes. Pres. Bush sends thousands of our troops to die for a lie, while killing
hundreds of thousands of Iraqi's - and the democratic party now led by Obama,
who spoke out AGAINST this, is the party of death.

And don't they understand that a huge majority of those who are PRO CHOICE
only vote that way because it's not the governments choice to decide what a
woman does with her own body? I would NEVER have an abortion but don't want my
legislators deciding this for me. This is still a free country.

SHAME ON THE POPE.

Posted by Amy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:32 pm UTC

FACT: The only President of the United States to approve and release a nuclear
weapon against humanity was Harry S. Truman…Democrat.

The Democrats are the only party with a track record of nuking people.

Posted by JJ Little | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:39 pm UTC

I will pray for all those women and men who are not responsible enough to co-
create a human being and then decide to kill the child.  
But I do insist that my taxes do not go to assist any woman that has an
abortion or is contemplating to.  
If you want it-Pay for it yourself.

Posted by Donna Lenz | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:48 pm UTC

Burke apparently mistakenly thinks he speaks for ALL Catholics….where are his
comments regarding Bush & Cheney's immoral war & torture ??? Does he think the
Catholic Church is perfect? I beg to differ…let him judge his colleague,
Cardinal LAW, who turned his back and moral authority on the children who were
abused on "his watch"…Does Burke speak against that? What about the abuse in
his own St. Louis area…how does he look at himself in the mirror these days,
and not feel like a sinner?? I hope his "glass house" shatters!

Posted by DickNH | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:48 pm UTC

should be of interest to OLOJ parishoners

Posted by n.salemi | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:50 pm UTC

There are many who fault the Catholic Church for inserting itself into the
political fray. Yet, these same individuals have no problem with the fact that
Rev. Jeramiah Wright spoke for some 20+ years not only from the pulpit but
directly into the ear of the Democratic Nominee, Barack Obama and his Wife
Michelle.

You should believe that the words Rev. Wright spoke had a profound effect on
Mr. Obama's views. If you have any doubt about this please do your research on
his voting record in Illinois and the US Senate. I won't insult your
intelligence by giving links that may sway those reading this to my way of
thinking.

Religion or lack of it will always and has always creeped its way into
governments. As long as any one Religion doesn't run OUR government, our
Constitution is safe.

Posted by Judy Dias | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:50 pm UTC

Yes, and the Catholic Church risks "transforming itself into a Church of
Pedophiles for hiding known pedophiles from law enforcement for decades within
their church". The churches continued tactics of dissemination regarding this
issue and others disgusts me. Their position of moral authority is a joke.
Raymond Burke, you disgust me.  
A once and never again Catholic…  
Good Day

Posted by Phillip Weeks | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

3:56 pm UTC

My dear Michael….where do we begin? You conspiracy theorists truly have a gift
for making all things more complicated than they really are. The ONLY thing
the Roman Catholic Church is complicit in is spreading world Peace. Only a
twisted mind sees otherwise. The Church is also opposed to war, but realizes
that there always was, is, and will be conflict. I realize you can’t grasp
this, but we're a fallen race, and nothing will change that. There truly is
Evil in the world, and where it is met, it must be dealt with.  
As far as the US being on the verge of nuclear war with Iran…. It will never
happen. You must learn to be thankful for Countries like the United States and
Israel, who when faced with Evil, will seize the opportunity to quash it. Make
no mistake; Iran will not be given the chance to acquire nuclear weapons.  
You naively ask, where does the Church get the millions to rightly pay for all
the abuse cases? By selling property, it’s really that simple my friend. And
while you’re hung up on the abuse subject, did you know that the incidence of
Priestly abuse is appx. 1.5% of acting Priests? While still way too high, it
mirrors that of the general populous of appx 1.3%. And is no higher than that
of any other religious order, or even that of the Boy Scouts. There goes that
“fallen race thing” again….  
I fully realize you’re a Dove with a capital D Michael, however, thank God
there are just enough Hawks in the world to protect the rest of us from the
evildoers in this fallen world. Relax buddy, things really aren’t all that
complicated. After all, it was Christ who said,  
“I say to you, except you turn, and become as little children, you shall in no
way enter into the kingdom of heaven.”

Posted by Scott | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:00 pm UTC

War was never necessary against anyone? I suppose that Michael and others
would rather be speaking German (if their ancestors had been allowed to live).
I suppose that countries like Iran should be allowed to do as they please and
threaten their neighbors as they see fit. We know how much the UN is going to
abate that. I'm sure they'll play nice with everyone. And if they don't, then
we can have a war and surely it will involve a lot of innocent people.

No, surgical strikes on nuclear facilities and strategic locations is
preferable. And where did Michael get his info of us going to nuclear war in
the first place? I must have missed that. I don't recall anything but
conventional weapons being used since WWII. As always, there is someone on the
fringe left that will seek to change the main conversation by diverting and
elevating the talk to something on the extreme edge.

Posted by KW | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:07 pm UTC

There is no such thing as a "pro-choice' party. It is in fact PRO-DEATH. All
of you PRO-DEATHers, think about where you'd all be if YOUR mothers had
abortion available to them!!! All the PRO-death scam artists started by
demanding easy access to contraceptives to prevent unwanted pregnancies. OK,
you got it! Then that didn't quite do the job, so let's have abortion
legalized. OK so you got it!! Next we can't make up our minds to decide, abort
or not to abort. Well, let's wait 7 or 8 months. OK, let's wait till the
birth, and then we can suck the the little 'whatever's' brains out and just
kill the little 'whatever'. Happy now?  
No?? Well then what's next?? You PRO-DEATHers are responsible for the dramatic
increases in the murders of new born babies, dumping them in flushes, trash
containers and whatever is available at the time. You have made life worthless
with your total disregard for human life. Shame!!!

Posted by fred | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:14 pm UTC

Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are the religions of death and in the case of
Catholics they are also the religion of pedophilia. Let’s get real here, more
lives have been lost & destroyed from these three than all the abortions in
the world. It’s time for religion to stay out of politics; there is no place
for fantasy thinking in out government. Why does the Catholic God kill so many
in hurricanes and tsunamis? Is he just an angry, murdering bastard or isn’t it
really that there is no God and all this make-believe is hurting humanity's
ability to deal with reality. I say it’s time to close down these 3 religions
for the welfare and betterment of all the Earth’s inhabitants!

Posted by Reality Check | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:14 pm UTC

I don't know who all you bloggers are but none of what you say makes any
difference to anything related to abortion. Abortion is a simple issue. If you
believe life begins at conception (it's a proven scientific fact that human
DNA exists in the embryo) then abortion is murder - end of conversation. If
you can justify in your moral value system that life begins when you decide it
does then abortion at anytime other that what you think, even partial birth
abortion, should be ok with you. If you believe the former then abortion is
not a matter of choice it is a matter of murder and is not related to any
other things. If you think the latter abortion it just removing something that
is causing you an inconvenience - end of conversation. Any other conversation
in just wasted rationalization and has no relevance at all.

The choice in this election is clear. On one side the candidates are strong
believers in the sanctity of the life of the unborn child, on the other side
are strong believers that anyone who wants to can kill their unborn child even
using partial birth abortion. Shut America and make your choice. All should be
happy that America finally have the chance to go on record before God and
everyone as to where we stand. Don't waste your time talking about it, it's a
personal choice based on you moral value system and your view as it relates to
the respect you have for human life. We will show what our true value system
isin this election. I think it's great and don't care what anyone else thinks.
As I said before it's a personal decision just shut up and make it. If you
don't have a value system that lets you make this decision without input from
others you might want to think about a vote against abortion but that's up to
you I couldn't care less what you think on this issue.

Posted by ld | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:17 pm UTC

Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are the religions of death and in the case of
Catholics they are also the religion of pedophilia. Let’s get real here, more
lives have been lost & destroyed from these three than all the abortions in
the world. It’s time for religion to stay out of politics; there is no place
for fantasy thinking in our government. Why does the Catholic God kill so many
in hurricanes and tsunamis? Is he just an angry, murdering bastard or isn’t it
really that there is no God and all this make-believe is hurting humanity’s
ability to deal with reality. I say it’s time to close down these 3 religions
for the welfare and betterment of all the Earth’s inhabitants!

Posted by Reality Check | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:23 pm UTC

Raymond Burke was the Bishop in St. Louis for years. His ignorance,
exemplified in this position, is exactly why I left the Catholic church. He
was an embarrassment in St. Louis, his is an embarrassment in the Vatican.
Dogma kills rational discussion.

Posted by recovering | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:31 pm UTC

Take religion out of the abortion issue for this argument and decide - when
does life begin?

Most rational people agree that murder is wrong. Once life begins, abortion
has to be murder. It is always murder no matter how that life began, rape,
incest, loving sex, in-vitro fertilization, makes no difference, if life has
begun then it is murder. If I am the product of rape or incest is it OK to
kill me when I am 50 years old? So, all this stupidity about abortion being OK
in rape and incest makes no sense - it all depends on when life begins not how
it begins. I can agree with terminating a preganancy early if the life and
health of the mother is at risk but then every reasonable effort must be made
to support the life of the baby because they are alive!

There is no scientific answer to when life begins so it is anyone's opinion.
If you choose to believe (are of the opinion) that life begins sometime after
conception, then you need to decide when that is - 4wks? - 20wks? - 28 wks
(commonly thought of as the age of viability i.e. in a medical sense when the
baby is more likely to live than not if born then)? -full birth? If it is
anything other than full birth then late term abortions are murder. If you
think life begins at full birth then you should be OK with abortions up to the
very second of birth - at 40 weeks. If you think life begins at some other
time than birth, then to me you are just arbitrarily picking numbers. Most
people agree that the abscence of brain function (brain death) is the end of
life. Take that backwards and you could argue that the beginning of brain
function is the beginning of life - that is about 1 week after conception - so
almost every fetus is alive one week after conception and thus almost every
abortion is murder even from a purely scientific view.

We as people have a responsibility to prevent murder, no matter where or how
or when it occurs, no matter whether we like, know, approve of or care about
the victim, . Yes, we have a responsibility to prevent the type of murder
called abortion by direct intervention, legislation, education or any other
non violent means.

If you are a religious person, the Bible clearly teaches that life begins at
conception. So, for any christion every abortion is always murder and every
christian has a right and responsibility to actively work against abortion.

I know of no one who has said that you have to be perfect before you can
encourage others to be better. So, just because the Bishop or the church is
not perfect, they can still encourage others to be better. I am very over
weight but I can still encourage my wife to lose weight, this is not being
judgemental, this is being human and supportive. The bishop did not encourage
that the politicians be stoned, cast into hell or anything like that - he just
wants them to follow thier faith better.

Posted by js | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:33 pm UTC

The dems are the party of death indeed, and abortion is the sickest act of
inhumanity ever perpetrated on humanity and you people "OWN IT" ..History will
show who the animals were in the 20th and 21st century, that you can be sure..

Anyone who defends the killing of fetuses has no ground to stand on for
anything regarding other peoples morality or lack thereof. If you can't defend
the weakest of humans to the tune of 50 plus million in less than a
coupeldecades, you people are the wrost mass murderers in human history, how
does it feel?

Then all these stupid clever little monikers you people use all like this
crapola, as everyone in Sodom & Gomorrah known as liberal land has a label and
five names like so: "pro choice catholic PC approving African Italian American
Joe says" what the hell is that crap about anyway? Stand for something for
once besides death and hatred.. What a bunch of crap you people spew calling
yourselves intellectuals and purveyors of freedom and such, You need help
please get it..

Posted by Chicago Ray | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:44 pm UTC

I say go Brother Burke! You rock! As far as war in general, I'm sure he'd have
a lot to say-especially about the one in Iraq. Unfortunately, some are
necessary and will not cease till the true Prince of Peace comes…and by the
way, He will be weilding a rod of iron, book of Revelation…let's see, is he
breaking the ten commandments? I think not. And if we consider abortion
murder, then religious belief has nothing to do with it. Shall we legalize all
murder? I think not!

Posted by Nancy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:48 pm UTC

I don't have audio on my computer, so if you can't read that I put "rose" then
I guess my comment can't be posted. If there's something else I need to do, I
can't hear it to do it. (Please don't post this comment because it's to you
whoever you are!)

Posted by Nancy | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:52 pm UTC

When the Pope turns himself and Cardinal Law (harboring in the Vatican) in for
questioning and trial regrading their complicity in systematic sexual abuse of
children, there may be some reason to listen. Until then, "let he who is
without guilt…" and "better to be cast into the depths with a millstone around
the neck" apply.

Posted by Tony | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

4:55 pm UTC

Many of these comments seems like they are touchy. How hard is it to
understand that when you support the termination of 47 million helpless
infants, you are changing the life of the country. The only thing that the
Vatican did was reaffirm the facts. Prayerfully, i hope that this message and
other messages from the Bishops will change the hearts of the many Catholic
who have been misled by those who deviate from Church teachings for selfish
reasons.

Posted by Deacon Joe | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:01 pm UTC

Can't impose your religion on others? Everyone has deeply held beliefs that
drive your decisions. It is impossible NOT to have a belief system. Not all
religions have deities. How then can you say you have no religion. You CAN'T
have equal care and concern for all points of view, it's an impossibility. Try
and have equal care and concern for views of a rapist and the woman he wants
to rape. It is not possible. Either he gets his way, or she gets hers. We KNOW
that her way is correct. Stop trying to sound high and mighty and say 'you
have no religion' - you absolutely have beliefs and a point of view. The point
is - whose view is correct?

Posted by James Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:02 pm UTC

It's about time Catholic democrats who support abortion are called out by
their church. They proudly announce their religion in campaign media but then
twist its principals to fit their political agenda. Pelosi and Biden have only
to look in the mirror to see who to blame for this issue coming to the
forefront now. Biden and Pelosi: "I am a good catholic……not."

Posted by Tallboat | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:03 pm UTC

We loved you in St Louis Archbishop and appreciate your unwavering support of
the Church!

Posted by LJ | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:04 pm UTC

Well, it's about time!! My entire family were democrats until the mid 70's,
yea they saw the light and went republican. Im glad to see SOME people arent
afraid to be seen as "politically un-correct"? If folks of this country dont
see that its dangerous to lose morals then it's all over but the crying. GOOD
JOB BISHOP! Amazing to me that were even worried about this Obama and his
cronies getting control of our Nation! Just 20 years ago we'd have just
laughed at the idea of this guy with sooooo many warning signs even thinking
of running for the highest office in the world. WOW. Ronald Regan was right
when he said that "freedom is just 1 generation away from being lost"…now were
watching that very thing happen…God help us! reminds me of a song by an old
group called Megadeath, "Symphony of Destruction", next time you see a rally
for Obama, turn down the tv volume and throw in the cd.

Posted by vince | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:05 pm UTC

If you do not know when life begins, why do you act like you do? If you think
there's a baby inside the brown paper bag, you do not kick the bag.

Posted by James Johnson | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:08 pm UTC

GMT, I would love it if you could explain what you feel is ignorant about
Burke's position?

Posted by LJ | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:10 pm UTC

It is very clear; if you are a Catholic and vote for a Democrat you are just
as guilty as someone that has an abortion. Democrats are GODLESS creatures.

Posted by H Crapper | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:16 pm UTC

Hey guys! I've found where all the left-wing atheist nutjobs hang out. They're
over on the Reuters site.

Posted by Dave A. | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:29 pm UTC

oh and for "ITB Conservative"s comment posted earlier…Jesus didnt build the
church on "Peter"…he was referring to the answer that Peter had just given him
concerning who Peter said Jesus was..the Christ..That "Truth" is what Jesus
built his church on…the belief that Jesus is the Messiah.

Posted by vince | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:30 pm UTC

From what i understand of this article the Bishop was only referencing the
fact that two of the democratic party's leaders WHOM mentioned the fact they
were Catholic.

his article mentions abortion it was not him saying this for some political
race, it was the Bishop reminding those and not just the 2 mentioned that if
your Catholic then live by those teachings,, now being most of the Catholics
or those that proclaim to be are in the democratic party.

his words were just a reminder of the teachings of the Catholic church to
which all say they belong and aspire to follow those teachings so follow the
teachings, and not the teachings of the democratic party that go against the
teachings of the Church , abortion which democrats are mostly in favor by
party lines hence the suggestion of the "party of death" this said because it
went against the teachings of the catholic church which these people listed
and others love to proclaim which is wonderful if its just to let people know
they belong to that church and not for political gain my take on this as for
republicans in this and all others in the world the church are not without sin
but they possibly do not belong to the Catholic Church so the Bishop makes
broader statements on this as a church position on the other arguments that
are stated within this post this becomes separation of church and state, they
are views/opinions of the church. but to say i am a Catholic live by your
teachings and teach from those as taught to you by that same church not by
direction of a political party if you feel these teachings are not correct to
your beliefs then you need to do a couple of things look elsewhere for a
church, and quit calling yourself a Catholic, in life those that believe God
is first and foremost before anything else and from this dictates how you go
in your lives on a daily basis

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:31 pm UTC

Not worth spit coming from a bunch of child molesters that wear funny hats and
long robes.  
The only thing more pathetic than the Republican party is the Catholic Church.

Posted by handycapt | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:44 pm UTC

Get a grip people. The Church is against the willful decision to take life by
medical abortion. They are also against taking human life via weapons of mass
destruction, genocide, terrorism, etc. There is an established Judeo-Christian
concept of a "just war" and active resistance rationale for combating I.E.
Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, Soviet Russia, Communist China, and militant
Islam for starters. If we chose to die rather than actively resist violence
that is also an acceptable alternative. Putting your liberal heads in the sand
is not an option though. As people of faith evil must be confronted either
actively (just war) or passively ( Ghandi). If you cannot descern the
difference between a just war and murder you are simply blind. The West is
full of the "usefull idiots" as V.I. Lenin was so fond of. Get a grip, hooray
that the Catholic Church is standing up for absolute truth-bravo!  
-Russ Ramey Lima, Ohio

Posted by RussRamey6 | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:45 pm UTC

and that is your opinion to which your entitled to and this whole
conversation, this blog this article was about an opinion from the teachings
of a church reminding them that belong to teach correctly if you say you are
one of us teach how you were taught not how a political party mandates

if they can not teach by their own church which the publicly say they belong
why say i am Catholic

Any group formed has laws and bylaws which the members are required to follow
in order to remain members of said group to which you freely confess , agree
enter into contract and agree to uphold these people did just that they agreed
to uphold the catholic church and their teachings in their lives, and the
Bishop just reminded them of this agreement they have with the church they
freely belong to and are members of

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:46 pm UTC

Those who are pro-life, but against an "unjust war", and voting Obama/Biden,
are voting for one infanticide-promoter and for one pro-war candidate who
supports abortion (Biden voted for the war), so you are voting FOR everything
you are against!

Posted by Kathleen | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:50 pm UTC

Having an abortion without being given the facts, and then finding out years
later what you've done, kills, maims and destroys a lot of women too. The
babies are not the only victims.

Posted by Kathleen | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

5:51 pm UTC

i am sure that if the president, vp, or any other person holding a political
office were a member of the Catholic Church i am sure the Bishop would have
said the same things to them i am not sure so i can not state that, but don't
cut off the nose to spite the face there were some bad apples in the Catholic
churches and i for one HOPE that all of those have been dealt with.to the
highest extent of the law but i for one can not sit back and condemn the whole
Catholic church based on a few misguided unchecked priests.

Very interesting reading and thanks for the indepth look into the democratic
thinking

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:03 pm UTC

If life does not begin at conception, then when does it begin? This is the
unanswered question which indicts the "wisdom" of abortion advocates.

Conception is the creation of life from the contribution of a living woman and
a man. Life begets life. It is the very essence of life and the procreation of
mankind.

It is difficult to understand how interfering with this life giving biological
process through which a baby is delivered -- absent only the interference --
could be construed in any manner other than tampering with a natural process
that inalterably leads to life. This is how we all got here, isn't it?

The Catholic church states the obvious -- men tamper with God's creation at
their own peril. The church speaks with clarity, wisdom and sound logic in
defending its dogma but more importantly it speaks truth!

I pray for those who believe that man can or should tamper with the creation
of life with no consequences.

If an American politician wants to portray himself as a "Catholic" then the
basis for that characterization is fair game to be explored. No different than
if an American politician wants to present himself as a Veteran.

The Church should excommunicate any politician who supports abortion while
portraying himself as a Catholic.

Posted by JLM | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:06 pm UTC

For a Church to say such nonsense is terrible. There is evidence that the
church cooperated with the Nazis in their party of death (the Holocaust)…the
Democrats were in charge when America won WWI and WWII…Had they failed, there
would today be no Vatican, no Church. Mind your own business and stay out of
American politics.

Posted by fred lapides | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:08 pm UTC

It matters not what religion or none- it's all personal responsibility! EVERY
single problem in this country would be fixed if we were held accountable for
our actions. Simple. You choose to have sex-you could very well have a baby or
a disease. You choose by taking off your trousers. TAKE CARE OF YOURSELVES
PEOPLE! I believe as the REPUBLICANS- KILL TAXES and RAISE BABIES.

Posted by Miwest Momma | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:19 pm UTC

I find it very ironic that there are many "liberals" who are so anti-war (even
necessary wars) that they take every chance they can to call the troops "baby
killers", when these EXACT SAME PEOPLE actually support legalized infanticide
and encourage women to kill their babies even over adoption (when was the last
time Planned Parenthood actually encouraged a woman to give her baby up for
adoption instead of killing him?)

Sick. But it makes sense.

Rom 1:28-32 ESV And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave
them up to a debased mind to do what ought not to be done. (29) They were
filled with all manner of unrighteousness, evil, covetousness, malice. They
are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, maliciousness. They are gossips,
(30) slanderers, haters of God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of
evil, disobedient to parents, (31) foolish, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
(32) Though they know God's decree that those who practice such things deserve
to die, they not only do them but give approval to those who practice them.

Posted by Jeff | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:29 pm UTC

and we as Americans wonder WHY in our society today people can not sit down
and have a good debate on anything without it becoming political,, and why are
we in the state we are in look through this blog read the differant opinions
on just his one item now tell me if a handful of people can not see the forest
for the trees how do we EXPECT our own leaders to do the same,, site your
opinions thats freedom of speech, now if we could just get our leaders to just
look at each other instead of pushing a hard edged agenda we could make this a
heck of a lot better place to live , with diversification thriving because
people would acknowledge others have a right to an opinion as well , but the
marks of true leaders are those that stand up in the face of adversity and
their opinions heard and understood ,,we elect our government to do one thing
while they are in office to take care of business and i don't think finger
pointing and back stabbing is doing it, whom have you seen stand up in
government and set an example never mind their party putting aside their party
and saying enough we were elected to run this country not just sit here and
stare at the walls if you are not willing to do the job go home . i blame
every single politician in office for failing the Americans from our president
down to the newest members of elected government

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:30 pm UTC

I am catholic and was taught that I am not supposed to kill anyone, or be part
of a group of people that kills. Therefore, I, and I mean me; myself is bound
by these rules. I will not have an abortion and I will not kill anyone and I
will live my life according to the 10 Commandments.  
However, I must forgive and must not impose my views to others unless they are
willing to accept them.  
So, what is the difference between having an abortion (killing a baby) and
invading IRAK and killing people? Maybe, you can kill thousands and that is
OK, but if you kill an unborn child is sin????  
Killing is killing and both should be condemned. No religion has the right to
impose it’s views on people that do not want to follow that particular
religion.

Posted by SafiaJove | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:43 pm UTC

I don't see anything being forced on anyone here! This is a true statement and
I doubt seriously it will cause anyone to change thier religious affiliation!
The political correctness in America is literally strangling us to death! Our
country's forefathers would not have hesitated to allow this innocent
statement to be viewed at a presidential race!

Posted by MM | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

6:52 pm UTC

The real issue here is the fact that mankind is guilty of sin and it manifests
itself in innumerable ways. People have defined for themselves what is right
or wrong and therefore made truth relative from one individual to another. So
how do we know who's right? Well it has to come from someone that is greater
than ourselves, who has already established truth that doesn't change with the
passing of time. It comes from God who made himself known through his son
Jesus Christ who came and died on across for the sin that we are all guilty of
and was then raised to life three days later proving that he was who he said
he was. It is only through believing and placing your faith and trust in him
and nothing else that God cleanses us and forgives us of our sin. God's word (
the bible) is the standard for truth, right and wrong, not the countless
opinions of others that flood these news pages. I know that some will simply
say that they choose not to believe what I'm saying but it's not what I'm
saying in the first place it's what God himself has already said. So people
can choose not to believe if they want, God will not force you, but you will
stand before him in judgement regardless. The bible says that apart from a
relationship with Jesus, people will have to spend eternity in hell because of
their refusal to believe by placing their faith in Jesus. You want to know the
right view you should have in relationship to all the posts that have been put
up here? You'll only have a correct understanding if you belong to Christ.

stuart

Posted by stuart | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:06 pm UTC

The catholic church doesn't want abortions and they also don't believe in
birth control. Can't have it both ways.

Posted by nikki | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:08 pm UTC

This article and thread is a pretty good reason why we should be overthrowing
the Vatican and turning St. Peter's Basilica into a nightclub.

It's the 21st century: Catholicism has no relevance to this world today.

Posted by danger hussein al-malak choom al-khadra | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:29 pm UTC

Obviously this Michael Cecil has a problem accepting the truth. Sometimes the
truth hurts Michael.

Posted by Dr J | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:34 pm UTC

The posters here amaze me with their lack of knowledge of history or
misinterpretation thereof. Europe's wars of religion were really over who
would be rulers of particular territories. The Crusades were in response to
centuries of wars of aggression and ethnic cleansing on the part of Muslims.
Religion was merely used as a method of propaganda to motivate the masses to
become soldiers or otherwise aid in the war effort. In our day and age the
only religion that wages war because of religion are Muslims. Posters misquote
scripture saying 'Thou shall not kill' when it really says 'Thou shall not
murder.' There is a difference though one wonders if they could ever discern
it in their ignorance. Over the last 100 years nearly all of the world's war,
misery, and mass killing of innocents has been perpetrated by those who would
now be labeled as 'Progressives.' They labor under labels like the National
Socialist German Workers Party, Socialism, Marxism and Communism. Hundreds of
millions of innocents were murdered by the command of people with names like
Stalin, Mao, Pol Pot, and Hitler. People who all had one thing in common; they
were socialists. Just like the 'Progressive' liberal Democrats in today's
America.

Posted by str8talk | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:37 pm UTC

No matter how anyone twists this story, it's about Life and following the
teaching of the Catholic Church. A "fetus" is a human being. It's not a dog or
a cat or any other kind of creature growing in the woman. Life begins at the
moment of conception, and it's touched by God and given a Soul. This belief
cannot be changed by the Church, it's non negotiable. Centuries can come and
go, but the teachings of Christ will never change. An abortion for whatever
reason is forgivable. All you need to do is be truly sorry and repent. You can
also urge society to refrain from irresponsible behavior. When you have sex,
yes, there is a chance the woman will get pregnant! Most women regret their
abortions, and the main reason they have it IS because they have no choice!

Posted by evasapple | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:39 pm UTC

since abortion was legalized. a lot of people seem to use it as a birth
control. maybe men need to be more careful. i myself am catholic and we are
not to believe in abortion. the soul enters the body at the moment of
conception. but if you do not bleive in god then that is your choice. it is
something that you will have to deal with when you leave this earth. i knew
someone that had an abortion at 6 months into her pregancy. could not belive
it. tried to talk her out of it. happened about 10 yers ago. i never forgot
about it. all christians should not believe in it. i feel.

Posted by mary | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

7:55 pm UTC

I hope diehard republicans don't only vote for them on this topic.

Then again baldwin is a minister. Maybe he will get some votes from some of
the republicrats over this news.

will c.

Posted by baldwin | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:06 pm UTC

"Pro-choice" Democrats are the wolves in sheeps clothing that Jesus talked
about…let's all pray for their souls.

Posted by Robert Narvaez | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:13 pm UTC

Fascinating discussion, I've learned a lot.  
So how about this… war and murder are nothing bur VERY late term abortions?

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:30 pm UTC

John, we are talking about the article and the subject is abortion. Why bring
in an other subject like war to justify one wrong with the other.

Posted by evasapple | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:34 pm UTC

Good to see a prominent Catholic figure telling the truth about the Dems. Re:
Schiavo, abortion.

Posted by More conservative than Rush | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:42 pm UTC

Since progressives have all the answers but can't seem to stop war, poverty,
child-abuse, animal abuse, green house gasses etcetera…the Catholic church
should stop reminding them of their other failures.

Be nice to the know-it-alls!

Posted by Johnny Left | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

8:45 pm UTC

Homosexual pedifiles shouldn't be pointing fingers at anyone.

Posted by john | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:09 pm UTC

[…] Biden and Pelosi get bitch slapped by the Vatican. An American, the former
St. Louis Archbishop Raymond Burke called US Democrats the "Party of Death."
[…]

Posted by Weekends Insanity | Madness Letters | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:23 pm UTC

What needs to be added here are some numbers and other facts. Abortion in
America tortures and kills 3000 babies a day. We can call it whatever name
people want, but that is what it does. Americans dying in Iraq used to be an
average of 2.3 deaths a day, which is far lower than about 40 murders in the
US and perhaps 3 to 5 murders in Chicago alone. About 7000 people die in the
US per day not including the 3000 liberal abortion murders. So Iraq is a quite
low percentage of American deaths while abortions are a huge percentage of
that - and yet the media who hated Bush can only find stories for the 2.3
deaths and none others. Now lets add the 3 million deaths in Vietnam and
Cambodia when the liberals like Jane Fonda and John Kerry asked us to pull
out. Anyone smart enough to understand that no matter how you get into a war,
if you leave and abandon your allies, lots of people die? Obama and the
Democrats can't figure that one out and want to repeat slaughter in Iraq by
surrendering. And my internet says that communists killed more than 50 million
last century, with Mao at 40 million and Khmer Rouge at 2 million and there
were others. But liberal Hollywood loves the communists and seems to hate
Senator McCarthy who tried to warn - hey you know? These might not be nice
people.  
And then there is the civil war where Democrat Stephan A Douglas was for
slavery and so was the supreme court in their 1860 Dred Scott decision that
said Black people aint got no rights (overturning the 1820 Missouri Compromise
which began to free some slaves), and it was Republican Lincoln and many other
Republicans who fought to the death against the evil Democrats to free African
American slaves. Whoopi Goldberg on the View seems to imply that Republicans
want to enslave her. And liberal presidents sat on their butts while some of
our embassies burned and 230 Americans would die and looked the other way
until Bush came along. Read the history books sports fans. Democrats are
becoming the party of death.

Posted by Ron | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:26 pm UTC

Thank you!! It's about time!!!!!

Posted by Loren | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:28 pm UTC

Q: When does human life begin?

A: After a child's first birthday? On the day a child is born? When they are
in the birth canal? One week before that? During the 8th month of pregnancy?
Fourth month? If you believe the answer to that question is "above your pay
grade", then the default should fall on the side of life. If you can't specify
when life starts then you must also acknowledge that abortion could indeed be
an act of murder.

"Pro-Choice" is a an oxymoron. It can only exist under the false pretense that
there is only one life that affected by that "choice". Imagine, just for a
moment, what "choice" the millions of innocent murdered babies would make if
were possible to give them that opportunity. If that's too abstract, try this;
imagine what YOUR "choice" would be if you wound up being on the wrong side of
someone exercising their right to "pro-choice".

The argument of "if you are 'pro-life' but you are not anti-war and anti-death
penalty, etc., then you are a hypocrite" simply does not hold up. Wouldn't the
counter-argument be that "if you are pro-choice" you must be "pro-war", "pro-
death" penalty, etc. or else you are a hypocrite"? It is safe to say that as a
general rule the opposite of aforementioned is true. Does that mean that those
who are "pro-choice" are only for death when it deals with the most innocent
of all human beings? Oh, that's right; a woman's right to choose only involves
the woman…there are no innocent human beings being murdered when an abortion
is performed. That false pretense must be adhered to or the whole argument
comes crashing down.

Crazy stuff.

Posted by Hornig | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:37 pm UTC

Whether you like it or not , Archbishop Burke is perfectly right. Check out
the Democratic vs the Republican party platforms and the positions of the
various candidates. Though not all Republicans vote completely pro-life, many
do and many others support many of the pro-life positions. Definitely not so
for the Dems.

Posted by Marion Smyth | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:47 pm UTC

Way back up the string, Dave claims that it is "unethical" to impose ones
religion on another.  
Were you correct and consistent, Dave, you would then be required to
decriminalize murder in any form. That is a religious belief, grounded in
Judeo-Christian teaching and theology as promulgated by God according to
Exodus, Chapter 20.  
Now, if you disagree and asert that murder should not be allowed, whether or
not you accept the notion that its prohibition is based on a religious belief,
then you must also accept the principle abortion (infanticide) must also be
prohibited. Otherwise, you have demonstrated that you have made the choice to
simply make up whatever laws suit your own personal preference and fancy,
lacking any logically consistent grounding. That, of course is one of the
hallmarks of political liberals, including most Democrats, today.

A protestant Christian who concurs with my Catholic Christian brothers and
sisters.

Posted by Larry B | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:47 pm UTC

I think it's high time we remove the tax free status of churches, synagogues,
mosques, temples, etc… and really, REALLY get on with being a country that
embodies the separation of church and state. It's gotten so ridiculous that I
can't stand it. Why is so much power over the decision on abortion given to
Christian believers anyway? It's not their decision to make. The fact of
abortion is that it is now, in the year 2008, a legal, science-based medical
procedure that we as biological human beings, regardless of faith or atheism,
etc… have to deal with. The fact that the argument whether a fetus has a soul
(Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish, Dianetic, etc…) or not will never, ever
be resolved screams out that the only way to settle the issue is to have
freedom of choice!!

Posted by Mike A Jones | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

9:58 pm UTC

SafiaJove,

Let not your heart be troubled attempting to discern why some of your fellow
Catholics would take a stand against abortion while defending ANY warfare,
such as in Iraq where killing does indeed take place.  
You might want to read St. Augustine very thoroughly so as to understand the
concept of a "just war." After doing so, you MIGHT then want to argue that
Iraq does not meet St. Augustine's test and demonstrate why it does not.  
You might also want to abandon your reading of the "ten commandments" from the
King James Version of the Bible. With rare exception, language and Bible
scholars now agree that Exodus 20:13 is properly translated from the original
texts as "You shall not MURDER." I hope that you would agree that the concept
and meaning of "murder" is a vastly different from the concept and meaning of
"kill."

Larry B.

Posted by Larry B | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:00 pm UTC

Yes the Demos' are death dealers, and to the innocents that can't defend
themselves. Shame, on you Democrats! I pray God forgives you.

Posted by SgtRokcnroll | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:02 pm UTC

To correct some of you the bible says thou shalt not murder (note not kill).
Those of you who think that abortion is ok because the parents dont want a
child? Lets follow that line of logic… Homeless people are an annoyance they
are poor and give nothing to society so lets take them all down to the
homeless clinic, or old people, PETA annoys me can I kill them since I don't
want them arround? And how come if you kill a pregant women a person can be
charged with two counts of murder? Is it not the same fetus? Beign wanted,
being loved, being a contributor to society is not what gives is value but
that God loves us all everyone equally.

Posted by Mark | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:13 pm UTC

All said and done, how about this inconsistency. When a doctor? cut off limbs
of a living baby, sucks it brains out till it dies, is a legal unpunishable
act. But when this is done outside the womb, this same act is murder! Anyone
ever seeing a video of it will be an instant pro-life supporter. Pro-
abortionist are fighting toot and nail to prevent any abortion film or video.
They are coldblooded morons void of any respect of live but their own! Finally
God can still open or close the womb, regardless of men's procreation
abilities, which is also a gift.

Posted by Jake h oek | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:13 pm UTC

To those of you who belive that life begins at birth. If our laws state life
begins at birth,then how can we also have laws that charge a pregnant woman
with child abuse for smoking and drinking,or when a pregnant woman is killed
in a automobile accident or mudered,the suspect is charged with a double
murder?Double standards?

Posted by Frank | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:14 pm UTC

You are either a "practicing Catholic" or not! The Ten Commandments are clear
and so is the Church's teaching. Archbishop Burke is speaking specifically to
abortion and the proponents of abortion (infanticide) We have literally killed
in the United States alone since Roe v Wade almost 50,000,000 babies. This is
murder, and our church is right to stand up and sanction those who would press
for the continuation of this blatant disregard for God's commandment "Thou
shalt not kill" using the mantra of a woman's "right to choose" Only God can
give or take a life. As a Catholic we are taught that if we continue in a
grave sin, then we cannot receive the sacraments, which include receiving the
Holy Eucharist, which is the real presence of Our Lord, Jesus Christ, body,
blood, soul & divinity. That is what is being addressed here. When a public
figure blatantly continues to denegrate Our Lord by receiving Him in grave
sin, our Church must speak out in order to help correct this blasphemis
behavior. They continue to give public scandal to the Catholic Church,
therefore they must be publicly reproached. I say, it is about time that the
Church step up and speak out for life, at all stages!

Posted by Linda Ward | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:17 pm UTC

all who invoke that life is a choice and every mother has the absolute right
whether to abort or keep her child have warped consciences that go against the
law of nature. They are damn lucky their mothers didn't abort them ..or are
you all suffering a miserable life right now that you think those fetuses are
hopeless like you?

Posted by don | Report as abusive

Oct 4, 2008

10:52 pm UTC

"Girl, you made me hate. And when I go to hell you can meet me at the gate."
Thank you Jackie Greene, for that line from the song Follow You on the Giving
Up the Ghosts CD. Every time I hear that song I think of Nancy Pelosi.

Pelosi's partisan hatred of all things Bush is poisonous to her and all who
follow that path. Comments like these are the results of such poison. Nancy
Pelosi has been changed by this poison, and so has the Democratic Party. I
believe it is the acme of intellectual dishonesty to convince yourself
abortion does not kill.

When people talk about choice, it's not the choice of whether or not to have
an abortion, although that's probably what 98% of us think of first. It's the
choice we make to believe when life starts that is used to justify killing.

I support a woman's right to kill her unborn child. If the government can
force her not to have an abortion, then the government can force her to have
an abortion. We cannot give this power to government, and even if women decide
to kill their unborn children, it is their choice. Just stop lying to yourself
and the rest of the world about the killing.

It is better that mother's have the right to kill their unborn children, than
the government having the right to kill unborn children. That's the real
choice.

Posted by michael spurek aka cpt asshole | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

11:02 pm UTC

Hey Linda, when you talk about the "thou shalt not kill" commandment, are you
referring to the one with the subsection in fine print that says, "…unless you
have to go to war to liberate a country from a tyrant"? Because otherwise, you
should be out protesting the war as well as abortion rights. Otherwise, you
too are denigrating Our Lord. You're supposed to not let your left hand know
what the right is doing…not preach something on one hand and practice
something else with the other. I'll let you redeem yourself; re-post and talk
about your feelings on war. Thanks.

Posted by jamison | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

11:13 pm UTC

What I’ve noticed, most particularly in politics is that for the most part
people don’t reach the height of indignation when lies and
mischaracterizations are spread about them: they get that way when the truth
is told about them. That is the case here. Abortion is an evil practice and it
is as essential to the Democrat platform as wealth redistribution. These same
officials (Biden and Pelosi as classic examples) that “personally oppose”
abortion while showing enthusiastic support for it in the legislative process
explain that they don’t want to “impose their religious beliefs” on others.
However, they have no problem citing their religious ideals of “compassion”
and “charity” as a justification for imposing wealth re-distribution –
particularly when chastising conservatives. The Democrat’s are undeniably the
party of death and taxes – and the evidence is their indignation to that
label.

Posted by Russ | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

11:31 pm UTC

It`s about darn time that my church spoke up about all these liberal Catholics
that support abortion rights. Why don`t all the U.S. Bishops and priests
preach it from the pulpit? Also what about 'so-called" Ctholic nuns that are
voting for Obama? I am scandalized and very disappointed in the hierarchy of
my beloved chirch. Joan Clancy

Posted by Joan Clancy | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

11:35 pm UTC

Abortions as they are performed today in medical clinics all over the world by
doctors with accredited degrees in modern medicine have a lot less to do with
anything written down in any religious text written 1000's of years ago. It's
a different world now. Not everyone believes in and, at least for now, not
everyone has to believe in the faiths born of these old texts. Because we are
a nation born of the separation of church and state it's an ethical decision
and not a moral one now.  
As stated above this issue will never ever be resolved one way or another so
why don’t we just let it go and accept pro choice as the only resolution.
Unless your religion promotes the intolerance of other points of view then one
has to accept freedom of choice in this day and age. The United States is not
a Christian nation!!!! It’s a secular nation with Christians in it!! Whether
you are an atheist or a believer in whatever doesn't matter concerning the
issue of abortion at least as a political decision to be made by Democrats or
Republican or from whatever party. It’s shameful the way politicians simply
use abortion as a means of garnering votes or credit with their people. I
think an honest and wonderful thing to hear from a politician on either side
of the fence when asked their opinion on abortion would be, “I’m done with
that debate because there is no resolution that will make everyone happy so
let’s just leave it alone the way it is for ever so we can move on.” That a
leader in the Catholic Church chose to make the statement about democrats in
the manner he did further demonstrates the need for people to quit looking to
some of these people and their ancient ways for answers to some of the modern
dilemmas we face.

Posted by Mike A Jones | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

11:38 pm UTC

They can say what they want, but they’d better keep their child-molesting
priest away from our kids!

Posted by Bill | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:02 am UTC

You pro-choicers are rediculous sometimes. You suggest that no one should tell
you what to do and how to live your life, but you want other people to pay for
your decisions.  
Aren't pro-choicers for choice, and if you make a choice that results in a
pregnancy, why are you expecting others to pay for it, by having the govenment
tax us with no choice being given to us. (For those suggesting that health
care is the responsibility of the state and not of the parents) It's probably
the most rediculous argument I have heard so far.  
You know there is such a thing as adoption. There are thousands of families
willing to adopt "any" child in America, yet you feel the only solution is to
kill a child because you think that you can't get health care.

Come up with a better argument, please.

Posted by jenn | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:03 am UTC

Linda -  
The church can say whatever it wants to say about abortion. It can deny the
sacrament, if it wants. I was baptized Catholic 6 years ago, and now I'm not
so sure about it. They want to hold others accountable to the faith when they
themselves cannot. I don't care what anyone says, you do NOT have to agree
with everything your religious leaders say. If your faith brings you to it
then remember that you will answer to your God someday. All others, including
the Catholic Church, which can't even police itself, should shut their
pontificating mouths and stay the hell out of politics. Unless you want the
rest of the religious mix involved (Pat Robertson, James Dobson, etc…). This
is a secular Government, NOT a theocracy…

Posted by Temple | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:13 am UTC

if men could get pregnant, abortion would be a sacrament

Posted by peggy newlands | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:25 am UTC

What strikes me as appalling is the fact the that Vatican leadership threatens
to take away communion for those high ranking politicians that are Pro-Choice.
However, the priests that have molested little children over the years, still
practice communion!

Posted by Brad | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:27 am UTC

I have to agree with what Archbishop Burke says. The dems will kill an unborn
child without a second thought but rail against putting a mass murderer to
death. I can't really understand their reasoning. I'm not a fan of the death
penalty for children or murderers but you'd think they could see how absurd
their stance is.

Posted by Robert | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:31 am UTC

For Michael Cecil…

The only problem with your sad argument is that no nuclear war has occurred.
No killing of Iranians has occurred. In fact, no killing of any human being
with a nuclear device has occurred since WWII.

There are approximately 1.37 million abortions per year just in the U.S. That
is more deaths than all of the wars the U.S. has ever been in.

But I guess when you consider that it's only a mass of inanimate tissue and
not really a human being, then who gives a crap, right?

Kill the innocent and save the guilty! Liberal Obamunist crapola.

Posted by Bradley | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:34 am UTC

CD Walker:

"thou shall not **MURDER** "

to kill and to murder are two different things

Posted by CEA | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:42 am UTC

I am a Republican that is going to vote for Palin/McCain(the ticket as I see
myself voting for). I feel that the Vatican, as well as any other country, or
other foreign dominion, should not be able to try and influence this country's
election. All the other crap being written on this blog is nothing more than
dribbles of the different flavors of political Kool-Aid that exists in this
country.

Posted by Don Wayne | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

12:49 am UTC

Religion is not the biggest factor in determining politics! AND it never
should be. The only sensible thing I've read so far was about the separation
of church and state. A Catholic or anyone else for that matter should not be
able to even vote against same sex marriage or abortion, I'm sorry but
"because god said so" is not good enough. Also it is the responsibility of the
parent to be responsible with sex but keep in mind that many people cannot
afford birth control, and do not have transportation. You can't deny people
resources and then punish them by taking away their right to choose. It's time
to think outside of the box. For example, if a single women gets pregnant and
has to drop out of school, how is she going to afford childcare which averages
10,000 dollars a year? Our institution makes the victims that we throw away.
When a child is born into poverty it's impossible for them to achieve. And the
"privelaged" class is not privlaged if they are born into it.

Posted by Emma | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

1:01 am UTC

Remember Scott Peterson who killed his pregnant wife? He got charged with 2
counts of murder, one for his wife and one for his unborn children. Say, I am
3 month pregnant and a drunk driver hits my car and my unborn baby dies, that
drunk driver will be charged with homicide. So in our society the death of an
unborn baby is not murder if the mother kills the child but is considered
murder if someone other than abortion Doctor kills the child. So its the baby
is considered a life if you want it but if you don't its just an embryo..Weird
world we live.

Posted by Jenny | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

1:05 am UTC

In the article "Abortion and Infanticide," Michael Tooley argues that abortion
and infanticide are both acceptable because life does not begin until the
human child gains self-awareness. This generally occurs around 18 months after
birth.  
This country’s framers of our government state in the Declaration of
Independence is based upon the "self-evident" truth that "all men are …
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights". The proposition was
God gave mankind the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
These ideas were claimed as justification for the rebellion of the American
colonies. The U.S. Constitution is written based on this belief shared by the
founders. It was this belief that President Lincoln felt was at the heart of
our Civil War. President Lincoln at Gettysburg restates for everyone North and
South the proposition of that individual rights are derived from our creator.  
"Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a
new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all
men are created equal."  
This country’s record has not always been consistent in the treatment of
races, religions, and gender. Yet throughout this nation’s short history good
people have given their full measure in serving others in the cause for true
liberty. The Michael Tooleys and Barack Obamas in this world argue eloquently
about rights while justifying the slaughter of the innocent. These men and
groups they represent make no sense. They want to play God and have a
government or political party determine when life begins and what rights are
granted individuals. They argue against the very principles and birth right
that belong to all mankind from the moment of conception.  
Before the Civil War Religious people spoke out against injustice against a
race. When women were treated as property religious voices pointed again to
the proposition of unalienable rights. Today voices are again pointing to
unalienable right of life. The rights given by God are unchanging and absolute
to all. Individuals who believe otherwise undermine their very own existence.
Man's unalienable rights are sacred for the same reason that they are
unalienable-because of their Divine origin.

Posted by Mike | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

1:09 am UTC

"if men could get pregnant, abortion would be a sacrament"

… and it would still be the cold-blooded murder innocents - even when
administered by those with "accredited degrees in modern medicine".

The world is indeed a different place than it was during the formation of
Judeo-Christian faith. We now know that a full strain of DNA is formed at
conception – one that will remain unchanged throughout the life of the
individual. Therefore, using a strictly scientific/secular standard – a unique
human life begins with conception. However, without a moral context this
indisputable point is moot. E.g.: if there is no “Creator” to endow an
individual with certain “unalienable rights” - with “life” being first among
them – then what standard it to be used? Apparently that can be left to
individual “choice”. The Catholic Church is not a perfect institution – but it
has unwavering moral resolve and clarity regarding abortion. Abortion is an
absolute abomination and a moral stain on our society greater than that of
slavery. I pray that it does not take America as long as it did to recognize
the abomination of slavery.

Posted by Russ | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

1:20 am UTC

[…] -- whose stances have prompted a Vatican office to label the Democrat
party as "the party of death." In 2001, as a state legislator in Illinois, he
opposed a bill to protect-live born […]

Posted by Obama: Socializing America -- one "idiot" at a time « Over-the-Hill
Oracles | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

4:05 am UTC

Since the 50's we have been living under the way the Left says is right. Their
Religion has kids killing kids in school and killing teachers. Their Religion
has made us build more prisons where they get drugs, internet, work out rooms.
Good food, TV and much more. This is prison? We don't want to say that wrong
is wrong anymore. Can't you see how our country is going down and will not be
much of a country anymore? There is right and wrong. If you want to do wrong
like killing babies, tell the truth. When people have sex outside of marriage
and a baby comes along, it is the baby that has to pay with its life. We call
ourselves adults but don't want the responsibility. We want to be kids and
play. But life don't work that way. If you want to see America go down then
stay on the Religious left.

Posted by Gary Woods | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

4:11 am UTC

[…] The Pro-Life Obama fraud gets it wrong, particularly on the Freedom of
Choice Act. A Catholic Bishop re-enforces the point. Meanwhile, a high-ranking
Vatican official warns that the Democrats are becoming the party of death. […]

Posted by F3 Coalition - [Faith. Family. Freedom.] » Blog Archive » Podcast:
Sarah Palin Fighting for America | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

4:51 am UTC

The Catholic church is a staunch defender of precious human life and those of
us pro-lifers appreciate their unwavering support. However, those liberal
whiners who bring the kitchen sink into the dialog have no standing and they
are a simple smoke screen to the real issue. The issues of the world can be
discussed til the cows come home, but the focus in these forums should remain
true to the original article.

Now for the second part of the topic: life is as one previous blogger stated,
the completed DNA structure. Lest anyone misunderstand, it is the beginning of
a human life, the half nanosecond of the union of the ova and the sperm, a
dynamic wonderful human machine in the making. Any human who destroys that
life is a murderer in reality.

We pray for murderers to repent and to champion life instead. May the Lord
bless America-listen to His call for you to repent and know He is your Savior
and receive life through Him.

Posted by CR | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

7:54 am UTC

Like any church can realistically say they haven't killed less people of any
age then the democrats could possible have done so far is a strech of anyones
imagination.

Churches should be censored from making political remarks unless they wish to
be voted on as well.

Posted by Barry | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

9:13 am UTC

The Catholic Church is a vast money-making empire born directly from the
ancient Roman mafia families, and founded and invested in a history of blood,
martyrdom, murder, clandestine manipulation, spying, victimisation,
persecution and finantial extortion.

Even now the Pope expects even the poorest Catholic to give the church money
they cannot afford, whilst sentencing people to even greater poverty by
attempting to enforce a ruthless ban on contraception and thereby ensuring
babies and children die from bad diet and appalling sanitation.

On top of all this the Pope continues to give the green light on the
persecution of gay men and women, and to even stay quiet when abortionists are
targeted by terrorists.

I do not think that the Pope headed Catholic church is anything but the same
body it was when it was first formed.

It is an organisation riddled with control freakery, greed, bigotry and an
appalling lack of real compassion and any kind of profound understanding of
the doctrine of Jesus Christ.

It is NOT a church worth listening to on any subject.

It is an organisation of the captive. It is the death of human rights. It must
be ignored!

Posted by Erasmus | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

10:02 am UTC

Any that doubt the truth behind the Church's statement on abortion has a
problem with the spriitual truth that comes from above. When people turn from
protecting the "truly innocent", then they should be called the "party of
death". This is what makes the Democrat Party so leftist in it's anti-Church
views. This party should take a time-out to look at what made our country
great. I can promise it was not from having comtempt for GOD'S spiritual
truth.

Posted by RAO | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

3:14 pm UTC

Why are the local Pastors so reluntant to talk about the killing of babies in
the womb from the pulpit!!! This is an issue which should be addressed as
often as possible! What are they afraid of will happen if they do???

Posted by Theresa Adair | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

4:21 pm UTC

[…] headlines bespeak the astoundingly obvious. Vatican official attacks U.S.
Democrats as “party of […]

Posted by Naming Names | The Return Of Scipio | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

5:26 pm UTC

If the Catholic church wishes to engage in political activity, then their tax
exempt status should be revoked, and then they will be free to endorse the
candidates of their choice.

Posted by Deborah | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

5:42 pm UTC

Yeah for Archbishop Burke! I sincerely hope that other American bishops will
come out and reinforce Catholic teaching on this. Being pro-life is something
all Catholics should be and if they are not, they had better study up on
Catholic teaching. The Catholic church founded by Jesus Christ has always been
100% pro-life, and always will be! Jesus would not condone killing innocent
babies in the womb. B.Obama does condone such killing. Therefore we cannot
have him be president of our country.

Posted by Maribeth DeRocher | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

6:04 pm UTC

Burke use to be our bishop here in Wisconsin - he often made us scratch our
heads wondering why his actions were different than he preached. He was always
preaching about saving the "rural way of life" and the dignity of the farmers
yet he closed more rural churches in our diocese than any other biship.
Another thing he did was build a multi million dollar shine where we could go
pray for the poor….the most ironic part of the shrine is that you have to
drive through a very bad trailor park to get to it! He's just a hypocrite
trying to make a name for himself!

Posted by grant | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

6:09 pm UTC

[…] I feel the need to pull a Michelle Obama and say that I finally had a long
over due proud Catholic moment this week. The latest headline coming from the
Vatican says the following: Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party
of death”. […]

Posted by American Sentinel » Blog Archive » The Party of Death: Baby Killer
Chronicles . | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

6:54 pm UTC

No surprise that a Catholic Archbishop supports the party of Congressman Mark
Foley.

Posted by Ken | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

7:04 pm UTC

it is kind of ironic that the so called democrats here are full of bashing the
arch bishop for demanding those that belong to a faith and pronounce publicly
of such that they follow those teachings and so the arch bishop is not here to
answer to this charge the mighty liberal people of this party decided upon
themselves that they whom do not follow such demands hmmmmmmmm that those that
feel the need , have the freedom to follow what they believe is incorrect ,
how about you say we agree to disagree although i am still confused as how the
arch bishop making a statement turned this into a political battle, and did i
not read wayyyyyyyy back up near the top that the Catholic church has no right
in to force its opinion upon anyone is this not what those in here are doing
this was not and is not a political issue ,,you call it political issue
because those names mentioned were democrats THAT PUBLICLY PROCLAIMED
THEMSELVES AS CATHOLICS AND THEREFORE FOLLOW THE CATHOLIC TEACHINGS,as i said
earlier your a Catholic and follow the teaching or not if not then DON'T CLAIM
TO BE ONE,, but then that would not be publicly lying to maybe try and garner
a catholic vote ???? my opinions people and i don't care which party you
FOLLOW and live by their teachings. and someone HAD THE NERVE TO CALL ME
ELITIST ELITISTS !!!!!!!

Posted by Charles | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

7:35 pm UTC

RAO said:

"This is what makes the Democrat Party so leftist in it’s anti-Church views.
This party should take a time-out to look at what made our country great. I
can promise it was not from having comtempt for GOD’S spiritual truth."

Actually, you are mistaken. America was built on the backs of African slaves
and even before the days of slavery, the colonists wiped out enormous
populations of Native Americans (either by disease, which in some cases was
the first ever recorded instance of biological warfare, or the usual convert-
or-die method). The colonists believed in the Manifest Destiny and
superiority, and they used the Bible, religion, and God to justify greed,
slavery, and crimes against humanity. No matter what you say, the birth of the
nation of America is steeped in blood and moral failings, as is every other
nation. Our "greatness" cannot be discussed without also raising the
ethicality of the building of this nation. I find that the statement is true,
"Happy is the nation that has no history."

In conclusion, I am American but I do not subscribe to the belief that America
has attained a level of perfection or morality that is superior to the rest of
the world. I am a student of history and I can assure you that America, even
in the case of abortion, is just as imperfect as it ever was.

Posted by Elle | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

8:51 pm UTC

If churches want to weigh in on political topics then they must PAY for that
priviledge and lose their TAX EXEMPT STATUS. The reason they get the exemption
is because they are suppose to be non-profits that are apolitical.

Evangelical and Catholic Churches have crossed the line…time to pay up…besides
we need the tax dollars for the mess Bush and the Republicans have gotten us
into with the WARS of choice!

Posted by Berna | Report as abusive

Oct 5, 2008

9:54 pm UTC

AMEN!  
The truth is the truth is the truth no matter how you try to twist it!

Posted by Marie Waldron | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

11:13 pm UTC

Slow but sure!

Posted by j.r.mueller | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

11:51 pm UTC

I don't know if any of these posters have children, but I do and also have
grand children.

I had polio in 1948 at the age of 19.

I thank God Dr, Jonas Salk's mother did not have an abortion

Posted by Richard | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

12:10 am UTC

Re: Dave's "Regardless of one’s religious views on abortion, it is unethical
to legislate your religion on others." What a stupid remark. And where do you
think all our laws stem from? The Ten Commandments! By your logic, if I so
choose to shoot my neighbor, I have a right to "my feelings," freedom of
choice! Sheesh.

Posted by Linda | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

12:59 am UTC

I understand Raymond Burke's frustration at the democratic party's position on
abortion, however it is quite blind to not consider the impacts that such a
strong statment makes. this now isolates every member of the catholic church
that considers themselves democrats. I do not support abortion, however i do
not take that as a top priority in choosing which candidate to support, i
consider other very Christian ideals such as environmental related topics,
foreign aid, thrift, war, etc. This disheartens me as a christian.  
Perhaps the stone throwing comment that started this conversation off is the
most appropriate.

Posted by scott | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

1:02 am UTC

Well its about time the Catholic Church start speaking out. Abortion and Gay
lifestyles. The Church needs to speak out on these issues! Lets get a back
bone! And teach the Scriptures like it is supposed to taught! lets go!
already!

Posted by Roland Gomes | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

1:06 am UTC

Well Ellie. Since when building a nation ws neat and clean!!! cmon Elie get
off this high almighty self righteous rhetoric that you are spewing out here!
America is a great country! And by the way ms elie, there were WHITE slaves
too!!! Long live America!

Posted by Roland Gomes | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

2:27 am UTC

Berna,  
I assume you also count those churches (particularly Black churches) that
support the Democrat positions and Democrat candidates in your statement, "If
churches want to weigh in on political topics then they must PAY for that
priviledge and lose their TAX EXEMPT STATUS.". Is that correct, or do you want
to pull the tax exempt status of those churches that disagree with your
political ideas.

Posted by Rick | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

5:54 am UTC

There is a website for Democrats who are pro life: Democrats for Life of
America

Posted by Robert A. Marzullo | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

1:54 pm UTC

Archbishop Burk is only speaking the truth; he is not blaiming any one party.
One cannot deny that the majority of, or close to all of the democratic party
is pro-choice. The Vatican does not side with one party; the fact that
republicans happen to be more conservative, is just what it is. As a matter of
fact, the Vatican has fairly looked at both parties with a sense of
diappointment, because of the country's capitalist, and at times, unfair ways.
Save deer, birds, foxes, wildlife, and sea life, but murder babies in wombs;
is that a position you really want to take.

Posted by Feliciano | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

2:25 pm UTC

For all you posters who believe the Catholic church considers other human
rights issues to be on par with abortion, you clearly haven't read this:
http://www.lifesitenews.com/ldn/2008/sep /08091203.html.

And for those who don't want to read the whole thing, here's the pertinent
part: "When we have someone who has that stand on a disqualifying issue, then
the other issues, in many ways, do not matter because they are already wrong
on that absolutely fundamental issue."

Only when taken to a level of insanity could a 'pro-war' candidate be
considered on par with a pro-abortion candidate in the Bishop's view. "If we
had a candidate in favor of a war in Iraq in which we decimate the entire
population and we kill as many civilians to impose as much terror on everybody
as possible to make sure . . . If that was in opposition to a pro-abortion
person then I'd have a real conflict of conscience because you'd have a direct
and intentional killing of innocent persons on one hand and the direct and
intentional killing of persons on the other hand, said the Baker Bishop.

"But we don't have that issue with capital punishment, we don't have that
issue with the war in Iraq we don't have that issue with the present
Administration," he added.

And yes, I'm intensely curious about the church's tax-exempt status in all of
this. Not sure how this sort of advocating, which I've heard in church on
Sundays, for specific candidates jives with its 501c3 status.

Posted by Elizabeth | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

2:45 pm UTC

Wow. Lots of "interesting" comments.

First, just because Archbishop Burke has said that the Democratic party has
become the party of death, doesn't mean he has called the Republican party the
party of life. The Republican party is simply the party where there is still
hope for life.

Second, as long as there is pride, there will always be a need for war,
because there will always be tyrants who will only be able to understand one
thing: getting their butts whupped in war by those whom they wage war upon in
order to dominate. I am making no statements about Iraq or the war on terror
here. I AM making a statement on the modern sentiment that all war is evil and
that there is never anything good for which it is worth fighting. This
sentiment is completely wrong . . . especially in the industrialized West
where this is simply an expression of laziness in regards to justice and
courage to do, and fight for the good. Prosperity make have secured material
survival, but it has meant the death of the soul.  
Third, morality is NOT religion, but naturally pairs with it because one
cannot be holy and sanctified if one is immoral. Morality is graspable by
human reason, and therefore, all human beings are responsible to follow its
dictates. These dictates are derived directly from the respect due to human
beings because of their innate dignity. They are also universal because there
is only one race, the human race. Therefore, morality IS something that is
higher than, and therefore FORMS, just laws. Unjust laws are immoral, and they
are to be ignored as they do not fulfill the requirements of true law.  
The Ten Commandments outline the most serious moral prohibitions and (except
for the fourth commandment, intrinsically) obligations. That there is a god is
also graspable by reason. We can know something about Him without Divine
Revelation. We cannot know Him with it.

Fourth, because morality is universal, it is not a sectarian imposition on
others of different religions, or no religion at all, to demand that the
requirements of morality be met. It IS an imposition on others to demand that
they accept, and give legal status, to your immorality. It IS an imposition to
demand that they allow you to craft laws that enable you to put the negative
consequences of your actions on them, while you take all the positive
consequences of your own actions for yourself.

And as for the "Pro-Choice" position, women don't just suddenly get pregnant
like they get a cold. There is a choice, and everything that follows is
result. Sex isn't just for fun. It's sexual REPRODUCTION, and the human cycle
is 18-20 years worth of material, social, moral, emotional, psychological and
spiritual support from the time of conception. The problem is not unwanted
pregnancy, the problem is what has drive men and women to have such a careless
disregard for human generation that they think they can "play and not pay."
Maybe if we thought about what we do and the impact, we might realize that it
is not love and thought for someone else that motivates people to put sex
before, or just plain outside of, marriage. It's lust, it's loneliness, and no
matter how much we don't want to admit it, its selfishness.

Its time to stop making up lies to cover our tracks when we do something that
is bad for us and bad for others. Its time to choose the good and do it. The
only failure is to keep doing what doesn't work.

Posted by Fred Scharf | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

3:23 pm UTC

As an active pro-life and catholic I agreed completelly with the Vatican views
of the Democratic Party, I use to be Democrat, not any more, and just because
of the view the party has about abortion, euthanasia, etc. LIFE is precious
since the very begining until the natural death. And you can not be a
CHRISTIAN and pro-abortion.  
The Catholic Church is not impossing their view, they are telling you what is
truth since the Old Testament.  
GOD BLESS AMERICA!

Posted by Martha Lopez | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

3:34 pm UTC

I believe the major problem with our world today is people trying so hard to
make what they know is wrong into being right. Trying to pretty up there words
so that they don't feel so bad about it.People know what is right and what
good morale values are. whether it be religion or politics. And as for those
that might say politics and religion don't mix, they are flat out wrong.The
truth of the matter is abortion kills human beings. It's not the killing of
trees or animals. It is a human life with a soul.It is in my mind murder no
matter how pretty you want to make it sound.

Posted by Mitzi Fortier | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

3:50 pm UTC

We have become a nation of people who do not have to be responsible for their
own actions. Using abortion as birth control is abominable!! And don't deny it
but basically that is what is happening.  
As far as comparing the chuches involvement with this and our involvement with
Iraq and Iran etc is rediculous.  
Thousands of Kurds were gassed by Saadam and buried under a highway. The rape
rooms in his 'palace' were real, and our going in to rid this part of the
world with this kind of evil is a blessing to women and a race of people that
had no other options or hope in their future.  
Do we like war any better than the other side? Not just no but H&LL no!!!
After Obama has taken all our military capability away from us and there is no
one to stop this evil from invading the world (and they are already here,
believe it) who then will be there to save us?  
God gave us all choices, and we had better make them carefully. The change he
is calling for is NOT change we can live with. America with all its faults is
the only country of HOPE for a world falling apart. Without our military
strenth we are ripe for takeover.  
Mr. Obama has also voted 4 times against stopping late term abortions. Does
this make a difference???

Posted by Jackie Kelley | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

4:29 pm UTC

Yes, it's wonderful how justification can be made for the snuffing out of
INNOCENT life and God forbid some one should have an opinion other than that
of the liberal press. But if it's about defending ones self or the nation then
that is wrong. We live in a time of bizzaro.

Posted by Steven | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

4:39 pm UTC

Roland,

I find it interesting that you consider me "self righteous" when I simply
stated historical events. Building nations isn't clean and perhaps you missed
it, but I said that in my original post. If you were to look at my post again,
you would see that I took issue with the notion that our country was made
great from "not having contempt for GOD's spiritual truth." The way in which
our country was made great was, to use your words, not "neat and clean," and
many things that were done in the building of America could be considered an
abuse of religion because there were those who invoked God's divine favor
and/or blessing in the practice of slavery, intolerance, theft, and
dishonesty. (I also pointed out that all nations have equally disreputable
backgrounds).

I should have included that Native Americans were also used as slaves and that
there were European indentured servants, though the European indentured
servants came to America by their own free will and exchanged their labor for
the transatlantic passage. Technically, I was incorrect to use only the the
term "African slaves" to describe the early beginnings of America, though the
main point of that particular part of my post remains the same (slavery was
used).

I do not dispute the fact that America is a great country, but I do take issue
with the notion that everything that made our country great was the result of
"not having contempt for GOD's spiritual truth." As history shows, some of the
very practices used to acquire land and propel America to where it is today
were based on practices that show contempt for the Christian principles many
colonists of that time professed to embrace, and that cannot be disputed. At
the beginning of our nation, at the very foundation, man's best and worst
qualities were at work.

Posted by Elle | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

5:44 pm UTC

The Catholic Church is about nothing more than Social Control and Untaxed
mega-wealth. I say "abort" the Catholic church and we'll all be better off.

Posted by DFDoe | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

6:02 pm UTC

It took me a long time to understand that God's plan might not be the same our
plan. Which of us chose when we would be born? The more we try to reject our
creator and run our own show, the more pain we will suffer.

If anyone out there has an unwanted pregancy and is considering abortion, I
know lots of people who would love your baby, including me. Also, there are
lots of support options if you are brave enough to accept (and keep) the most
beautiful gift that God gives - life.

Posted by Kay | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

6:17 pm UTC

As a member of the Catholic Church, I can say without hesitation that the
Vatican is not consistent on pro-life issues because this really isn't about
fetus; it is about controlling the lives of women, always has been. The
Cathoic Church has a long, bloody history of rape, torture, imprisonment,
theft, murder and mayhem when it comes to the treatment of women. Women have
next to no voice in church affairs, but are expected to financially support
the institution that shows them and their supporters such disrespect. Senator
Biden and Speaker Pelosi are just the latest targets for badmouthing. American
women, in particular, are singled out for their stance on reproductive issues,
but, for the Bishops, it really is a loosing position. There is no going back
to the "good ole' days" when men ruled; today's women expect to have control
of their reproduction, as well as most other aspects of their lives and
threatening our supports and those who show respect for others, itsn't going
to change the outcome of progress for women and other that the church
hierarchy has mistreated and continues to deny their human rights. Go Senator
Biden and Speaker Pelosi; keep speaking your truth to power, we support your
efforts.

Posted by Alice | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

6:22 pm UTC

Re:abortion, et al. Such actions are wrong because they are morally wrong, not
because any religion says so. Although one of the people in this discussion
may find a "religion" that endorses destruction of life. A Jim Jones type I
suppose.

Posted by c | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

6:27 pm UTC

The Catholic Doctrine is pro-life. Nancy Pelosi stated that after years of
research, she could not find the Church stand on when life began. The
statement is simple, pro choice Catholics are in violation of doctrine. I am
sure Nancy Pelosi was shocked to find that out. She did research the subject
for years.

You can argue if it is right or wrong, all day, but reading the Catechism of
the Catholic Church will answer questions on the Church stance on Abortion,
War, Suicide, and the Death Penalty. Nancy Pelosi should buy one, or she can
use mine.

As far as the Separation of Church and State. The intent was to prevent the
Government for identifying one church as the "National" church. It lets
Americans chose their church.

If you believe in abortion, find a church doctrine that supports it. Don't
expect the Catholic Church, the Universal Church, to except the legislation
the United States has come forth with.

Another insight might be to actually read "Roe vs Wade" rather than
regurgitating what you hear on television. It made me question a father's
rights, or how did we get to aborting a child while in the birth canal. Obama
has voted four times that a child surviving an abortion, should be left to
die.

Posted by Rob | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

6:57 pm UTC

Michael Cecil and others would do well and serve the cause of truth if they'd
first consult scholarly works on the issue of waging a just war and the
legitimacy of preemptive action in certain limited circumstances before
spewing this nonsense that adopting a lawful though controversial position,
i.e. the war in Iraq, is the moral equivalent of the willful taking of
innocent human life, whether in the name of "choice" as with abortion or
"convenience" as with assisted suicide or "science" as with cloning, stem cell
research. Everyone is free to accept or reject the basic teachings of the
church, but, if you repudiate them, at least have the courage to admit that
you're calling yourself a Catholic only as a matter of birthright and
political expediency, not because you accept the church's core beliefs.

Posted by joe | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

8:56 pm UTC

Isn't it wonderful to be able to devour christians? What religion are the
commentors? How many of us are "fatally cool" you know, wanting to be liked
and accepted or "cool" or "all that" that we do not have enough love and self
respect to be honest about what we believe to give others the respect they
deserve.

Jesus last words to the people crucifying Him, spitting on Him and Mockings
was in love and mercy… saying "Father forgive them - FOR THEY DO NOT
KNOW/UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY ARE DOING.

As I read the commentary to this article was so full of hatred, spite and
envy, etc… I felt the wounds they intended in my heart, soul and mind and it
hurts deeply. I am sad that still the "liberal humanitarian" democrats and
republicans cand still spew such hatred with so much concern for their own
opinion without the ability or even slightest hint fo wanting to appreciate or
understand the other person- who has just as much value and the other. When
you love God and others as yourself -you are near to peace.

Posted by Muhr | Report as abusive

Oct 6, 2008

9:22 pm UTC

I am a mother and a wife of 13 years. When we miscarried it was one of the
saddest times in our lives. The day I was blessed with my son I found it to be
one of the most joyfullest experience. I do realize that there are women who
have unplanned pregnancies- worst cases even raped. I don't want to get into a
blog debate or point the figure at anyone. As a women I just can't understand
how life can be taken away regardless the circumstances. On average every day,
over 3500 viable babies are aborted in the USA alone.. That's over 1.2 million
abortions every year here. War is soldier to soldier and sadly civilian are
lost. I lost a good friend myself. Abortion is mother to child. My heart feels
broken as it did when I lost my child at14weeks. I think about what he or she
could be like. Yes I believe in God. I am not a Catholic. I do believe that we
as a people-especially women should do something to end the right to abort.
Unfortunately there are no real leaders that have courage to get the ball
rolling to put a complete stop to Abortion. So I don't think it truly matters
what political party, what church you are a part of. If a baby dies before it
is born -- as in an abortion -- the woman who conceived it is still a
"mother."

Posted by Yolanda | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

11:42 pm UTC

The Catholic Church has always been Pro-Life and will always be Pro Life. If a
Catholic does not agree with the Church's teachings and doctrine then they
need to leave the church. Abortion is the murder of a human being.

Posted by Rebecca | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

12:23 am UTC

Bishop Burke is the best; God bless him. Our Church needs more brave, orthodox
leaders like him.

Posted by Gene | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

1:37 am UTC

Everyone is overlooking the fact that the Catholic Church did nothing about
the forced abortions taking place in the Marianas Islands (Saipan), a U.S.
territory, for the past 15 years. Various Catholic officials and groups were
informed and asked to intercede on behalf of 11,000 women (not a child among
them). However, they allowed the practice to continue and never interceded
with any of the "pro-life" Republican politicians who prevented U.S. labor law
from being applied to the Marianas Islands. Human Rights Watch has condemned
Catholic Church labor policies in the U.S. The issue was finally resolved
after the Democrats took control of Congress in 2006 and certain "pro-life"
Republicans were defeated.

If the Democrats are the Party of Death then Archbishop Burke represents the
Church of Forced Abortion . There are many other similar titles which could be
applied but I will forgo the opportunity to list them.

Posted by Art Yeske | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

1:43 am UTC

Glad someone is finally speaking the ABSOLUTE TRUTH about this issue… Not only
is the liberal agenda (and especially Obama) all for infanticide in EVERY
form, including AFTER a child has been fully born (See BornAliveTruth.org),
but it should also be noted that Obama's government-run "healthcare" plan will
take medical care and treatments away from the elderly and high-risk patients
and give them instead to illegals, pregnant teens for abortions, and all the
welfare-class individuals who refuse to work and choose to eat at McDonald's
every day… This will serve to institute the large-scale practice of EUTHANASIA
in America, which will be passed off as being necessary and as "having mercy"
on the "suffering" of society (i.e., those they deem as useless, including the
elderly, disabled and special needs individuals). The left-wing academia has
been advocating this kind of euthanasia doctrine for many, many years now…
Remember Terri Schiavo? That will become an everyday thing when Obama's
socialized medicine programs are implemented!

Posted by Marla in KY | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

3:05 am UTC

I am sad that people will allow themselves to blame the faith itself for the
sins or mistakes humans have comitted. Whether it be someone in the church or
not we are all human. As for woman having the right to their reproductions.
Give me a break. What give us the right to play God and decide who gets to
live or die. You seems to be forgetting another human being involved here who
does't get to decide if they get to live or die. I pray that people will
realize this.

Posted by Mitzi Fortier | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

6:26 am UTC

I am saddened by so many comments here that devalue innocent life to promote
their personal agendas - they follow the theme outlined in the article - a
type of "ends justify the means". Democrats (and some Republicans, I'm sure)
should be ashamed they have lost hold of the truth and have become happy
maintaining their moral "low" ground. Thank God for the priests and other
leaders not fearing to stand up and speak calling evil evil. There is a better
way.

Posted by Jim | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

2:48 pm UTC

I find it unbelievable that I am reading comments about Iran being so
victimized. It is proof to me that Liberals have been so badly brainwashed
that DIRECT threats right from the mouth of Ahmadineshad are ignored. Iran is
amongst the most energy rich regions on the planet and when they claim that
their nuclear program is "energy" based it is accepted as truth. I KNOW that
the Democrats have no intentions of reacting to the threat posed by Iran. I
strongly believe that the Democrats are the party of death. OUR death.

Tax & Spend, Cut & Run, Duck & Cover.

Posted by Greg | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

3:09 pm UTC

JS, saying that when life begins is a matter of opinion is like saying that a
flat earth is a matter of opinion.

As I said before, I'm an agnostic with no opinion on God or gods, but I do
know that the life of a fish begins when a cell from its father combines with
a cell from its mother to produce a new, individual fish. If you don't kill
the developing fish, it will swim off one day.

The lives of a person, a dog, a lemur, a mouse, or a sparrow begin at
conception. That's the simplest scientific fact.

If you're not sure it's a person because it doesn't look like one, watch it
for a while. If it grows into a child, you can be sure it wasn't some invasive
parasite or a tumor.

Posted by Mike Nowland | Report as abusive

Oct 7, 2008

6:09 pm UTC

All life begins at conception and will continue to grow if nutured. We need
more Catholics speaking the truth, instead of the Pelosi's and Biden's, either
misrepresenting the truth, or taking the easy way out and saying "I will not
impose my views on others". That is what all politicians do, so when it comes
to abortion it's different???  
Why upon reading these comments do I see so much on what to do with "unwanted
children"? What child is unwanted? That is a disgusting thing to say. Anyone
ever hear of ADOPTION? Abortion is so selfish, and thinking you can't afford a
child is just ridiculous. So many couples would be happy to raise a child. The
pro-choice movement never sees adoption as a choice. And even here, the pro-
lifers forget about it.  
Think carefully before you vote. Abortion is evil, and it is the evil that
leads to so many others. The pain and suffering it leaves behind is
devastating.

Posted by anne | Report as abusive

Oct 8, 2008

12:10 am UTC

It's such a joke for the Vatican to prosecute Liberal Democrats for being
"pro-choice", at the very moment that it is promoting the canonization of
"Hitler's Pope", Pius XII, who NEVER used any of the powerful weapons he had
in his quiver against ANY of the many, many Roman Catholic ultra-conservative
"pro-life" ( i.e. anti-abortion) leaders of the Nazi regime:  
What did Pope Pius XII do about any of these Roman Catholic architects of the
Jewish holocaust: Adolf Hitler, Heinrich Himmler, Josef Goebbels, Reinhard
Heydrich, Rudolf Hoess, Julius Streicher, Fritz Thyssen, Klaus Barbie, and
Franz Von Papen or  
R. C. Engelbert Dollfuss who was head of the Nazi state of Austria.  
R. C. Leon Degrelle who was head of the Nazi state of Belgium.  
R. C. Emil Hacha who was head of the Nazi state of Bohemia-Moravia.  
R. C. Ante Pavelic who was head of the Nazi state of Croatia.  
R. C. Adolf Hitler who was head of the Nazi state of Germany.  
R. C. Miklos Horthy who was head of the Nazi state of Hungary.  
R. C. Konrad Henlein who was head of the Nazi state of Sudetenland.  
R. C. Pierre Laval who was head of the Nazi state of Vichy-France.  
R. C. Henry Petain who was head of the Nazi state of Vichy-France.  
R. C. priest, Fr. Augustin Voloshin who was head of the Nazi state of
Ruthenia.  
R. C. priest, Fr. Josef Tiso who was head of the Nazi state of Slovakia.  
R. C. priest, Fr. Andrei Hlinka who was head of the Nazi state of Slovakia.  
R. C. priest, Fr. Anton Koroshec who was head of the Nazi state of Yugoslavia.  
Did Pope Pius XII excommunicate any of these the most visible Catholics in
their countries at the time? NO. How can anyone say that this pope did "all
that he could", when he failed to take this obvious measure so as to make it
clear to the millions of Catholic faithful who were enabling the Nazis to
carry out their campaigns of mass murder, not only against Jews, but against
their fellow Catholics in Poland, that they should have no part in these
monstrous of crimes and most mortal of sins?  
On the other hand, after the Nazis were defeated and no longer posed any
threat to the pope, the Vatican, or the Catholic Church anywhere, did Pope
Pius XII allow the Vatican to be used to protect thousands of Catholic war
criminals such as the above to escape punishment for their war crimes? YES.
Whose side was the pope on?

Posted by Rev. Ray Dubuque | Report as abusive

Oct 8, 2008

2:56 am UTC

It is true in a sense that the Democrats (particularly Sen. Obama) have shown
themselves to be a "party of death." Speaker Pelosi tried to manipulate what
the Church teaches about when life begins showing confusion. Sen. Biden claims
to be Catholic and yet, in order to rise in the political sector, will stray
from his faith to support abortion in order to obtain votes. Sen. Obama has
voted against medical care for children who have survived an abortion. I
thought he was FOR universal health care? Now that these children are "living"
human beings (now that they are outside the womb), why will he not support
their entitlement to health care?

When we start to qualify what life deserves protection with the defenseless
unborn children, who else will lose their right? The elderly who become more
of a burden in intensive nursing facilities - especially once their medicare
or other health insurance runs away from their obligations (as we did by
bailing out the Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac quagmire)? Our bishops and pastors were
given the authority by Jesus to treat those who disregard Church teachings as
tax collectors and sinners (Matt 18: 15-22). Of course, that is after a period
of attempts to bring our brother/sister back through charitable fraternal
correction. Our bishops have tried that. I think we are near that last step.
When parents do not follow through on their promises (and threats of
punishment) with their children, their children soon learn that their words
mean little.

Posted by Rev. John Zimmerman | Report as abusive

Oct 8, 2008

5:18 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” - Reuters
BlogsVatican officials seldom single out political leaders who differ with the
Church on issues like abortion rights or embryonic stem cell research. But now
that the Vatican’s highest court is led by an American, the former St. Louis
Archbishop Raymond … […]

Posted by Religions » Multi-lingual debate: US Elections - bbc | Report as
abusive

Oct 8, 2008

1:16 pm UTC

ABORTION IS THE MURDER OF GODS CREATION PERIOD.

Posted by Mitzi Fortier | Report as abusive

Oct 8, 2008

3:45 pm UTC

I am a St Louis, practicing Catholic. I am father who has been and is raising
4 children in the faith while supporting my parish and our school. Many of our
immigrant fore fathers and mothers fled miserable conditions in countries and
cultures where the heirarchy of Catholic church was in bed with the wealthy
and abusive leadership. In the US they are in the pocket of the Republican
party. Good riddance to Raymond Burke, I hope he votes in Italy…

Posted by Art Martin | Report as abusive

Oct 8, 2008

4:47 pm UTC

To the Vatican’s highest court,led by an American, the former St. Louis
Archbishop Raymond Burke:

When will your court decide that the Vatican should not harbor it's own
pedophiles? How laughable for you to think you have any moral superiority over
anyone.

Posted by Janeysbaby | Report as abusive

Oct 9, 2008

7:05 pm UTC

It seems to me that Pascal's wager apply's very well concerning the issue of
abortion. Whether a zygote, an embryo, or a fetus is a living human being is
not the issue. It is an accepted medical fact that life begins at conception,
this is indisputable. At conception growth begins, metabolism begins, these
are recognized signs of life and any biologist studying the DNA will clearly
identify it as human, hence, it is Human Life. The question is when does this
human life become a person, for it is the 'person' that has an unalienable
right to LIFE, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness. Here's where Pascal's
wager comes in. There are four possibilities -  
1)It is a person and you defend it as such.  
2)It is a person and you deny that fact.  
3)It is not a person and you defend it as though it were.  
4)It is not a person and you agree with that fact.

Scenarios 1 and 3 describe the Pro-Life advocates. The best that can be said
of them is that they recognize the unborn for what they are and have chosen to
defend them as best they can. The worst that can be said of them is they are
defending something that is not a person, however, given the natural course of
events, eventually will become a person.  
Scenearios 2 and 4 describe the Pro-Choice side. The best that can be said of
them is that they recognize the unborn for what they are not and have chosen
to defend a woman's choice to have sex without consequences, no harm, no foul.
However, the worst that can be said of them is that they are defending murder
of the most helpless and innocent of our society.  
It seems to me the only ethical choice is to err on the side of life. If I'm
wrong, then I've spent my life trying to raise society to a higher level of
morality; to bring a little bit of dignity back to the act of human sexuality,
rather than just using another person to get my rocks off. But, if you're
wrong…than God help you, you are defending one of the most horrific and
heinous behaviors ever know to man.  
Oh, by the way, just an interesting statistic, there have been over fifty
million abortions in the United States alone since Roe vs. Wade was decided 35
years ago. Fifty million…if that's not a holocaust or genocide I don't know
what is.

Posted by Sharkman | Report as abusive

Oct 10, 2008

12:32 am UTC

Vote NO for Obama.

Posted by nobama | Report as abusive

Oct 10, 2008

11:42 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks US Democrats as “party of death” […]

Posted by Paris - History | Worlds Biggest Cities | Report as abusive

Oct 12, 2008

12:49 am UTC

This article is not about war. How can you pro-choice people compare abortion
to war? A helpless unborn child has no voice on whether it can be allowed to
live or be killed. But a soldier who is well aware of his actions and able to
determine right from wrong and can very well put down his gun and walk away,
CHOOSES to engage in the killing of other people. There is a BIG difference
here. Why can't you people see that??

Posted by VMM | Report as abusive

Oct 12, 2008

3:51 am UTC

Nate said: If you aren’t ready for a kid, and cant afford to have a kid, don’t
have sex. Simple. Short. Consise. The choice to have sex, comes with the
possible outcome of having a kid. Biology, learn it and live it.  
Morons…..  
======================================== ===  
People seem to believe they have a right to do whatever they want to do,
including having sex however & whenever they want it, without having to be
confronted by any of the consequences. Life doesn't work that way.

Posted by Nancy | Report as abusive

Oct 12, 2008

1:19 pm UTC

To see why "Liberals Like Christ" clergy like myself understand and support
the need to respect the right of women to govern their own reproductive lives
without dictates by hypocritical and/or pedophile, supposedly "celibate"
clergy MEN, see http://JesusWouldBeFurious.Org/Christian Choice .

Posted by Rev. Ray Dubuque | Report as abusive

Oct 13, 2008

4:08 am UTC

Iran's "right" to uranium enrichment? Are you serious? Why would an oil
PRODUCER require nuclear energy? You think they are just looking for
alternative energy to appease the environmentalists? I don't hear about Israel
threatening to blow Iran off the map, but I do hear a lot of 'fightings words'
from Iran.

www.offeringcommonsense.blogspot.com

Posted by JD | Report as abusive

Oct 13, 2008

6:26 am UTC

I think the more neo-con catholics (whether bishops or not) fight against
progress and an enlightened society, the less influence the church has in the
world. I'm not sure Joseph Ratsinger understands this very well. The more
conservative he and his bishops are, the less relevant the institutional
church becomes.

Posted by Tony | Report as abusive

Oct 14, 2008

12:34 am UTC

what nuclear war with iran are you guys talking about?? wake up!!! youve
created a war that doesnt exsist… democratic party is the party of fanatical
secularits that wish they were apart of some sort of revolution that will
"change" the world !?! they view everything in a 1960's point of view… its
made up of young educated inexperienced brats … along with adults that never
grew up.

Posted by zotni | Report as abusive

Oct 14, 2008

2:21 am UTC

You crazy a** pro-lifers are out of your minds. You cannot sit there and tell
anyone that a newly-formed ball of cells in some woman's uterus is a human
being (one with rights no less). Let's be real here. If you're pro-life, then
be pro-life and NEVER kill or lobby to kill a thing. That means no bad guys in
prison. No trees and other biological life. No marching over to someone else's
country and bombing its people to death. Every pro-lifer out there is a
HYPOCRITE for that very reason. Kill everyone and everything else, but don't
destroy a handful of cells that don't even qualify as a child. That being
said, I am conservative, and in any normal circumstances, I would never
terminate a child growing inside of me under normal circumstances, however, if
I were raped tomorrow, I would be downing the morning after pill as if it were
to save my life (or the abortion pill for that matter). I could never bring a
child into the world out of such an atrocity - and if you are one of those
idiots that hates when people argue this point, then you are just that, a VERY
selfish idiot (that I'm nearly 100% positive would be changing your tune if
this happened to you or someone close to you). That also being said, if by
some divine intervention that happened and pregnancy happened to go further
into term than the first few weeks to months, I would NOT terminate, as I
believe partial birth abortion is just as terrible. To simply put this, this
is NOT a black and white issue (read everything I just wrote), and
furthermore, the goverment has no place legislating moral or religious issues,
which this is anyway. That in and of itself is socialism. Who are you to try
and dictate what anyone does in their personal lives with their significant
other and their children or would-be children. Are you going to be there to
support (physically, emotionally, and financially) the poor mother that you
want to force to have that child when he or she is born into this world? If
not then sit down and shut up. It's none of your business. By the way, the
dirty Catholic church especially has no bearing here at all. They have
committed such atrocities throughout history they should be hiding in the
shadows and praying for themselves. Whatever they have to say about anything
is not only irrelevant, but shows a complete lack of focus on what they really
need to be focusing on, which is themselves. They need to pull the plank out
of their eyes before pointing out the spec in our society's.

Posted by HeyMan | Report as abusive

Oct 14, 2008

8:39 am UTC

Not matter what all this rubbish above points to, the bottom line is that
there is and certainly never will be a resolution to any problem as long as
people are seeing the world only through the limited focus of whatever they
think these two parties actually represents. For crying out loud are there any
independent thinkers out there???? Is the two party system simply a convenient
way for idiots to simply fight about something that no one really understands
and no one can really ever take care of? Do you all really think that we can
just simply fix all of this crap by only thinking about things in such a
narrow minded and idiotic way of thinking. Do you think some sort of God put
all of us here to bicker about EVERYTHING in this manner? Get out of your
anthropocentric and stuck heads and REALLY, REALLY think about things!!!!!!!

Posted by Mike A Jones | Report as abusive

Oct 15, 2008

5:18 am UTC

I think we all need to go back to the saying "What would Jesus do". So what
did he do? He lived his life so as to provide us with an example of what it
means to sacrifice self for the sake of another. The total opposite of
selfishness, he gave his whole self, even to the point of death. So what is
self-sacrifice? Is it to take the easiest, most comfortable road possible? Or-
is it to take the road that that is the most difficult, most contrary to our
human nature so as to do whatever possible to help our fellow man? Maybe that
is why many times the "right" decision seems so foreign to us, because it goes
against our very nature to be comfortable. So you decide. Which is more
difficult? To have an abortion to "take care of a problem" or to give up our
very lives for a totally separate, distinct life within us? (The
separate/distinct part is just a scientific fact.) And are they really our
bodies to begin with? Don't forget 1 Corinthians 6:19-20 "Do you not know that
your body is a temple of the holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God,
and that you are not your own? For you have been purchased at a price." Let's
even go so far as to take the most horrific example- rape. Can you imagine how
difficult it would be for a woman who had been raped to carry a baby
(conceived by rape) to term? She would sacrifice everything for 9 whole
months- to give up her life for this child within her- to allow God's grace to
take over and His will to be fulfilled- remember Romans 8:28? "We know God
causes ALL THINGS to work together for GOOD". Let's face it- children are a
blessing no matter how they are conceived (Psalm 127:3-5). Who are we to put
limits on God. What is to stop God from taking a child conceived out of rape
and making him someone great? How do we have the right to snuff out this life
simply because of the torture or embarrassment we would suffer? We adopted one
of our children and have no idea of the circumstances of his conception, but
he has been nothing but a blessing to our family. If he had been conceived by
rape, we would not love him any less. Let us not presume to know or understand
the ways of God (Isaiah 55:8) "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are
your ways my ways, says the Lord." But let us instead ask his Holy Spirit to
come into our hearts to teach us His way, His truth, and His life. Let's
listen to the voice of the Lord as He spoke to Jeremiah (1:5) "Before I formed
you in the womb I knew you." And even if you still aren't convicted of this,
just ask our Lord to write His truth in your heart- and He will. So what would
Jesus do?

Posted by MH | Report as abusive

Oct 16, 2008

2:45 am UTC

It's nice how you twist the words of the bible to fit this subject. This
subject is discussed nowhere in the bible, and furthermore, the point is that
this is something that should be left between the person and God, not
legislated by the government. In fact, our wonderful God is not always so
wonderful and self-sacrificing himself. Just read Leviticus - he speaks about
punishing people by death left and right (even innocent children of the
wicked) - so don't fool yourself into believing he is an advocate of every
life out there. That is a practically a fairy tale. Do you really think if Roe
v Wade were overturned that it would stop abortions? Even if it is mandated by
state if that happens, not all states will outlaw it, you can be sure of that.
And even if they did, it would be done illegally (and more horrifically God
forbid) here still, or outside the country. You and many like yourself out
there have fooled yourselves into believing this is only a recent problem
since it's gained attention - abortion has been going on for longer than you
think and everywhere on this earth - long before several of your ancestors
were even born. No matter what the legislation is in this country, you will
never stop it - it will still be done either illegally or elsewhere. You can
do nothing about it, so it should be left out of politics where it belongs.
Besides, do you really think those conservative or republican politicians out
there really care about abortion (they are even guilty of it themselves!)?
They use it to manipulate you only for your vote. You are just their naive
little pawn. Why is that every time a republican has been president since
abortion was made legal they have done nothing about it to overturn that
judgement? They don't care. They just want your vote. So this should no longer
even be a political argument.

Posted by HeyMan | Report as abusive

Oct 16, 2008

6:50 pm UTC

Homosexuals force gay marriage down our throat all the time. Leftists are mad
that religion preserves decency because if people have no decency they can
peddle their filth all they want. Actually, society has stepped way over the
boundary and enslaved itself with sex and egoism. People living with each
other out of wedlock and having sex outside of marriage destroys the nucleus
of society: the family. The cultural revolution has pushed our soceity over a
cliff, making people cold and indifferent, pursuing hedonistic pleasures with
no regard for self or neighbor. Jesus said that he destroyed the law through
showing the Father's love, but that not one letter of the law has been
removed. Looking to preserve society morals is not casting stones, it's
preserving the decency which allows love to flourish through helping each
other, not taking the easy way out of erasing a life.

Posted by terrone | Report as abusive

Oct 17, 2008

12:42 am UTC

That still doesn't change the fact that the right uses abortion only to steal
your vote. They don't care, and they will never outlaw it, so people need to
stop even considering this when they vote. And your views on society morals
should never be imposed on anyone through government. Not everyone sees the
world the way you do, and thus the country should not be run based on your
view either. That is offensive to everyone else's values and morals out there
that conflict with yours, no matter what they are. Just because you don't see
it their way, it doesn't make them wrong, or anti-Christian, and even if they
were not Christian, it does not make them wrong or immoral human beings as you
suggest.

Posted by HeyMan | Report as abusive

Oct 17, 2008

3:52 am UTC

There are many subjects not discussed specifically in the Bible, but I'm
curious what does Jeremiah 1:5 mean to you? "Before I formed you in the womb I
knew you." Abortion can no more be left between the person and God, than
murder. What about the 5th commandment "Thou shalt not kill?" Or are you one
of those people who argues abortion is not killing an actual person? We have
laws in place to protect people and there is no longer any debate that these
unborn babies are people.  
As for our God- Jesus died to accept the punishment for all our sins. God no
longer punishes "the wicked" on earth like He did in the Old Testament. That
is why you don't find any of the stories in the New Testament like the ones in
Leviticus.  
I know if Roe vs. Wade were overturned it would no more stop abortions than
laws against murder prevent drive by shootings. The point is, if abortion is
accepted by our society as a reasonable solution, we cannot expect God to
bless our nation. Luke 12:31 "Seek first His kingdom and these other things
will be given you besides."  
You say abortion should be left out of politics, however, you are fighting to
keep a law in place allowing it. I encourage you to educate yourself before
making your comments. Actually, in 2002, President Bush signed the Born Alive
Infants Protection Act which reaffirms the legal principle that all infants
born alive are entitled to the full protection of the law. This came about
because congress received testimony that some infants who had been born alive
after unsuccessful abortions were left to die in the soiled linen closets.
Also in 2003, Bush signed the Partial- Birth Abortion Ban prohibiting the
barbaric practice of abortionists where, the baby's entire body is delivered
except for the head. The abortionist then jams scissors into the baby's skull.
The scissors are then opened to enlarge the hole and removed. A suction
catheter is inserted to suck out the baby's brains causing the skull to
collapse. The dead baby is then removed. My… how far we have come as a
society. Obama has said, "The first thing I will do as President is sign the
Freedom of Choice Act." (FOCA) FOCA would nullify all the protective
legislature regulating the abortion industry including partial-birth abortion,
the Infants Protection Act, parental consent laws, as well as waiting periods.
At least a Republican president would not take us back to these horrible
practices. Here is a quote from Mother Theresa which pretty much sums it up…  
"America needs no words from me to see how your decision in Roe v. Wade has
deformed a great nation. The so-called right to abortion has pitted mothers
against their children and women against men. It has sown violence and discord
at the heart of the most intimate human relationships. It has aggravated the
derogation of the father's role in an increasingly fatherless society. It has
portrayed the greatest of gifts -- a child -- as a competitor, an intrusion,
and an inconvenience. It has nominally accorded mothers unfettered dominion
over the independent lives of their physically dependent sons and daughters"  
And, in granting this unconscionable power, it has exposed many women to
unjust and selfish demands from their husbands or other sexual partners. Human
rights are not a privilege conferred by government. They are every human
being's entitlement by virtue of his humanity. The right to life does not
depend, and must not be declared to be contingent, on the pleasure of anyone
else, not even a parent or a sovereign." (Mother Theresa -- "Notable and
Quotable," Wall Street Journal, 2/25/94, p. A14)

Posted by MH | Report as abusive

Oct 17, 2008

9:18 pm UTC

You cannot claim that "the Church is not attempting to impose a moral code
upon others" while it is attempting to coerce politicians into imposing that
moral code, that's disingenuous at best, and laughably dishonest at worst.

The cold fact of the matter is that when you are elected into Congress in the
United States you swear an oath to uphold the Constitution. You have an
ethical obligation to uphold that oath, even should it conflict with your
moral code.

Here's the oath:

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I
am about to enter. So help me God."

Since you add "God" at the end, you actually now also have a moral obligation
to uphold that oath, or you're taking the Lord's name in vain… something that
(cough cough) comes higher on the list than "thou shalt not kill", no?

The question of whether or not abortion constitutes murder is a moral
question, based upon a _theological_ concept of when life begins. It is
therefore an imposition of a religious doctrine to ban abortion outright… this
is forbidden by the establishment clause.

Therefore, you have a quandary, as a Catholic politician… you have an ethical
and moral obligation to _not_ vote to ban abortion, and a moral obligation
_to_ prevent abortion.

This is one instance where the duty and obligation of Congresspeople in the
United States is (to my mind) absolutely clear; they cannot vote for a ban on
abortion, either ethically or morally, but they are required to bear the
consequence of that decision.

So, either don't run for office as a Catholic, or accept the fact that you're
suspended from active participation in the Church while you serve, or go argue
it out with the Pope.

Burke is actively asking Catholic politicians to violate their oath of office,
I'm surprised nobody has called him out on this.

Posted by Pat Cahalan | Report as abusive

Oct 18, 2008

11:37 pm UTC

Liberals,

Abortion is killing a baby. You've deluded yourselves or sold your souls to
believe that you are exercising some decent "choice," when in fact you're
killing a person who cannot speak for his/herself.

What's the liberal definition of abortion?

www.offeringcommonsense.blogspot.com

Posted by JD | Report as abusive

Oct 19, 2008

11:52 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” […]

Posted by Prominent Black Leaders Support McCain « Cao2's Weblog | Report as
abusive

Oct 20, 2008

12:34 am UTC

It's totaly amzing to me that some of you on here think that life exists only
at birth. I suppose that's your way of justifying abortion. In consideration
of that thought process, then you aren't killing anything. The unborn is the
most defenseless of the defenseless. So all of you who are trying to compare
abortion to collateral damage in wartime are just kidding yourselves. It
always amazes me that liberals always criticize the war (and these Islamo
Fascists want us all dead) but are perfectly fine with abortion. Not being
judgmental as only our Creator reserves that right but I pray you all wake up
before it's too late.

Posted by Ed | Report as abusive

Oct 20, 2008

4:32 am UTC

[…] Obama Lied About His Abortion Voting Record During the Third Presidential
Debate - An analysis of the third presidential debate shows that Obama lied
about his legislative action on abortion. Obama Lie One: Obama stated that the
Born Alive Infant Protection Act "said you have to provide lifesaving
treatment and that would have helped to undermine Roe v. Wade." Truth: The
legislation applied to babies that were born live, living completely outside
their mothers' womb and no longer under any jurisdiction of Roe v. Wade. Obama
Lie Two: Obama stated, "And the Illinois Medical Society, the organization of
doctors in Illinois, voted against it. Their Hippocratic Oath would have
required them to provide care, and there was already a law in the books."
Truth: Illinois abortion law to this day only protects babies that survive an
abortion who the abortionist deems fit to live. Obama opposed closing this
loophole by voting against legislation to mandate a second doctor be present
at deliveries of all babies born alive, in order to independently assess their
viability. Obama Lie Three: "I am completely supportive of a ban on late-term
abortions, partial-birth or otherwise, as long as there's an exception for the
mother's health and life, and this did not contain that exception." Truth:
Note Obama's slick use of the phrases "late term" and "partial birth"
abortions when the issue is about babies "born alive" after a botched
abortion. Obama then starts talking about the "mother's health and life" to
deflect attention away from the live baby in need of health care to continue
surviving. In 2001, Obama was the only Illinois senator to speak out on the
Senate floor against the bill that would provide health care to babies born
alive after a botched abortion. What kind of man is Obama who would do that,
then lie, straight-faced, about what he had done?
http://bornalivetruth.org/debate3.aspx Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats
as "party of death" By Phil Stewart which exposes how the former St. Louis
Archbishop Raymond Burk who is the head of the Vatican's highest court, the
Vatican's Supreme Court of the Apostolic Signature, said that the Democratic
Party risked "transforming itself definitively into a party of death for its
decisions on bioethical issues." He then attacked two of the party's most high
profile Catholics — vice presidential candidate Joe Biden and House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi — for misrepresenting Church teaching on abortion. Pope Benedict
has been encouraging Catholic bishops to speak out more openly on public
policy issues to make the Church's voice heard.
http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/2008 /10/01/vatican-official-attacks-us-
demo crats-as-party-of-dea… […]

Posted by Surprise, Surprise at Desert Conservative | Report as abusive

Oct 23, 2008

3:26 am UTC

Unfortunately in the Diocese of Stockton, California, USA, our bishop has
pushed a pro-Democrat agenda on the Catholics of this diocese. He recently
stated  
"…under the Democrats, there have been fewer abortions." That is not a truth.
Actually, it is through the actions of a very positive, dedicated pro-life
group (of all faiths) that abortions are down - not low enough,but still
fewer. Through offering support to unwed mothers or mothers with unwanted
pregnancies, that much of this has come about. The Catholic church in many
communities is active in this effort. - But as I said, our bishop subscribes
to the USCCB policies which, in the opinion of many of us Republicans and
conservative Democrats falls short of what we are called to do as Christians.

Posted by Grace M. Alvarez | Report as abusive

Oct 24, 2008

2:42 am UTC

The reason the number of surgical abortions is fewer is because of the
availability of "chemical abortions" such as RU 486 or the "morning after
pill". The actual number of abortions including surgical and chemical is
estimated at an all time high- however there is no way to actually calculate
it since women can now just take a pill. May God have mercy on our nation!

Posted by MH | Report as abusive

Oct 24, 2008

3:08 am UTC

I find it truly amazing that this election is exposing the true colors of some
spiritual leaders, and even the Vatican and Pope. I don't think that the
issues they are using to defamate the Democratic party leaders are necessary
or acceptable. I am certain that the Lord is watching and taking notes,
because He says," 1. Judge not, that you be not judged. 2. For with what you
judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with the measure you use, it will
be measure back to you. 3. And why do you look at the speck in your brother's
eye, but do not consider the plank in your own eye? 4. Or how can you say to
your brother,' Let me remove the speck from your eye; and look a plank is in
your own eye? 5. Hypocrite! First remove the plank from your own eye, and then
you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother's eye. 12.
Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you, do also to them, for this is
the Law and the Prophet. 15. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in
sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravenous wolves. 21. Not everyone who
says to Me, 'Lord, Lord, shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does
the will of My Father in heaven ( The last time I checked, judging, is not
doing The Father's will. Only He can judge!) 22. Many will say to Me in that
day,' Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Your name, cast out demons in Your
name, and done many wonders in Your name? 23. And then I will declare to them,
' I never knew you; depart from Me, you who practice lawlessness!" Matthew 7:
1-5, 12,15,21-23.

Thus, beware my Brothers and Sisters. Those who are voiceful and stakes claims
at the expense of the Lord are not always doing His work, and the consequences
that they will pay is unimaginable.

Posted by Madam | Report as abusive

Oct 25, 2008

8:55 pm UTC

I am a "recovering Catholic" - I am a Christian Liberal - Religion without the
HATE. I am sick of the judgemental attitude of the catholic church. I was
raised a catholic but have not attended mass in years because they are always
pushing the political agenda. You cannot be pro-war, anti environment, anti-
equality and call yourself PRO-LIFE!!

Posted by cmac | Report as abusive

Oct 29, 2008

6:04 pm UTC

I agree with the Catholic church taking a stand on this abortion issue.
Someone needs to stand up and it's about time. Too bad the priests are afraid
to get up on the pulpit and tell us like it is. War is wrong, but we need to
protect our children from attacks and be proactive, not hide and wait to be
attacked by those who hate us and hate freedom. Voting Democratic right now is
certainly going to limit our freedoms that we so love as we get ready for the
world of socialism. Abortionists will no doubt be paid less for abortions
since the government will be in control of health care, therefore, the less
qualified physicians will be preforming these. Maybe that's a good thing. More
deaths to our nations youth and daughters in the name of socialism. Less and
less doctors will be available to perform these, because their pay rates will
be controlled by the government and there is not a lot of money are praise to
doctors who are supposed to pledge "First do no harm" before they are given
docter privileges. We need to protect our girls from evil. Abortion is an evil
act. If you have had an abortion and feel great about it there is something
wrong with you. It's great to say it's no big deal, but the truth is there are
walking wounded out there who have suffered due to an abortion. I believe
having pro-life candidates is a FOR SURE sign to try and fix the flaws of
abortion rights. One of these candidates has a downsyndrome child. Could this
be a sign from God that we better listen as Catholics and we better stop
picking and chosing what we like most about being Catholic. Will they reverse
the rules on abortion? Most likely not, but I do hope and pray then when I
turn my Republican vote in that they will start putting up major restrictions
and or abolish this act together. It scares me that my daughter can go with
out my knowledge and obtain an abortion as young as 15.  
Girls can get an abortion without mom or dad knowing it as long as they can
scrape up the money. They are using abortion as a birth control method.
Planned Parenthood would like you to think that they are doing all they can to
prevent abortions with counseling, but this is just not true. Abortion is not
birth control but it sure is being used as such. Girls are immature and just
trying to get out of an unplanned pregnancy so they don't have to face mom and
dad. What about the boy's family? They are left completely out of the picture.
Let's face it, it's big business at the expense of our American population.
Now, if my daughter was raped and became pregnant it would be difficult for me
to have her go through with the pregnancy, however the child is not evil- the
act is. I am not sure what I would do because this child is my own relative
and not a frog to be squashed without some thought. However, the majority of
abortions are not the result of rape or incest. This is my potential
grandchild missing. Who could this person have been? These children may be
adopted- and our current adoption policies indeed are so messed up, Americans
would rather adopt from China than here. That's another issue. The laws need
to be revamped to help these American women who deep down would like to keep
their baby or see it adopted and feel good about doing the right thing, but
cannot afford it. I would happily pay taxes to support this. I guess my point
is, abortion is being used as birth control by girls behind their mother's
backs for girls between the ages of 15-20. Abortion just encourages
irresponsability and way to get out of being stupid. This is wrong. What is
happening to our country when a girl can go and do this without the counsel of
a caring adult? Obama thinks its cool that they have a choice and openly
ADMITS it. If our president thinks abortion is cool, him (Obama) being the
biggest role model of the country, then why are we surprised that our youth
are so messed up? They need to look up to someone who has morals. By the way
if you are treated in the hospital shortly after a rape, pregnancy can be
prevented with proper care. Inner city girls are getting abortions because
they are not being parented or lack parents, or any type of proper sex
education, or encouraged to keep themselves safe by not having sex at all. The
public school system needs to encourage purity for the sake of these girls,
put counselors in place in high schools so they can be helped. These are our
future adults and mothers. We simply are too busy and too accepting of
abortion as the status quo and have closed our eyes. We should be protecting
our future population and the mental health of our girls of this country. As a
Catholic this is obvious to me. We need to protect our American daughters not
only from an unwanted pregnancy, but from the spread of disease. But no, this
would be too moral and God like. God wants us to be happy, which is why purity
is in the Bible and taught in religion class. I would like to think that He
encourages purity because he does not want to see the spirit suffer from the
mental anguish that occurs shortly after the abortion or many years later,
when these girls marry and have see their baby's faces and wonder…what have I
done? Our youth need our help. Catholic adults voting for Obama are committing
a sin and voting for EVIL. Our nation's children should come first which is
why I WHOLEHEARTEDLY agree and am warmed by this Bishops comments. These
children of ours need to be counseled which our country severely lacks because
we have taken God out of our schools, listened to the liberal agenda serving
the needs of sinners. The 10 commandments are a general unknown to our youth
unless parents are actively talking their children about what is right and
what is wrong. Something to think about when you vote for a someone so for
abortion as Obama is and WHOLEHEARTED endorses killing a baby that has
unbelievably survived a botched abortion. I guess he doesn't care if his
daughters decide to engage in this behind his back. He is a senator first and
a father second and supposedly has no problem with his daughter being on an
abortion table. Now, we are paying the price for all the murderous abortions
with our failed economy. It's all about money and that's how God is trying to
get our attention. God is watching. Do you care?

Posted by A non cafeteria Catholic | Report as abusive

Nov 7, 2008

11:49 pm UTC

Heyman Writes: "You crazy a** pro-lifers are out of your minds. You cannot sit
there and tell anyone that a newly-formed ball of cells in some woman’s uterus
is a human being (one with rights no less). Let’s be real here."

Let's be real Heyman, YOU started out the same way, a newly-formed ball of
cells in some woman’s uterus, or in this case YOUR mom's uterus. You should be
happy YOUR mom didn't have an abortion. What's that? Could YOU have prevented
YOUR mom from killing you before YOU had a chance to be born? NO! It's people
like us crazy a** pro-lifers that are fighting to give ignorant people like
YOU a chance to LIVE!

Posted by VMM | Report as abusive

Nov 20, 2008

7:42 am UTC

[…] Monologue record: Obama Abortion Record video: ABORTION Clinics Targeting
Minorities report: Vatican Opposes Party of Death guide: 2008 Christian Voter
Guide, more myths: Abortion […]

Posted by OBAMA'S VALUES « FactReal | Report as abusive

Nov 25, 2008

1:33 am UTC

[…] Catholic leaders are heavily engaged in political debate at the national
level, too. The presidential campaign is an example. Prominent Catholics are
debating the morality of voting for Democrats or pro-choice politicians. A
Vatican official recently dubbed the Democrats a "party of death": […]

Posted by Last Men Stand » Anger over the right to die | Report as abusive

Jan 11, 2009

8:20 pm UTC

American Bishops are in Apostacy. B16 - once a Nazi, always a Nazi. A leapord
cannot change his spots.

Posted by John | Report as abusive

Jan 26, 2009

2:35 am UTC

Let us pray that Obama does the right thing for the unborn; we are all waiting
for him to MAKE THE RIGHT DECISION and we continue to pray for the unborn that
they be given life as all have a right to…..

Posted by chishy joey | Report as abusive

Feb 18, 2009

6:08 pm UTC

At last, a place to express my view of this debate. I used to be a Democrat,
now I am a registered Republican. I could not, in good conscience, vote for
Obama, Biden, or be on the side of Nancy Pelosi. We cannot elect politicians
who are Catholics, and approve of abortion, assisted suicide, or emboyonic
stem-cell research. They are wrong! I am disturbed that Obama got elected, us
knowing he is pro-abortion. They should ALL be denied Communion - it would be
a sacriledge for them to receive. Are we now turning our heads and denying
they're wrong! We must publicly stand up for the truth, we being Priests and
laity.  
Jeane

Posted by Jeane Castile | Report as abusive

Aug 10, 2009

1:47 pm UTC

[…] As far back as October, 2008, a Vatican official called the Democratic
Party the "party of death". Archbishop Raymond Burke, prefect of the Vatican’s
Supreme Court of the Apostolic Signature, further stated that pro-life
Democrats were “rare” and that it saddened him that the party that helped “our
immigrant parents and grandparents” prosper in America had changed so much
over the years. Reuters Blogs […]

Posted by Members of the Macabre « ProgressiveThink.com | Report as abusive

Jul 2, 2010

2:46 pm UTC

[…] this brief segment, which originally aired on June 28, 2010, Rob covers,
Democrats: the “party of death,” the Progressives' left-wing subversion of
Christianity, and fraudulent faith-based […]

Posted by Jawing with Jay: Rob Schilling interviewed on religion, politics and
faith : The Schilling Show Blog | Report as abusive

Sep 19, 2010

1:07 pm UTC

How a politician can claim to be a person of faith, Catholic or otherwise,
then support anything pro choice is beyond me. If only one day we'd have a
politician that won't sacrifice values and beliefs for the sake of political
expedience…but then I guess they wouldn't be called a politician.

http://wwww.frugaldiy.com

Posted by FrugalDIY | Report as abusive

May 9, 2011

12:50 am UTC

[…] Vatican official attacks U.S. Democrats as “party of death” By: Phil
Stewart […]

Posted by OBUSHAMA'S SOUL-LESS NATION: AMERIKA « GREGORY PAUL MICHAEL HARTNELL
| Report as abusive

Mar 29, 2012

12:14 am UTC

It's about time.

Posted by Aethling | Report as abusive

Dec 9, 2014

3:34 pm UTC

Baby murderers are baby murderers, no way to justify it.  
[  
You use abortion as birth control, don't try to get the rest of us to approve
you, won't happen.

Posted by Factoidz | Report as abusive

Dec 9, 2014

6:33 pm UTC

100% PRO-ABORTION right here.  
He has no clue the World is approaching 8 Billion population, energy usage
will cook us all via Climate Change.

As an American he should be THUNDERING at the SHOCKING lack of guaranteed by
law support for pregnant women and new moms.

Instead it is - "how will I pay for the hospital delivery, I don't want to
stick them with the bill, with my state rejecting FREE $Billions of
Obamacare?" (100% true - many states turned down Federal funds.)

Posted by cirrus7 | Report as abusive

Dec 9, 2014

9:07 pm UTC

This is pretty laughable considering that it is coming from the Roman Catholic
Church; the church that repressed the Jesuits, the church responsible for the
Crusades and attacks on citizens of Jerusalem, and countless early popes who
were interested in not much more than extending their power reach, extending
the religious empire, and in the case of at least one pope, debauching a
virgin girl.

The Vatican ought o be more concerned with how to compensate the thousands of
modern day victims of a cult of clergy that seems to be addicted to the supple
flesh of young boys…..

Posted by cabeachguy | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

12:16 am UTC

Time to remove the tax exempt status of the Catholic Church which is clearly a
political organization. as for purveyors of death the Church has killed
hundreds of thousands during its existence and would consign a mother to her
death even if a an abortion could save her life. The Church with its thousand
so pedophiles many of whom still lurk within its ranks has no moral high
ground to preach to the world its so-called moral views as if they have any
meaning whatsoever. better to clean up the Church's act before sallying into
morality.

Posted by Bfstk | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

1:09 am UTC

The Catholic Church weighing in on ethics. That's a laugh.

Posted by breezinthru | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

7:00 am UTC

Burke is going to be out on his sanctimonious lie telling ass really quick.
The guy is an embezzeler, he's stolen millions from US tax payer money that
was funneled through Catholic Charities. Burn in Hell, Burke. Other priests
have already bound you to the lake of fire for your sins and that isn't going
to be loosed.

Posted by SixthRomeo | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

12:52 pm UTC

Burke is a top member of the Pedophile Cult known as the 'Catholic Church'

Perhaps he should follow Jesus' teachings and stop casting stones…

Posted by dectra | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

1:38 pm UTC

A public figure who repeatedly & consistently spits in the face of a critical
Church doctrine like abortion should be denied communion.  
In face, why do they attend Mass at all if they reject the Church's teachings
??  
Sadly, like the Mafia figures in years past these politico types donate so
much to the collections that Priests will turn a blind eye to them.  
If Pelosi & Biden want to support abortion that's fine, I do not at all
begrudge them to take that stand.  
But that means they cannot morally call themselves Catholic.

Posted by Bobo9 | Report as abusive

Dec 10, 2014

9:55 pm UTC

And the GOP is pro-death penalty! This BS is why I left the Catholic Church --
because it has taken political sides and declared me the enemy so forget
them!!!

Posted by jeivers | Report as abusive

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

