

Trending

    
        * LOOP: Trump administration ends fetal tissue research
    * Catholic Clergy Pledge to Risk Jail Rather than Obey CA’s Confession Bill
    * LOOP: Lawmakers worry about trade war with Mexico
    * LOOP: Big tech stocks tumble
    * LOOP: Judge orders Missouri's abortion clinic open
    * Mueller's Presser: Trump Supporters Were Right
    * LOOP: Trump threatens Mexico with 5% tariff
    * LOOP: Mueller resists calls to testify
    * Media Accuse ‘Misogynist’ Pope Francis of ‘Inciting Violence’ with Abortion Remarks
    * LOOP: Illinois on verge of passing pro-abortion law
    

__

    
        * RSS
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube
    * Instagram
    

![CatholicVote.org](/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CV-logo-top-header.png)

Navigate __

    
        * Home
    * ABOUT
      * About Us
      * Policy 101
      * Religious Liberty
      * Marriage
      * Life
      * Immigration
      * Economics
      * Healthcare
      * Education
      * Environment
    * CV Blog
    * Watch
    * Action
    * Join
    * Buy
    * Give
    * __ 0 Shopping Cart
    

##

You are at:Home»Abortion»10 Reasons the Unborn is Not a Part of a Woman’s Body

![](/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/3850109985_ec24eef5f3_b-702x336.jpg)

# 10 Reasons the Unborn is Not a Part of a Woman’s Body

__29

Ryan Mayer on January 20, 2015

![3850109985_08a1c22e92_o2](http://www.catholicvote.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/01/3850109985_08a1c22e92_o23.jpg)

January 22 is the anniversary of the infamous Roe vs. Wade Supreme Court
decision. Ever since, one of the chief cries of abortion-on-demand supporters
has been that of bodily autonomy—“my body my choice!” Setting aside the highly
dubious hidden premise that one is free to do whatever they want with their
own bodies, here we give ten reasons why the unborn cannot rightly be called a
“part” of the mother’s body.

**1. Genetic Identity**

Let’s start with the most basic observation. It is biologically false to say
that the unborn is not an individual. In living things, the instructions for
their physiological makeup are embedded within each of their cells. Simply
put, the mother and unborn child are both genetically unique individuals. It
always bugs me when people refer to a zygote or an embryo as a “fertilized
egg”. It’s incredibly misleading. A fertilized egg is not an egg cell anymore.
A zygote may be a single cell, but it’s _an entirely new organism_. A gamete
is a _haploid_ cell, meaning it carries half the genetic code of its source.
But a zygote, the new, single-celled organism that comes into existence after
fertilization, is a _diploid_ cell, meaning it has a full and unique genetic
code. Even identical twins are not even completely identical. Each has a
unique code, due to epigenetic factors and the way DNA is transcribed and
translated. Mother and child are genetic individuals.

**2. Sex**

Because the genetic identity of the zygote is not that of the mother, the
zygote can even be a different sex than the mother. Sexual identity is
determined by the chromosome carried by the male gamete (sperm) in
fertilization. Because it is haploid, the ovum always carries only one half a
chromosomal identity, an _X_ chromosome. If the sperm cell, also being
haploid, also carries an _X_ chromosome, the resulting zygote, being diploid,
will have an _XX_ chromosomal identity, making it female. If the sperm cell
carries a _Y_ chromosome, the resulting zygote will have an _XY_ chromosome,
making it male. Sexual identity, genetically speaking, is determined at
conception.

**3. Blood Type**

Contrary to popular thought, the unborn does not share a circulatory system or
blood with the mother. Oxygen is diffused through the placenta into the
unborn’s bloodstream and circulated through its body and to its tissues and
organs by its own heart. In fact, Rhesus disease occurs when a mother’s body
recognises the presence of the unborn as a pathogen because of the difference
in blood type and produces antibodies to attack it. Difference in blood type
indicates that the unborn is an individual distinct from the mother and is
therefore not a part of her.

**4. Transitive Possession of Body Parts**

The unborn is itself composed of parts. At eight weeks after conception, all
the major organs we normally think of as body parts are present (even if not
yet functioning). Now if the unborn has parts and the unborn is itself a part
of the mother, then the parts of the unborn would have to be called parts of
the mother. If _A_ is part of _B_ and _B_ is part of _C_ , then necessarily,
_A_ must be part of _C_. This is called a transitive relation. But this leads
to obvious absurdities. How many feet does a mother have at, say, 12 weeks
gestation? If we say that the unborn is a part of the mother then we would
have to say four. We would also have to say that she has a penis, if she’s
pregnant with a boy. But this is absurd. The only possibilities then are to
deny the logical principle of the transitive relation or to deny that the
unborn in a part of the mother. Logic suggests we deny the latter.

**5. Shifting Dependence**

As evidence that the unborn is a part of the mother and not an individual,
some will point to the fact that the unborn is dependent on the mother for
nutrition and for survival. But “dependence” is a nebulous concept and is
marked by degree. Every born person is dependent in some way on others, but
they’re still individuals. There is no other case where one’s degree of
dependence causes us to recognise them as a non-individual, so as a
justification for abortion, dependence already seems to be a kind of _non
sequitor_. It’s true that the unborn depends on the mother for nutrition
before birth (as it will after birth), but the way in which the unborn depends
on the mother shifts depending on the unborn’s stage of development. In fact,
very early in development, the embryo is nutritionally self-sufficient. The
mother does not provide nutrition to the unborn prior to implantation in the
uterine wall, and after implantation, the yolk sac provides nutrition and
serves as a rudimentary circulatory system for the developing embryo for a
short time. If nutritional dependence means the unborn is a part of the mother
or is not an individual, then this would mean that the unborn shifts from
being an individual (prior to relying on the mother for nutrition) to not
being an individual (after it does rely on the mother for nutrition) and then
back to being an individual (at some point after birth, presumably…teenager?),
which is absurd. Hence, the unborn is not a part of the mother.

**6. Meaning of individual as self-contained whole**

The unborn may be small (like many of us) and in varying ways dependent on the
mother (like many of us), but this doesn’t take away from the fact that even
the zygote, that single-celled new little individual, is in fact a _whole_
individual. There is a tendency to think of the unborn as not whole
individuals because they are in an early and rapid stage of development. But
living things are not constructed the way inanimate objects are. For example,
a carpenter builds a chair by assembling its parts—legs, seat, back, etc. It’s
not really a chair until it has all the essential parts. But living organisms
are not _constructed_ , they _develop_. A single-celled zygote may not have
all the parts it may later come to develop, but it is nonetheless a complete
organism. It is whole from the time it comes into existence, which
biologically speaking is at conception. The mother’s body does not construct
the unborn, rather, the unborn self-develops with the mother’s assistance,
just as infant, toddler, adolescent, and adult human individuals develop with
assistance from one another and from the world around them. The unborn is
whole and therefore not a part of the mother.

**7. Place does not equal part**

It may seem obvious to say that the unborn is a part of the mother, since the
child is actually inside the mother and is physically connected to her body.
This does not make the unborn “part” of her though. Does _X_ being inside _Y_
make _X_ a part of _Y_? It that’s the case, then you are a “part” of your car
when you sit inside of it. Or consider a single brick in a wall. What makes
_this_ brick a part of _this_ wall? Not merely place, but that the brick
contributes to the wholeness of the wall and to its function. Place does not
equal part.

What about physical connectedness? Is _X_ a part of _Y_ because they are
physically connected? Consider the wall again. Posters and graffiti may be
“connected” to the wall, but we wouldn’t say that they constitute the wall’s
parts. Human beings are connected to different things all the time for myriad
reasons (clothes, jewellery, cell phones, other human beings) and even for
reasons of dependence. This doesn’t mean those things become “part” of us. So
physical connectedness also does not make the unborn part of the mother.

**8. Wholeness of a non-pregnant Woman**

If the unborn were a part of a woman’s body, there would be two natural ways
for a woman to develop this “part”. One possibility would be for her to be
born pregnant, as women are born with other prenatally developed body parts,
such as limbs, a brain, sex organs, lungs, a stomach, etc. Women are not born
pregnant, and no one expects them to be. Another way we come to have organs or
parts is to develop them postnatally. But some women never become pregnant.
Clearly we do not speak of non-pregnant women as lacking something essential
to womanhood or to her bodily integrity. A non-pregnant woman is not missing
any of her organs or parts. And since we do not speak thus, the unborn cannot
be said to be a part of the woman whenever it is present. This might be called
the argument from the non-privation of a non-pregnant woman. A non-pregnant
woman is not missing anything even if she never becomes pregnant. If the
unborn were a part of a woman, non-pregnant women would have to be called “de-
formed”. Non-pregnancy would be considered a pathology, which is absurd.

**9. Argument from the Social Relationship Between Mother and Unborn**

One of the most exciting aspects of being an expectant parent is developing a
social relationship with the unborn while still in utero. Parents talk to and
about their unborn child. They (may) name their unborn child. They may even
play with their child, for example poking or tapping a little elbow sticking
out of the mother’s belly. No one names, plays with, or sings songs to their
body parts, at least not seriously. There is also ample evidence to indicate
that there is a tremendous amount of social learning that occurs before a
child is even born. Interactions between twins are especially interesting (and
cute). The parent-child relationship exists before the child is even born
precisely because child is an individual and only individuals can be social
with one another. This reality is exactly the reason abortion providers want
to avoid mothers seeing ultrasounds, naming their babies, or even referring to
their unborn as “he” or “she”. So the unborn is an individual and not a part
of the mother.

**10. Meaning of Part to Whole-Mother as Part of the Unborn**

The argument that the unborn is part of the mother suffers from a
misunderstanding of what it means to be “part” of something. In an individual
being composed of parts, the nature of the parts is that they serve the whole.
This is the essential element in the relationship of part to whole, that the
part exists and functions for the sake of the whole. But the unborn does not
contribute to the whole functioning of the mother. True, pregnancy does
provide some hormonal and physiological benefits to the mother, but these
usually last only through pregnancy and seem to actually be for the benefit of
the unborn and to the benefit of the mother only secondarily. In fact, while
neither mother nor unborn are parts of the other, it is more correct to say
that _the mother is a part of the unborn._ The effects of pregnancy on the
body of the mother are more so directed to the functioning and development of
the unborn than the mother. The changes a mother’s body undergoes throughout
pregnancy—and even after—are the result of the mother’s body having turned
itself into an extension…a part, so to speak, of the unborn, for the unborn’s
flourishing. Even more amazing is the fact that _whole organs_ of the mother
exist for no other purpose than the functioning and development of the child,
such as the uterus and breasts. The mother’s body behaves more like a whole
part of the unborn rather than the reverse.

**An Important Note**

All of what has been said here is simply to refute the biologically false
slogan that the unborn is part of a woman’s body and that she therefore has
the right to dispose of it (the hidden premise, that one is free morally to do
whatever they wish with their own body, is also false, by the way). It in no
way diminishes or reduces the dignity of the mother-child relationship to
observe that both are unique individuals. The most amazing thing I have ever
witnessed and been a part of has been seeing my wife become pregnant and give
birth to our two boys. And everything else she does for us three hooligans.
Motherhood is freaking amazing. Catholic comedian Jim Gaffigan put it best:

“ _But truly, women are amazing. Think about it this way: a woman can grow a
baby inside her body. Then a woman can deliver the baby through her body.
Then, by some miracle, a woman can feed a baby with her body. When you compare
that to a male_ _’_ _s contribution to life, it_ _’_ _s kind of embarrassing,
really. The father is always like,_ _“_ _Hey, I helped, too. For like five
seconds. Doing the one thing I think about twenty-four hours a day. Well,
enjoy your morning sickness_ _—_ _I_ _’_ _m going to eat this chili. Mmmm,
smell those onions._ _”_

Republished with permission from Epicpew.com

The views expressed here are those of the author, and do not necessarily
represent the views of CatholicVote.org

Share. Twitter Facebook Google+ Pinterest LinkedIn LinkedIn Tumblr Email

### About Author

![](/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/RyanMayer-150x150.jpg)

Ryan Mayer

Ryan Mayer teaches courses in apologetics, moral theology, and bioethics in
the San Francisco Bay Area, where he lives with his wife and three sons. He
holds degrees in philosophy, theology, literature, and bioethics and is
currently pursuing a licentiate in bioethics from a Pontifical University in
Rome. Ryan loves food and Legos. The latter he cannot afford. @RyanCMayer

### Related Posts

    
        * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/solidarity-stamp-nationalism-5-214x140.png)
    

March 20, 2019 __1

## Can Christians Support Nationalist Movements in Europe and America?

    
        * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/still-me4-214x140.jpg)
    

March 7, 2019 __0

## Rhode Island Catholic Mom Fights Abortion with Powerful #MeStillMe Campaign

    
        * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Solidarity-Stamp_normalizing-unconscionable-01-214x140.png)
    

February 28, 2019 __0

## Normalizing the Unconscionable

### Leave A Reply Cancel Reply

    
        * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Catholic-Herald-30-Percent-Banner-325x271.jpg)
    * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/CVTV8-Fb.jpg)
    * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Side-3-580x325.jpg)
    * ### CV Exclusive
    
      * ![Catholic Clergy Pledge to Risk Jail Rather than Obey CA’s Confession Bill](/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Confessional-85x75.jpg)
    

### Catholic Clergy Pledge to Risk Jail Rather than Obey CA’s Confession Bill

June 5, 2019No Comments

    
          * ![Mueller’s Presser: Trump Supporters Were Right](/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/mueller-85x75.jpg)
    

### Mueller's Presser: Trump Supporters Were Right

May 31, 20191 Comment

    
          * ![Media Accuse ‘Misogynist’ Pope Francis of ‘Inciting Violence’ with Abortion Remarks](/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/yoder-francis-85x75.png)
    

### Media Accuse ‘Misogynist’ Pope Francis of ‘Inciting Violence’ with

Abortion Remarks

May 29, 2019No Comments

    
          * ![Why we fight](/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CV-Why-We-Fight-Blog-1007x588-85x75.jpg)
    

### Why we fight

May 22, 2019No Comments

    
          * ![Catholic voters welcome Trump administration’s proposal to modernize our immigration system](/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/shutterstock_immigration_border-85x75.jpg)
    

### Catholic voters welcome Trump administration's proposal to modernize our

immigration system

May 16, 2019No Comments

    
        *     *       * Home
      * Blog
      * Join
      * Give
    * #### CONTACT US
    

CATHOLICVOTE.ORG  
PO Box 259837  
Madison, WI 53725

(312) 201-6559  
Info@CatholicVote.org  
facebook.com/CatholicVote  
Twitter.com/CatholicVote

    
        * ![cv-script-logo-1c-3125](/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/cv-script-logo-1c-3125.png)
    

PAID FOR BY CATHOLICVOTE.ORG CIVIC ACTION, A 501(C)4 ORGANIZATION.  
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CATHOLICVOTE.ORG ARE NOT TAX-DEDUCTIBLE.

©2019 CatholicVote.org. All Rights Reserved

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

