

Skip navigation

![National Institutes of Health](https://medlineplus.gov/images/nihlogo.png)
U.S. National Library of Medicine

![MedlinePlus Trusted Health Information for

You](https://medlineplus.gov/images/m_logo.png)

The navigation menu has been collapsed.

Menu

    
        * Health Topics
    * Drugs & Supplements
    * Videos & Tools
    * About MedlinePlus
    

Show Search

Search MedlinePlus

GO

    
        * About MedlinePlus
    * Site Map
    * FAQs
    * Customer Support
    
    * Health Topics
    * Drugs & Supplements
    * Videos & Tools
    

EspaÃ±ol

You Are Here:

Home ->

Medical Encyclopedia ->

Developmental disorders of the female genital tract

URL of this page: //medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001497.htm

# Developmental disorders of the female genital tract

To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.

Developmental disorders of the female reproductive tract are problems in the
reproductive organs of a baby girl. They occur while she is growing in her
mother's womb.

Female reproductive organs include the vagina, ovaries, uterus, and cervix.

## Causes

A baby starts to develop its reproductive organs between weeks 4 and 5 of
pregnancy. This continues until the 20th week of pregnancy.

The development is a complex process. Many things can affect this process. How
severe your baby's problem is depends on when the interruption occurred. In
general, if the problems occur earlier in the womb, the effect will be more
widespread. Problems in the development of a girl's reproductive organs may be
caused by:

    
        * Broken or missing genes (genetic defect)
    * Use of certain drugs during pregnancy
    

For example, some babies may have a defect in their genes that prevents their
body from producing an enzyme called 21-hydroxylase. The adrenal gland needs
this enzyme to make hormones such as cortisol and aldosterone. This condition
is called congenital adrenal hyperplasia. If a developing baby girl lacks this
enzyme, she will be born with a uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes. However,
her external genitals will look like those found on boys.

Certain medicines that the mother takes can pass into the bloodstream of the
baby and interfere with organ development. One medicine known to do this is
diethylstilbestrol (DES). Health care providers once prescribed this medicine
to pregnant women to prevent miscarriage and early labor. However, scientists
learned that baby girls born to women who took this medicine had an abnormally
shaped uterus. The drug also increased the daughters' chances of developing a
rare form of vaginal cancer.

Sometimes, a developmental disorder can be seen as soon as the baby is born.
It may cause life-threatening conditions in the newborn. Other times, the
condition is not diagnosed until the girl is older.

The reproductive tract develops close to the urinary tract and kidneys. It
also develops at the same time as several other organs. As a result,
developmental problems in the female reproductive tract sometimes occur with
problems in other areas. These areas may include the urinary tract, kidneys,
intestine, and lower spine.

Developmental disorders of the female reproductive tract include intersex and
ambiguous genitalia.

Other developmental disorders of the female reproductive tract include:

    
        * Cloacal abnormalities: The cloaca is a tube-like structure. In the early stages of development, the urinary tract, rectum, and vagina all empty into this single tube. But later, the 3 areas separate and have their own openings. If the cloaca persists as a baby girl grows in the womb, all the openings do not form and separate. For example, a baby may be born with only 1 opening on the bottom of the body near the rectal area. Urine and feces cannot drain out of the body. This can cause stomach swelling. Some cloacal abnormalities may cause a baby girl to look like she has a penis. These birth defects are rare.
    * Problems with outer (external) genitals: Developmental problems may lead to a swollen clitoris or fused labia. Fused labia is a condition where the folds of tissue around the opening of the vagina are joined together. Most other problems of the outer genitals are related to intersex and ambiguous genitalia.
    * Imperforate hymen: The hymen is a thin tissue that partly covers the opening to the vagina. An imperforate hymen completely blocks the vaginal opening. This often leads to painful swelling of the vagina. Sometimes, the hymen has only a very small opening or tiny small holes. This problem may not be discovered until puberty. Some baby girls are born without a hymen. This is not considered abnormal.
    * Ovarian problems: A baby girl may have an extra ovary, extra tissue attached to an ovary, or structures called ovotestes that have both male and female tissue.
    * Uterus and cervix problems: A baby girl may be born with an extra cervix and uterus, a half-formed uterus, or a blockage of the uterus. Usually, girls born with one half a uterus and one half a vagina are missing the kidney on the same side of the body.
    * Vaginal problems: A baby girl may be born without a vagina or have the vaginal opening blocked by a layer of cells that are higher up in the vagina than where the hymen is. A missing vagina is most often due to Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome. In this syndrome, the baby is missing part or all of the internal reproductive organs (uterus, cervix, and fallopian tubes). Other abnormalities include having 2 vaginas or a vagina that opens into the urinary tract. Some girls may have a heart-shaped uterus or a uterus with a wall in the middle of the cavity.
    

## Symptoms

Symptoms vary according to the specific problem. They may include:

    
        * Breasts do not grow
    * Cannot empty the bladder
    * Lump in the stomach area, usually due to blood or mucus that cannot flow out
    * Menstrual flow that occurs despite using a tampon (a sign of a second vagina)
    * Monthly cramping or pain, without menstruation
    * No menstruation (amenorrhea)
    * Pain with sex
    * Repeated miscarriages or preterm births (may be due to an abnormal uterus)
    

## Exams and Tests

The provider may notice signs of a developmental disorder right away. Such
signs may include:

    
        * Abnormal vagina
    * Abnormal or missing cervix
    * Bladder on the outside of the body
    * Genitals that are hard to identify as a girl or boy (ambiguous genitalia)
    * Labia that are stuck together or unusual in size
    * No openings in the genital area or a single rectal opening
    * Swollen clitoris
    

The belly area may be swollen or a lump in the groin or abdomen may be felt.
The provider may notice the uterus does not feel normal.

Tests may include:

    
        * Endoscopy of the abdomen
    * Karyotyping (genetic testing)
    * Hormone levels, especially testosterone and cortisol
    * Ultrasound or MRI of the pelvic area
    * Urine and serum electrolytes
    

## Treatment

Doctors often suggest surgery for girls with developmental problems of the
internal reproductive organs. For example, a blocked vagina can most often be
corrected with surgery.

If the baby girl is missing a vagina, the provider may prescribe a dilator
when the child reaches young adulthood. A dilator is a device that helps
stretch or widen the area where the vagina is supposed to be. This nonsurgical
process takes 4 to 6 months. Surgery may also be done to create a new vagina.
Surgery should be done when the young woman is able to use a dilator to keep
the new vagina open.

Good results have been reported with both surgical and nonsurgical methods.

Treatment of cloacal abnormalities usually involves multiple complex
surgeries. These surgeries fix problems with the rectum, vagina, and urinary
tract.

If the birth defect causes fatal complications, the first surgery is done
shortly after birth. Surgeries for other developmental reproductive disorders
may also be done while the baby is an infant. Some surgeries may be delayed
until the child is much older.

Early recognition is important, particularly in cases of ambiguous genitalia.
The provider should check carefully before deciding that the child is a boy or
a girl. This is also called assigning a gender. Treatment should include
counseling for the parents. The child will also need counseling as they get
older.

## Support Groups

Support is important for families of children who are diagnosed with
abnormalities of the sexual and reproductive organs. Experts also suggest
counseling and support groups for the children themselves, as they get older.

Different support groups may differ in their thoughts regarding this sensitive
topic. Look for one that supports your thoughts and feelings on the topic.

Support organizations include:

    
        * CARES Foundation -- www.caresfoundation.org
    * Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Education and Support Network -- congenitaladrenalhyperplasia.org/people.html
    * DES Action USA -- www.desaction.org
    * Intersex Society of North America -- www.isna.org
    

## Possible Complications

Cloacal abnormalities can cause fatal complications at birth.

Potential complications may develop if the diagnosis is made late or is wrong.
Children with ambiguous genitalia who are assigned one gender may later be
found to have internal organs related to the sex opposite from which they were
raised. This can cause severe psychological distress.

Undiagnosed problems in a girl's reproductive tract can lead to infertility
and sexual difficulties.

Other complications that occur later in life include:

    
        * Endometriosis
    * Going into labor too early (preterm delivery) 
    * Painful abdominal lumps requiring surgery 
    * Repeated miscarriages
    

## When to Contact a Medical Professional

Call your provider if your daughter has:

    
        * Abnormal-looking genitals
    * Male traits
    * Monthly pelvic pain and cramping, but does not menstruate
    * Not started menstruation by age 16
    * No breast development at puberty
    * No pubic hair at puberty
    * Unusual lumps in the abdomen or groin
    

## Prevention

Pregnant women should not take any substances that contain male hormones. They
should check with the provider before taking any type of medicine or
supplements.

Even if the mother makes every effort to ensure a healthy pregnancy,
development problems in a baby may still occur.

## Alternative Names

Congenital defect - vagina, ovaries, uterus, and cervix; Birth defect -
vagina, ovaries, uterus, and cervix; Developmental disorder of female
reproductive tract

## Images

    
        * ![Developmental disorders of the vagina and vulva](//medlineplus.gov/ency/images/ency/tnails/17052t.jpg)Developmental disorders of the vagina and vulva
    

## References

Diamond DA, Yu RN. Disorders of sexual development: etiology, evaluation, and
medical management. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.
_Campbell-Walsh Urology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 150.

Grindler NM, Cooper AR. Vulvovaginal and mÃ¼llerian anomalies. In: Kliegman RM,
Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds. _Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics_. 20th
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 554.

Kaefer M. Management of abnormalities of the genitalia in girls. In: Wein AJ,
Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds. _Campbell-Walsh Urology_. 11th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 149.

Rackow BW, Lobo RA, Lentz GM. Congenital abnormalities of the female
reproductive tract: anomalies of the vagina, cervix, uterus, and adnexa. In:
Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, eds. _Comprehensive Gynecology_.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 11.

## Review Date 9/28/2017

Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma
Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda Center for Fertility, Loma
Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda
Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.

![Birth Defects](https://medlineplus.gov/images/BirthDefect_thumb.jpg)Birth
Defects _Read more_

![NIH MedlinePlus Magazine](https://medlineplus.gov/images/ency_mag_card.jpg)
NIH MedlinePlus Magazine _Read more_

![Health Topics

A-Z](https://medlineplus.gov/images/ency_healthtopics_card.jpg) Health Topics
A-Z _Read more_

![A.D.A.M Quality Logo](https://ssl.adam.com/urac/square-quart.gif)

A.D.A.M., Inc. is accredited by URAC, also known as the American Accreditation
HealthCare Commission (www.urac.org). URAC's accreditation program is an
independent audit to verify that A.D.A.M. follows rigorous standards of
quality and accountability. A.D.A.M. is among the first to achieve this
important distinction for online health information and services. Learn more
about A.D.A.M.'s editorial policy, editorial process and privacy policy.
A.D.A.M. is also a founding member of Hi-Ethics and subscribes to the
principles of the Health on the Net Foundation (www.hon.ch).

The information provided herein should not be used during any medical
emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A
licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and
all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other
sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements
of those other sites. Copyright 1997-2019, A.D.A.M., Inc. Duplication for
commercial use must be authorized in writing by ADAM Health Solutions.

![A.D.A.M

Logo](https://medlineplus.gov/spanish/ency/images/ency/ftrAdamlogo.gif)

    
        * About MedlinePlus
    * Site Map
    * FAQs
    * Customer Support
    * Get email updates
    * Subscribe to RSS
    * Follow us ![Twitter](https://medlineplus.gov/images/i_share_twitter.png) ![Facebook](https://medlineplus.gov/images/i_share_fb.png)
    
    * Disclaimers
    * Copyright
    * Privacy
    * Accessibility
    * Quality Guidelines
    * Viewers & Players
    * MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs
    * For Developers
    

U.S. National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health

Page last updated: 03 June 2019

![Return to top](https://medlineplus.gov/images/return-top.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

