

Skip to main content

![Lumen](https://courses.lumenlearning.com/atd-bmcc-criminaljustice/wp-

content/themes/bombadil/assets/images/LumenOnDark-150x69.png)

# Criminal Justice

### Courts - Structure and processes

Search for:

## Section 5.1: State and Federal Courts

The U.S. court system is very complex due to dual federalism. Each level of
government-state, local, and federal-has its own courts. Perhaps the easiest
criminal court system to understand is the federal system. When an act
violates a federal criminal law, the suspect is tried in federal court. When a
suspect violates a state law, it can be tried at the local or state level,
depending on the state.

This disparity occurs because each state has its own court system. No two of
the fifty are exactly alike. In addition, the federal government operates
courts within each of the fifty states. The vast majority of criminal cases
are tried in state courts. Most state court systems and the federal court
system can be described as hierarchical or "pyramid shaped."

### Lower Courts

At the bottom of the court hierarchy are the **lower courts**. The majority of
cases heard by these courts are traffic violations and misdemeanor cases. The
names vary widely, depending on the state. Municipal courts, police courts,
and traffic courts are common examples. There are also many specialized courts
at this level. Juvenile courts, for example, often exist at this level.

These courts tend to hear relatively minor matters. Many can, however,
sentence violators to jail and impose large fines. Some of these courts also
deal with preliminary matters in criminal cases, such as conducting
arraignments and preliminary hearings. These felony cases are subsequently
transferred to a higher court for trial. Many people-especially those
appearing in them-are critical of the "assembly line" justice offered by many
municipal courts.

### Courts of General Jurisdiction

While the lower courts can only hear nonserious matters, this level of the
court system can hear felony cases. **Courts of general jurisdiction** are the
trial courts of record of the state court systems. Generally, these courts
operate more formally and professionally than the lower courts. There are
fewer of them. The name varies depending on the state; in some states, they
are called district courts, and in others, they are called circuit courts.
This can be very confusing in states that are the reverse of the federal
system (where district courts are trial courts and circuit courts are
appellate courts). Only a small fraction of cases filed by prosecutors ever go
to full trial in these courts. The vast majority end in a plea bargain.

### Courts of Appellate Jurisdiction

When a party is dissatisfied with the results of a trial, then they can appeal
to a higher court. Appellate courts mostly hear appeals cases, and are higher
up in the court hierarchy. The number of levels of appeals courts depends
largely on the population of the state. In states with relatively small
populations, the losing party at trial can appeal directly to the state's
highest court, the state supreme court. In larger states, there is usually an
intermediate appeals court that lightens the workload of the state supreme
court.

The supreme courts usually have a broad discretion in deciding whether to hear
a case or not. The judges are free in many circumstances to decide what cases
are important, and to only hear those.

### The Federal Court System

Federal courts are organized along very similar lines to state courts,
although the more general subject matter jurisdiction of federal courts makes
them more streamlined that many state systems.

#### U.S. District Courts

In the hierarchy of courts, the trial courts of general jurisdiction are
always near the bottom. At the federal level, these workhorses of the court
system are the 94 U.S. District Courts. Every state in the United States has
at least one district court, and some states have several. According to an
annual report entitled _Judicial Business of the U.S. Courts_ (2014), "filings
for criminal defendants (including defendants transferred from other
districts) fell 3 percent to 91,266 in 2013. This was the lowest total since
2008." Drug offenses counted for the largest percentage of these filings at
around 32% of all criminal cases. Shifts in enforcement strategies have seen a
dramatic decline in federal prosecutions for marijuana-related offenses, with
an 8% drop in 2013 over the previous year. Immigration, fraud, and firearms
related crime made up the bulk of remaining cases.

#### U.S. Courts of Appeals

Above the federal district courts in the federal court hierarchy are the U.S.
Courts of Appeal. They serve mostly to hear appeals from the district courts.
Appeals judges do not sit alone when deciding cases, but rather sit in panels
of three judges. Rare and important cases are sometimes heard _en banc_ ,
meaning all of the judges in that circuit hear the case together.

These courts lack the discretion of which cases they hear that the Supreme
Court enjoys. The docket of the appeals courts is dictated by the number and
types of appeals that are filed. Filings in the 12 regional courts of appeals
fell 2 percent to 56,475. Decreases occurred in filings of criminal appeals,
appeals of administrative agency decisions, and civil appeals. Growth was
reported for prisoner petitions, bankruptcy appeals, and original proceedings
(Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, 2014).

#### The U.S. Supreme Court (USSC)

The U.S. Supreme Court crowns the hierarchy of United States Courts. It hears
appeals that come out of both federal and state courts. Considering there are
only nine justices, the workload of the Supreme Court is very heavy. The
Supreme Court is different than lower level courts in that they exercise
**certiorari power**. This means that the justices get to decide which cases
to review and which to pass over. The cases that they do select tend to have
very broad national implications. Because the Supreme Court functions mostly
as a court of appeals, most of the cases they decide result in a lower court
's decision either being **affirmed** or **reversed**.

### Problems with the Courts

One of the biggest problems facing the courts today is the high volume of
cases. For example, in 2013, combined filings for civil cases and criminal
defendants in the U.S. district courts totaled 363,914. According to the Court
Statistics Project, over 10.6 million cases were processed in state trial
courts in 2009 (the last year for which data is available).

The tough drug sanctions of the recent past caused a steadily increasing
caseload for the courts. A majority of state courts are perpetually behind on
hearing cases. Accordingly, there has been an increasing interest on both the
state and federal level with how to reduce caseloads and speed up the flow of
cases.

#### Reducing Caseloads

Perhaps the most popular effort to reduce caseloads has been the advent of
_drug courts_. A big difference between drug courts and regular courts is that
drug courts tend to sentence nonviolent, first-time offenders to drug
treatment rather than probation or prison. The main purposes of drug courts
are to reduce recidivism and reduce the caseload of the regular courts. The
empirical research suggests that drug courts are more effective at reducing
recidivism than traditional probation or prison.

#### Speeding Up Court Processing

When there are too many cases being processed by the courts, the speed at
which cases can be processes slows down, sometimes dramatically. This is
especially problematic in criminal courts where defendants have a
constitutional guarantee of a speedy trial. For this and other reasons, the
public is dissatisfied when case resolution becomes a long, drawn-out process.

At the federal level, there has been legislation to force the courts to run
faster. **The Speedy Trail Act of 1974** sets time standards for two different
stages in the federal progression. The law stipulates that the prosecutor has
a maximum of thirty days from the time of arrest to arraign a suspect, and an
additional seventy days from the indictment to the trial. Every state has
followed the federal example by enacting some form of speedy trial law.

### The Role of Judges

The many responsibilities of the trial court judge extend throughout the
entire criminal court process. From the time of an arrest, judges make
critical decisions that have a deep impact on the cases and lives of those
accused of crimes. Because they must evaluate probable cause and issue search
and arrest warrants, judges are often involved in criminal cases before an
arrest takes place. Once the offender is arrested, the judge must decide if
bail is to be granted, the amount of bail, rule on pretrial motions made by
both the prosecution and the defense, hear pleas, referee trials, and pass
sentences. At all stages of the process, the judge must perform a balancing
act, protecting the rights of the accused while also protecting the best
interest of the public. Appeals court judges have different responsibilities
than trial judges. While trial judges are mostly referees in the adversarial
battle between prosecution and defense, appeals court judges serve as legal
scholars by researching, clarifying, and writing opinions on legal issues.

#### Federal Judges

Federal judges tend to be the cream of the crop. They tend to come from
families with a long history of public service and attend the finest law
schools in the world. Some critics argue that those families are also wealthy,
and that federal judges are selected from the social and cultural elite and
that the process is unfair.

#### State Judges

State level judges tend to be drawn heavily from whichever political party
dominates that particular state. There are a variety of ways that judges are
selected, depending on state law. Some states have partisan elections, meaning
that candidates for judgeships run under the banner of a particular political
party. In other states, judges are elected, but they run as nonpartisan
candidates, meaning that they state no allegiance to a particular political
party. Some states use an appointment system, where the governor of the state
appoints judges. Still other states select judges by legislative appointment.
Some states, such as Missouri, use a merit system.

#### Judicial Decision Making

The very nature of being a judge requires making important decisions. Judges
make decisions that have an enormous impact on the lives of defendants. Trial
court judges are often called upon to make decisions in an instant, while
appeals court judges have more time to ponder weighty issues and seek input
from colleagues and staff.

Because of the doctrine of _stare decisis_ , the decisions of judges are
tempered by the existing legal landscape. That is, most judges follow
precedent when it is available, and try to use the legal logic of past cases
to guide them when novel legal questions arise. Political values often come
into play, although these are not as readily recognized as is legal tradition.

### Judicial Misconduct

Judges have an awesome amount of power, and this power sometimes corrupts.
Judges, like other criminal justice professionals, sometimes act in unethical
and illegal ways. These inappropriate activities undermine the public
confidence in the judiciary and create injustice. Each state has some sort of
mechanism in place to deal with unethical conduct by judges. At the federal
level, judges can only be removed by impeachment by the Senate.

### Judicial Independence

The founding fathers decided early on that the courts should be independent of
the other branches of government. There are several reasons for this
separation of powers. Perhaps the most important reason for judicial
independence is that it allows judges to preside over cases in a just and
impartial way. Another important reason is that the courts serve as a check on
the power of the executive and legislative branches.

It is a mistake, however, to view the judiciary as completely independent. The
other branches of government have the ability to influence the judiciary. The
executive often has the power of appointment over judges. The legislative
branch has the power of the purse, controlling the budget of the courts. These
powers, while significant, are limited. Federal judges, for example, are
appointed for life tenure. That means that once appointed by the executive,
they cannot be fired. The founding fathers formed government in this way
because they understood that a judge fearful of losing his job could not be a
neutral and detached magistrate that is willing to rule against the
legislative or the executive.

### Juveniles and the Courts

Just as with the adult criminal justice system, the courts powerfully
influence the juvenile justice system. This is true at both the juvenile court
level, and at the appellate level.

#### Juvenile Courts

Perhaps the most important member of the juvenile justice system is the
juvenile court judge. Juvenile judges have the role of a traditional judge,
but this role is greatly expanded when a judge presides over a juvenile court.
In many jurisdictions, the juvenile judge oversees not only the operations of
the juvenile court, but juvenile probation departments as well. In many small
jurisdictions, juvenile court judges are responsible for the fiscal management
of the courts as well as probation departments.

The beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors of juvenile judges can have an
incredible impact on other criminal justice agencies in particular, and the
entire community in general. For example, judges that do a poor job of dealing
with juvenile delinquency in the schools runs the risk of creating a
disruptive and lawless learning environment. At the other end of the spectrum,
judges that are overly punitive in their decisions run the risk of violating
the doctrine of _parens patriae_.

Much of what juvenile court judges do can be described as a balancing act.
Juvenile judges must ensure that all processes and decisionmaking are carried
out in a fair and unbiased manner. They must make sure that all decisions
balance the best interests of the juvenile with the best interests of the
victim and community. In addition, they must ensure that the constitutional
rights of all parties are upheld. While the juvenile justice system is
substantially different than the adult system, constitutional guarantees of
due process must be upheld in juvenile proceedings. In practice, this
requirement creates an often-uncomfortable conflict of adversarial process
versus the best interest of the child.

#### The Supreme Court & Juveniles

Historically, juvenile proceedings rarely made it to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Starting with the Warren court in the 1960s, however, the Supreme Court handed
down several cases that dramatically altered the structure and function of the
juvenile justice system.

**Landmark Court Decisions in Juvenile Justice**

* * *

_Kent v. United States_ (1966) | Held that juveniles must be afforded due
process rights in court proceedings.  
_In re Gault_ (1967) | Held that juveniles accused of crimes must be afforded
many of the same due process rights as adults.  
_Breed v. Jones_ (1975) | Held that finding a child delinquent in a juvenile
court then trying the child in adult court amounts to double jeopardy.  
_Schall v. Martin_ (1984) | Held that the preventive detention of a juvenile
does not necessarily violate due process.  
_Doe v. Renfrow_ (1981) | Upheld a lower court decision that a search of
schoolchildren for narcotics by a drug dog is not rights violation.  
_New Jersey v. TLO_ (1985) | Set the evidentiary standard for searches of
students by school officials at reasonable suspicion.  
_Qutb v. Strauss_ (1993) | Held that curfew laws were constitutional because
they are designed to protect the community.

## _Key Terms_

**Affirmed, Assembly Line Justice, Certiorari Power, Courts of General
Jurisdiction, _Doe v. Renfrow_ (1981), Judicial Independence, Judicial
Misconduct, _Kent v. United States_ (1966), Lower Courts, Municipal Courts,
_New Jersey v. TLO_ (1985), Police Courts, _Qutb v. Strauss_ (1993), Reversed,
Speedy Trial Act of 1974, Traffic Courts, U.S. Courts of Appeal, U.S. District
Courts**

##

* * *

Licenses and Attributions

CC licensed content, Shared previously

    
        *  **Authored by** : Adam Mckee. **Located at** : http://www.docmckee.com/OER/INTRO/Section_5_1_text.html. **License** : _CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial_
    

Previous Next

![Footer Logo Lumen Candela](https://courses.lumenlearning.com/atd-bmcc-

criminaljustice/wp-

content/themes/bombadil/assets/images/FooterLumenCandela.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

