

Skip to the content

## Notable topics

  * The Border
  * Black Mirror
  * Alabama
  * NBA Finals
  * Forever Roll
  * Stonewall
  * Fleabag

Podcasts Slate Plus

Slate homepage

Submit search Enter query Sign In

My Account ▾

Settings Log out

  * News & Politics 
  * Culture 
  * Technology 
  * Business 
  * Human Interest 

Slate homepage

Menu Open menu Close menu

## Notable topics

The Border Black Mirror Alabama NBA Finals Forever Roll Stonewall Fleabag

News & Politics Culture Technology Business Human Interest Podcasts Slate Plus
Search

Follow us Slate on Instagram Slate on Twitter Slate on Facebook

Register Sign in

Settings Log out

  * Certified Expert on Comedy, Murder, and Hair 

Follow Us Slate on Instagram Slate on Twitter Slate on Facebook

Doublex

# When Does Life Begin? It’s Not So Simple.

## Fetal personhood bills are gaining steam—but many religious and scientific

ethicists, as well as women, see the path to personhood as a gradual one.

By Elissa Strauss

April 04, 20175:55 AM

  * Tweet
  * Share
  * Comment

![Natalie Matthews-

Ramo](https://compote.slate.com/images/e8b95a19-9787-42a3-ad28-9c1cc086e490.jpg)

Natalie Matthews-Ramo

In March of 2011, Ohio Republicans invited an ultrasound technician and two
pregnant women to a House committee meeting and watched, on a large screen, as
the women underwent ultrasounds. They were trying to garner support for
legislation that would ban abortions after the embryo’s heartbeat can be
detected, which happens at around 6 weeks’ gestational age or 4 weeks
following conception. “I think it kind of hits you in the forehead about what
is going on in the woman’s womb,” Rep. Lynn R. Wachtmann, a sponsor of the
bill, told reporters after the demonstration. “It’s an eye-opener.”

The belief underlying the Ohio measure, which never made it to the Senate
floor, is that the heartbeat serves as final and irrefutable proof of the
arrival of a unique human being, one who should be treated with the same
respect and care as a person outside the womb. Since 2011, similar heartbeat
ban bills have been proposed in 14 states, and one was proposed in the House
of Representatives this past January. The laws passed in Arkansas and North
Dakota, but both were ultimately blocked by federal courts.

Supporters of these bills have embraced the ultrasound as offering scientific
proof of their religious belief that life begins as early as conception. And
with President Trump seeking to add justices to the Supreme Court who would
overturn _Roe v. Wade_ —which protects abortion rights up to the point of
viability—these activists have new reason to be hopeful. Should a radically
shifted court ever embrace the cause that’s become known as fetal personhood,
abortion would be considered murder and outlawed nationwide.

But despite the insistence of anti-abortion activists, the notion that life
begins at the bright line of conception is at odds with many ethical
traditions. In a number of religions, when an embryo or fetus becomes a person
remains a mystery, something that occurs not in a single moment but in a
series of moments, none necessarily more important than the next. And, for all
the anti-abortion side’s embrace of ultrasounds, the medical community tends
to agree.

“Many scientists would say they don’t know when life begins. There are a
series of landmark moments,” said Arthur Caplan, professor and founding head
of the Division of Medical Ethics at New York University Langone Medical
Center. “The first is conception, the second is the development of the spine,
the third the development of the brain, consciousness, and so on.” That
perspective, it turns out, has deep roots. It’s also one that resonates for
many pregnant women who experience the embryo’s gradual passage to personhood
on a visceral level.

* * *

Many religious traditions, including a number of denominations of
Christianity, are ambivalent about the beginnings of life. The Evangelical
Lutheran Church in America and many American Baptists don’t believe abortion
is akin to murder. Presbyterians concede that they “may not know exactly when
human life begins” and encourage their followers to make their own careful
decisions on abortion. Unitarians are more overtly pro-choice and “believe not
only in the value of life itself but also in the quality of life.”

Among Muslims, there is no universally agreed-upon moment when a fetus becomes
a person. “Some say it takes 40 days, others say it takes 120 days, for a
human soul to be breathed into a fetus,” Sherine Hamdy, an associate professor
of anthropology at Brown who researches cross-cultural bioethics, told
**_Slate_**. She said many Muslim religious leaders allow for abortion in case
of rape before 4 months, and some also allow for it in the case of a prenatal
diagnosis of disability if it is seen as “an arduous burden on the family’s
well-being.”

The majority of Jews do not believe that life begins at conception but instead
see the creation of life as something that happens over time. During this
process, the fetus is seen as part of the mother, whose well-being, both
immediate and future, takes precedence. As with other religious traditions,
Jewish ethicists have increasingly become willing to consider psychological
threats to the mother in addition to physical ones, when considering whether
an abortion is the right decision.

“The tradition holds that we enter life in stages and leave in stages,” Rabbi
Elliot Dorff, bioethicist and professor of Jewish theology at the American
Jewish University in California, told **_Slate_**. He pointed to Exodus 21, in
which the Bible explains that if a pregnant woman is physically harmed and
miscarries as a result, the punishment for her assailant should not be the
same as if he killed another person. “It’s clear here that there is real
distinction between the status of fetus and status of a woman who is a full-
fledged human being.”

There are also a number of biblical passages in which the breath, and not the
heartbeat, serves as the central symbol for life, including, most famously,
Genesis 2:7: “Then the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.”
Anti-abortion activists often counter these examples with two other biblical
passages, both which suggest that some kind of ensoulment happens at
conception. “Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee,” reads Jeremiah 1:5. Together,
these passages suggest that the author or authors of the Bible were as
uncertain as we are about when life begins.

For many Christian ethicists, this ambivalence is reason to err on the side of
caution and to assume we are ensouled from the very beginning.

“You might be surprised to know that the Catholic Church has never
dogmatically defined when life begins,” said Daniel Sulmasy, a Catholic
bioethicist and director of the Program on Medicine and Religion at the
University of Chicago. “Instead, there is a recognition that there is
unfolding developmental potential in embryo, from unification between the
sperm and egg to birth. There is no defined moment of ensoulment. But we know
the potential of human life is there from conception so believe we ought to be
cautious and not interfere.” To him, this teaching holds true even if the
fetus has no chance of survival. “Our advice would be to let a natural
miscarriage happen or carry the fetus to term. And if the fetus is too sick to
live on its own, it can be allowed to die.”

Sulmasy added that there is no real historical theological precedent for the
recent focus on the heartbeat, which couldn’t have been heard until the
stethoscope was invented in the 19 th century. For much of its history, the
church considered life to begin at the quickening, or the first time a woman
feels the baby move, which usually happens sometime around 18 weeks. “[The
focus on the heartbeat] is just a contemporary attempt to create some dividing
line based on what we now know about biology,” he said.

In light of this uncertainty, even among Christian factions, it’s striking
that anti-choice activists have spent decades fighting to codify a fixed
definition of when life begins into state and federal law. These efforts were
given a boost by the passing of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act in 1993,
which made it easier for opponents of abortion to argue that compromising
those beliefs would be a violation of their freedom of religion. With _Roe v.
Wade_ already the law of the land, meanwhile, the voices of the religious pro-
choice have largely been missing from the debate.

“There has been a failure of religious groups of more moderate perspective to
really fight back on the expansion of laws [that restrict abortion rights],”
Jodi Jacobson, president and editor-in-chief of the pro-reproductive rights
online publication **_* _Rewire_ , told _ * _Slate_**. She believes leaders in
some faith traditions are reluctant to appear to disrespect the beliefs of
their peers—a position she sees as less and less reasonable as reproductive
rights diminish. “This has become an ethical dilemma.”

Janet Crepps, senior counsel in the U.S. legal program at the Center for
Reproductive Rights, sees legal potential in the argument that one group’s
religiously informed belief that life begins at conception violates the
freedom of religion of other groups whose traditions tell them otherwise.
“There is absolutely room for people of different religious faiths to come in
and challenge the thinking behind these laws,” Crepps told **_Slate_**
—emphasizing that the time to push back is before the laws pass, not
afterward. “We need to make other views heard in all their diversity.”

As for the scientific community, Caplan believes that the relative silence
from his peers on these issues is a product of professional fear. Many
scientists rely on the government for funding and want to avoid alienating
anyone with the power to shut down their research. “If scientists weren’t such
cowards about getting into the abortion issue, they would be speaking up more
about this,” Caplan said.

* * *

In the debate over life’s beginnings, the heartbeat is a metaphor, a visceral
and potent symbol of life that some can’t help but interpret as proof of life
itself. It’s hard to be unmoved by the coursing of blood through an embryo or
fetus’ heart, something many women and men now bear witness to in the exam
room, with our eyes, ears, and, yes, hearts.

Still, the heartbeat deceives. It renders the grayscale beginnings of life in
black and white, in refutation of the fact that this is a mysterious process
with many possible ends. Denying this doesn’t just threaten women’s
reproductive rights, but also limits the way we think and talk about
pregnancy, pregnancy loss, and childbirth. This mystery is what makes it
possible for the same woman to choose an abortion and then grieve a
miscarriage, or to pray for the survival of the 5-day-old embryo implanted in
her womb by a fertility doctor while being at peace with the fact that, if
that one makes it, the other half-dozen in the freezer will be destroyed. When
we view life as evolving in stages, it frees us to experience all these
moments in all their fullness and complexity.

Last year I went through infertility treatment. This included one egg
retrieval, during which doctors took 21 eggs out of my ovaries, 19 of which
fertilized, 12 of which made it to the fifth day, and four of which were
determined to be chromosomally viable through preimplantation genetic
screening. The first egg doctors implanted in me made it to 6 weeks
gestational age, and then I started bleeding. When I went into the doctor to
figure out what was going on, I saw the heartbeat. Two days later, the
heartbeat was gone. A few months later I was implanted with another egg, and
I’m now nearing the end of my third trimester. Throughout all this, my husband
and I struggled to boil down the mix of emotions and science to something our
toddler son could digest, a formulation that wouldn’t hide our desire for
another child while still acknowledging the precariousness and liminality of
the whole undertaking.

What worked for him is this: Mommy is trying to grow a baby. And when I got
pregnant: Mommy is growing a baby. Describing it this way allowed him to
understand two things: The creation of babies, of life, is a long,
complicated, and often messy experience. Also, babies don’t magically appear
but can only come into being with the assistance of the women who play host to
them. It’s a simple formulation, one that ultimately helped us make sense of
what was happening as well.

And when, if, this baby I am growing takes his first breath, it will be a
moment of awe for all parties involved. Finally, we will take comfort in what
we see as the undeniable, palpable arrival of life: a new person, in the
world. ****

  * Tweet
  * Share
  * Comment

Abortion Religion

* * *

  * Reprints
  * Advertise: Site / Podcasts
  * Commenting
  * Podcast FAQs
  * Contact / Feedback
  * Pitch guidelines
  * Corrections
  * About us
  * Work with us
  * Send us tips
  * User agreement
  * Privacy policy
  * AdChoices
  * Slate Shop

Follow Us

Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS Feed

The Slate Group logo

Slate is published by The Slate Group, a Graham Holdings Company.  
All contents (C) 2019 The Slate Group LLC. All rights reserved.

# We Need to Talk About Your Ad Blocker

Slate relies on advertising to support our journalism. If you value our work,
please disable your ad blocker.

Enable Ads on Slate

# Want to Block Ads But Still Support Slate?

By joining Slate Plus you support our work and get exclusive content. And
you'll never see this message again.

Join Slate Plus ![Illustration depicting a colorful group of people using an

array of mobile devices](/media/components/adblock-message/slate-plus-

promo.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

