

![](https://q.quora.com/_/ad/d29ea10c24a74df597d0ccaa32076ecd/pixel?tag=ViewContent&noscript=1)
Skip to main content

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.

Back to Reading

Sections

    
        * News
    * Metro
    * Page Six
    * Sports
    * Business
    * Opinion
    * Entertainment
    * Fashion
    * Living
    * Media
    * Tech
    * Real Estate
    * Sub Menu 1
      * Video
      * Photos
      * Covers
      * Columnists
      * Horoscopes
      * Sports Odds
      * Email Newsletters
      * Home Delivery
      * Coupons
    * Sub Menu 2
      * Page Six TV
    
    * Sign in
    

Search

Type to Search Search

**Tips** Sign Up

New York Post New York Post

### Share this:

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * WhatsApp
    * Email
    * Copy
    * Living
    

### Share this:

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * WhatsApp
    * Email
    * Copy
    * #  How babies know their mother's voice — even in the womb
    

By Kate Fehlhaber, Aeon

    
        * View author archive
    * Get author RSS feed
    

#### Most Popular Today

1 ![How babies know their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
Hero mom saves the day, killing gunman outside school 2 ![How babies know

their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
Marcia Cross' anal cancer likely linked to husband's throat cancer through HPV
3 ![How babies know their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
Drake instantly trolls Klay Thompson with questionable photo 4 ![How babies

know their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
NYPD chief fatally shoots self a month before mandatory retirement 5 ![How

babies know their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
Even Jennifer Lopez wears Spanx

Name(required)

Email(required)

Comment(required)

Submit

October 23, 2016 | 12:35pm

Enlarge Image

![How babies know their mother’s voice — even in the

womb](https://thenypost.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/shutterstock_111643082.jpg?quality=90&strip=all&w=618&h=410&crop=1)

Shutterstock

#### More On:

### pregnancy

## Pregnant bikini model shamed for 'problematic' labor photoshoot

## The 'extreme' pregnancy disease shared by Amber Rose, Amy Schumer

## Baby cut from mother's womb now able to breathe on his own

## Maternal fitness expert sues Columbia professor over criticism

It is no surprise that a child prefers its mother’s voice to those of
strangers.

Beginning in the womb, a fetus’ developing auditory pathways sense the sounds
and vibrations of its mother. Soon after birth, a child can identify its
mother’s voice and will work to hear her voice better over unfamiliar female
voices.

A 2014 study of pre-term infants showed that playing a recording of the
mother’s voice when babies sucked on a pacifier was enough to improve
development of oral feeding skills and shorten their hospital stay. A mother’s
voice can soothe a child in stressful situations, reducing levels of cortisol,
the stress hormone, and increasing levels of oxytocin, the social bonding
hormone.

Scientists have even traced the power of a mother’s voice to infants’ brains:
A mother’s voice activates the anterior prefrontal cortex and the left
posterior temporal region more strongly than an unfamiliar voice, priming the
infant for the specialized task of speech processing.

While it makes intuitive sense that a mother’s voice has special power over
infants and toddlers, what happens as children grow up?

Daniel Abrams, a neurobiologist at Stanford University School of Medicine, and
his team of researchers set out to answer this question using functional MRI
(fMRI), a neuroimaging technique  
that measures brain activity by detecting metabolic changes in blood flow.

The researchers examined 24 children between the ages of 7 and 12, who had
normal IQs, had no development disorders and were raised by their biological
mothers.

While in the MRI machine, these children listened to recordings of nonsense
words spoken by their mothers or by other women. The researchers specifically
chose nonsense words so as not to trigger brain circuits related to semantics.
Regardless, the children were able to accurately identify their mother’s voice
more than 97 percent of the time in less than one second.  
But what actually happened when these older children heard their mother’s
voice?

The team hypothesized that listening to her voice would produce more activity
in the so-called “voice-selective” brain regions, involved in recognizing
voice and processing speech, compared with when they heard unfamiliar female
voices.

But what the scientists found was even more remarkable. A mother’s voice
activated a wide range of brain structures including the amygdala, which
regulates emotion, the nucleus accumbens and medial prefrontal cortex, which
are part of a major reward circuit, and the fusiform face area, which
processes visual face information.

This pattern of brain activity can be likened to a neural fingerprint, where a
mother’s voice triggers specific activity in her child’s brain.

The investigation didn’t stop there. The team found that the more neural
connection between these “voice-selective” brain regions and those related to
mood, reward and face processing, the more social communication abilities a
child had.

In other words, the neural fingerprint of a mother’s voice within a child’s
brain can predict that child’s ability to communicate in the social realm.

If that neural fingerprint is thought of as a biomarker in a child’s brain,
then how different does it look in children with disorders in social function,
such as autism? And how does the neural fingerprint change in adolescence and
into adulthood?

The answers to these questions remain unknown, but it is now scientifically
proven that most of us carry a mother’s voice in the neural patterns of our
brain: bedtime stories, dinnertime conversation and the chatter we heard
before birth identify us, uniquely, as surely as the fingerprint, enabling
emotional development and social communication in childhood and, probably,  
through life.

_Originally published by Aeon Media_

### Share this:

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * WhatsApp
    * Email
    * Copy
    * Filed under babies ,  moms ,  pregnancy
    

### Share this article:

### Share this:

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * WhatsApp
    * Email
    * Copy
    * Read Next
    

Jets' national anthem singer wrestles with kneeling

Read Next

Jets' national anthem singer wrestles with kneeling

Share Selection

#### Trending Now on NYPost.com

    
        1. This story has been shared 134,940 times. 134,940
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Missing homicide detective found dead

    
        2. This story has been shared 83,812 times. 83,812
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Hero mom saves the day, killing gunman outside school

    
        3. This story has been shared 62,597 times. 62,597
    

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Couple recounts horrifying illness at same Dominican resort where 3 died

#### Now On Now on Page Six

    
        1. Inside Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg’s split with Bobby Kotick Inside Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg’s split with Bobby Kotick
    2. Feds hit Tekashi 6ix9ine ‘kidnapper’ with gun, racketeering charges Feds hit Tekashi 6ix9ine ‘kidnapper’ with gun, racketeering charges
    3. Kit Harington was laying off alcohol even before entering rehab Kit Harington was laying off alcohol even before entering rehab
    

SEE ALL

#### Video

Video length 42 seconds :42

##### Mom uses ninja-like moves to sneak out of child’s bedroom

#### Coupon Offers

    
        * #####  17 Groupon discount codes
    

Groupon coupon: $100 Off Hotel Bookings

    
        * #####  8 Target coupons & coupon codes
    

Enjoy $5 off $50 with this Target exclusive

    
        * #####  9 JCPenney coupons
    

Extra 15% off JCPenney promo code

    
        * #####  16 Macy's coupons & coupon codes
    

Get a free bronze membership at Macy's

    
        * #####  Walmart coupons for 2019
    

Save $10 off $50 Grocery w/ Walmart promo code

See All Coupons

#### More Stories

#### page six

##### Country singer Granger Smith's 3-year-old son dies in tragic accident

#### nypost

##### Missing homicide detective found dead

New York Post

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * LinkedIn
    * Messenger
    * Email
    * YouTube
    
    * Email Newsletters
    * Mobile Apps
    * Contact Us
    * Tips
    * Coupons
    
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * LinkedIn
    * Messenger
    * Email
    * YouTube
    
    * Sections & Features
      * News
      * Tech
      * Metro
      * Real Estate
      * Page Six
      * Video
      * Sports
      * Photos
      * Business
      * Alexa
      * Opinion
      * Covers
      * Entertainment
      * Horoscopes
      * Fashion
      * Sports Odds
      * Living
      * Classifieds
      * Media
      * Coupons
    * Newsletters & More
      * Email Newsletters
      * RSS Feeds
      * NYPost Store
      * Post Headliners
      * Home Delivery
        * Subscribe
        * Manage Subscription
        * Delivery Help
    * Help/Support
      * Customer Service
      * App FAQ & Help
      * Contact Us
        * Tips
        * Newsroom
        * Letters to the Editor
        * Reprints
        * Careers
    * Apps
      * iPhone App
      * iPad App
      * Android Phone
      * Android Tablet
      * Advertise
        * Media Kit
        * Contact
    

## Post Digital Network

    
        * Page Six
    * Page Six Style
    * Decider
    

(C) 2019 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved | Terms of Use | Privacy |
Your Ad Choices | Sitemap

![Powered by WordPress.com VIP](https://s0.wp.com/wp-

content/themes/vip/plugins/vip-do-not-include-on-wpcom/vip-powered-

wpcom/images/vip-powered-dark-small.png)

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/mu-plugins/post-

flair/sharing/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

__ click to copy

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/988380111/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

