

# History of abortion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/97/Mrs.Bird%26MadameCostello-

February24%2C1842NewYorkSun.jpg/230px-Mrs.Bird%26MadameCostello-

February24%2C1842NewYorkSun.jpg)

Indirect advertisements for abortion services, like these in _The New York
Sun_ in 1842, were common during the Victorian era. At the time, abortion was
illegal in New York.[1]

The practice of abortion—the termination of a pregnancy—has been known since
ancient times. Various methods have been used to perform or attempt an
abortion, including the administration of abortifacient herbs, the use of
sharpened implements, the application of abdominal pressure, and other
techniques.

Abortion laws and their enforcement have fluctuated through various eras. In
many western countries during the 20th century abortion-rights movements were
successful in having abortion bans repealed. While abortion remains legal in
most of the West, this legality is regularly challenged by anti-abortion
groups.

## Contents

    
        * 1 Premodern era
      * 1.1 Greco-Roman world
      * 1.2 Natural abortifacients
      * 1.3 Attitudes towards abortion
        * 1.3.1 Christianity
        * 1.3.2 In Judaism
    * 2 Modern era
      * 2.1 Criminalization
      * 2.2 Abortion methods
      * 2.3 Advertising for abortifacients and abortion services
      * 2.4 Turning point in abortion legislation
      * 2.5 Abortion law reform campaign
      * 2.6 Liberalization of abortion law
      * 2.7 Development of contemporary abortion methods
    * 3 Abortion around the world
      * 3.1 China
      * 3.2 India
      * 3.3 Japan
      * 3.4 Romania
      * 3.5 Thailand
    * 4 See also
    * 5 References
    * 6 Further reading
    * 7 External links
    

## Premodern era[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8f/AngkorWatAbortionAD1150.JPG/240px-

AngkorWatAbortionAD1150.JPG)

Bas relief at Angkor Wat, c. 1150, depicting a demon performing an abortion
upon a woman who has been sent to the underworld.

The Vedic and _smrti_ laws of India reflected a concern with preserving the
male seed of the three upper castes; and the religious courts imposed various
penances for the woman or excommunication for a priest who provided an
abortion.[2] In the epic Ramayana, there is description that the practice of
abortion was being done by the surgeons or barbers in those days.[3] The only
evidence of the death penalty being mandated for abortion in the ancient laws
is found in Assyrian Law, in the Code of Assura, c. 1075 BCE;[4] and this is
imposed only on a woman who procures an abortion against her husband's wishes.
The first recorded evidence of induced abortion is from the Egyptian Ebers
Papyrus in 1550 BCE.[5]

Many of the methods employed in early cultures were non-surgical. Physical
activities like strenuous labor, climbing, paddling, weightlifting, or diving
were a common technique. Others included the use of irritant leaves, fasting,
bloodletting, pouring hot water onto the abdomen, and lying on a heated
coconut shell.[6] In virtually all cultures, abortion techniques developed
through observation, adaptation of obstetrical methods, and
transculturation.[7] Physical means of inducing abortion, including battery,
exercise, and tightening the girdle were still often used as late as the Early
Modern Period among English women.[8]

Archaeological discoveries indicate early surgical attempts at the extraction
of a fetus; however, such methods are not believed to have been common, given
the infrequency with which they are mentioned in ancient medical texts.[9]

An 8th-century Sanskrit text instructs women wishing to induce an abortion to
sit over a pot of steam or stewed onions.[10] The technique of massage
abortion, involving the application of pressure to the pregnant abdomen, has
been practiced in Southeast Asia for centuries. One of the bas reliefs
decorating the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia, dated c. 1150, depicts a
demon performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the
underworld.[5]

Japanese documents show records of induced abortion from as early as the 12th
century. It became much more prevalent during the Edo period, especially among
the peasant class, who were hit hardest by the recurrent famines and high
taxation of the age.[11] Statues of the Boddhisattva Jizo, erected in memory
of an abortion, miscarriage, stillbirth, or young childhood death, began
appearing at least as early as 1710 at a temple in Yokohama (see religion and
abortion).[12]

The native Māori people of New Zealand colonisation terminated pregnancies via
miscarriage-inducing drugs, ceremonial methods, and girding of the abdomen
with a restrictive belt.[13] Another source claims that the Māori people did
not practice abortion, for fear of Makutu, but did attempt abortion through
the artificial induction of premature labor.[14]

### Greco-Roman world[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/Silphium.jpg/160px-

Silphium.jpg)

Cyrenian coin with an image of silphium, a contraceptive plant, but could also
have been a abortifacient.

Much of what is known about the methods and practice of abortion in Greek and
Roman history comes from early classical texts. Abortion, as a gynecological
procedure, was primarily the province of women who were either midwives or
well-informed laypeople. In his _Theaetetus_ , Plato mentions a midwife's
ability to induce abortion in the early stages of pregnancy.[15][16] It is
thought unlikely that abortion was punished in Ancient Greece.[17] However, a
fragment attributed to the poet Lysias "suggests that abortion was a crime in
Athens against the husband, if his wife was pregnant when he died, since his
unborn child could have claimed the estate.[18]

The ancient Greeks relied upon the herb silphium as an abortifacient and
contraceptive. The plant, as the chief export of Cyrene, was driven to
extinction, but it is suggested that it might have possessed the same abortive
properties as some of its closest extant relatives in the family Apiaceae.
Silphium was so central to the Cyrenian economy that most of its coins were
embossed with an image of the plant.[19] Pliny the Elder (23–79 CE) cited the
refined oil of common rue as a potent abortifacient. Serenus Sammonicus wrote
of a concoction which consisted of rue, egg, and dill. Soranus, Dioscorides,
Oribasius also detailed this application of the plant. Modern scientific
studies have confirmed that rue indeed contains three abortive compounds.[20]
Birthwort, a herb used to ease childbirth, was also used to induce abortion.
Galen included it in a potion formula in _de Antidotis_ , while Dioscorides
said it could be administered by mouth, or in the form of a vaginal pessary
also containing pepper and myrrh.[21]

The Greek playwright Aristophanes noted the abortifacient property of
pennyroyal in 421 BCE, through a humorous reference in his comedy, _Peace._
[22] Hippocrates (c. 460 – c. 370 BCE), the Greek physician, would advise a
prostitute who became pregnant to jump up and down, touching her buttocks with
her heels at each leap, so as to induce miscarriage.[23] Other writings
attributed to him describe instruments fashioned to dilate the cervix and
curette inside of the uterus.[24]

Soranus, a 2nd-century Greek physician, prescribed diuretics, emmenagogues,
enemas, fasting, and bloodletting as safe abortion methods, although he
advised against the use of sharp instruments to induce miscarriage, due to the
risk of organ perforation. He also advised women wishing to abort their
pregnancies to engage in energetic walking, carrying heavy objects, riding
animals, and jumping so that the woman's heels were to touch her buttocks with
each jump, which he described as the "Lacedaemonian Leap".[23][25] He also
offered a number of recipes for herbal baths, rubs, and pessaries.[23] In _De
Materia Medica Libri Quinque_ , the Greek pharmacologist Dioscorides listed
the ingredients of a draught called "abortion wine"– hellebore, squirting
cucumber, and scammony– but failed to provide the precise manner in which it
was to be prepared.[26] Hellebore, in particular, is known to be
abortifacient.[27]

Tertullian, a 2nd- and 3rd-century Christian theologian, described surgical
implements which were used in a procedure similar to the modern dilation and
evacuation. One tool had a "nicely adjusted flexible frame" used for dilation,
an "annular blade" used to curette, and a "blunted or covered hook" used for
extraction. The other was a "copper needle or spike". He attributed ownership
of such items to Hippocrates, Asclepiades, Erasistratus, Herophilus, and
Soranus.[28]

Aulus Cornelius Celsus, a 1st-century Roman encyclopedist, offered an
extremely detailed account of a procedure to extract an already-dead fetus in
his only surviving work, _De Medicina_.[29] In Book 9 of _Refutation of all
Heresies_ , Hippolytus of Rome, another Christian theologian of the 3rd
century, wrote of women tightly binding themselves around the middle so as to
"expel what was being conceived".[30]

### Natural abortifacients[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/Medievalpreg.jpg/210px-

Medievalpreg.jpg)

Art from a 13th-century illuminated manuscript features a herbalist preparing
a concoction containing pennyroyal for a woman.

Botanical preparations reputed to be abortifacient were common in classical
literature and folk medicine. Such folk remedies, however, varied in
effectiveness and were not without the risk of adverse effects. Some of the
herbs used at times to terminate pregnancy are poisonous.

A list of plants which cause abortion was provided in _De viribus herbarum_ ,
an 11th-century herbal written in the form of a poem, the authorship of which
is incorrectly attributed to Aemilius Macer. Among them were rue, Italian
catnip, savory, sage, soapwort, cyperus, white and black hellebore, and
pennyroyal.[26] Physicians in the Islamic world during the medieval period
documented the use of abortifacients, commenting on their effectiveness and
prevalence.[31]

_King's American Dispensatory_ of 1898 recommended a mixture of brewer's yeast
and pennyroyal tea as "a safe and certain abortive".[32] Pennyroyal has been
known to cause complications when used as an abortifacient. In 1978 a pregnant
woman from Colorado died after consuming 2 tablespoonfuls of pennyroyal
essential oil[33][34] which is known to be toxic.[35] In 1994 a pregnant
woman, unaware of an ectopic pregnancy that needed immediate medical care,
drank a tea containing pennyroyal extract to induce abortion without medical
help. She later died as a result of the untreated ectopic pregnancy, mistaking
the symptoms for the abortifacient working.[22]

For thousands of years, tansy has been taken in early pregnancy to restore
menstruation.[36] It was first documented as an emmenagogue in St. Hildegard
of Bingen's _De simplicis medicinae_.[26]

A variety of juniper, known as savin, was mentioned frequently in European
writings.[5] In one case in England, a rector from Essex was said to have
procured it for a woman he had impregnated in 1574; in another, a man advised
his pregnant girlfriend to use black hellebore and savin be boiled together
and drunk in milk, or else chopped madder boiled in beer. Other substances
reputed to have been used by the English include Spanish fly, opium,
watercress seed, iron sulphate, and iron chloride. Another mixture, not
abortifacient, but rather intended to relieve missed abortion, contained
dittany, hyssop, and hot water.[8]

The root of worm fern, called "prostitute root" in French, was used in France
and Germany; it was also recommended by a Greek physician in the 1st century.
In German folk medicine, there was also an abortifacient tea, which included
marjoram, thyme, parsley, and lavender. Other preparations of unspecified
origin included crushed ants, the saliva of camels, and the tail hairs of
black-tailed deer dissolved in the fat of bears.[10]

### Attitudes towards abortion[edit]

The Stoics believed the fetus to be plantlike in nature, and not an animal
until the moment of birth, when it finally breathed air. They therefore found
abortion morally acceptable.[18][37]

Aristotle wrote that, "[T]he line between lawful and unlawful abortion will be
marked by the fact of having sensation and being alive."[38] Before that point
was reached, Aristotle did not regard abortion as the killing of something
human.[39][40][41] Aristotle considered the embryo to gain a human soul at 40
days if male and 90 days if female; before that, it had vegetable and animal
souls.

The Oath, ascribed to Hippocrates, forbade the use of pessaries to induce
abortion. Modern scholarship suggests that pessaries were banned because they
were reported to cause vaginal ulcers.[42] This specific prohibition has been
interpreted by some medical scholars as prohibiting abortion in a broader
sense than by pessary.[26]

One such interpretation was by Scribonius Largus, a Roman medical writer:
"Hippocrates, who founded our profession, laid the foundation for our
discipline by an oath in which it was proscribed not to give a pregnant woman
a kind of medicine that expels the embryo or fetus."[43] Other medical
scholars disagree, believing that Hippocrates sought to discourage physicians
from trying dangerous methods to abort a fetus.[44] This may be born out by
the fact that the oath originally also prohibited _surgery_ (at the time, it
was far more dangerous, and surgeons were a separate profession from
physicians).[45]

Soranus acknowledges two parties among physicians: those who would not perform
abortions, citing the Hippocratic Oath, and the other party, his own. Soranus
recommended abortion in cases involving health complications as well as
emotional immaturity, and provided detailed suggestions in his work
_Gynecology_.[46][47]

Punishment for abortion in the Roman Republic was generally inflicted as a
violation of the father's right to dispose of his offspring.[17]:3 Because of
the influence of Stoicism, which did not view the fetus as a person, the
Romans did not punish abortion as homicide.[48] Although abortion was commonly
accepted in Rome, around 211 CE emperors Septimius Severus and Caracalla
banned abortion as infringing on parental rights; temporary exile was the
punishment.[18] Attitudes began to change with the spread of Christianity.

The 3rd-century legal compilation _Pauli sententiae_ (attributed to Julius
Paulus Prudentissimus) wrote: "Those who give an abortifacient or a love
potion, and do not do this deceitfully, nevertheless, [because] this sets a
bad example, the _humiliores_ [those of a lower status, _e.g._ , freed slaves]
will be banned to a mine, and the _honestiores_ [those of higher status,
_e.g._ , patricians] will be banned to an island after having forfeited (part
of) their property, and if on account of that a woman or man perishes, then
they [Pharr: the giver] will receive the death penalty."[49] This seems to
refer more to the killing of the woman who takes the abortifacient rather than
to the killing of the fetus itself.

The Roman jurist Ulpian wrote in the _Digest_ : "An unborn child is considered
being born, as far as it concerns his profits." Despite this, abortion
continued to be practiced "with little or no sense of shame".[50]

#### Christianity[edit]

_Main article:Christianity and Abortion_

The Bible's Exodus 21:22–24 describes two men fighting and accidentally
hitting a pregnant women's stomach causing a premature birth that does not
result in further injury as a non-capital offense and a "non-serious injury",
unless it results in the crime of murder.[51] Commentators such as Bruce
Waltke have presented this as evidence that "God does not regard the fetus as
a soul".[52][53][54][55] C. Everett Koop disagreed with this
interpretation.[56] Numbers 5:11-31 describes the test of the unfaithful wife.
If a man is suspicious of his wife's fidelity, he would take her to the high
priest. The priest would make a substance for the woman to drink made from
water and "dust from the tabernacle floor". If she had been unfaithful "her
abdomen will swell and her womb will miscarry, and she will become a curse."
If she was innocent the drink had no effect.[57]

![Emblem of the Papacy

SE.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/Emblem_of_the_Papacy_SE.svg/25px-

Emblem_of_the_Papacy_SE.svg.png)

* * *

Part of a series of articles on  
Abortion  
and the Catholic Church

Official opposition

    
        * Canon 915
      * Eucharist denial or excommunication
    * Canon 1398
    * _Evangelium vitae_
    * _Humanae vitae_
    * In politics
    

Philosophy and theology

    
        * Consistent life ethic
    * Culture of life
    * Sanctity of life
    * Ensoulment
    * Double effect
    * Indirect abortion
    

History

    
        * Gianna Beretta Molla
    * Margaret McBride excommunication
    * 2009 Brazilian girl abortion case
    * Death of Savita Halappanavar
    

Activism

    
        * March for Life 
      * Life and Family
      * Paris
      * Prague
      * Chicago
      * Washington, D.C.
      * West Coast
    * Priests for Life
    * Sisters of Life
    * Knights of Columbus
    * Catholic Answers
    * CatholicVote.org
    * American Life League
    * Catholic Family and Human Rights Institute
    * National Right to Life Committee
    

Dissidence

    
        * Catholics for Choice
      * _A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion_
    

See also

    
        * WikiBook: _Catholic Church and abortion_
    
    * Other Christian views
    * In the United States
    * Abortion
    * Abortion law
    

![046CupolaSPietro.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/046CupolaSPietro.jpg/16px-046CupolaSPietro.jpg)
Catholicism portal

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

The early Christian work called the Didache (before 100 CE) says: "do not
murder a child by abortion or kill a new-born infant."[58] Tertullian, a 2nd-
and 3rd-century Christian theologian argued that abortion should be performed
only in cases in which abnormal positioning of the fetus in the womb would
endanger the life of the pregnant woman. Saint Augustine, in _Enchiridion_ ,
makes passing mention of surgical procedures being performed to remove fetuses
which have died in utero.[59]

Saint Augustine believed that abortion of a _fetus animatus_ , a fetus with
human limbs and shape, was murder. However, his beliefs on earlier-stage
abortion were similar to Aristotle's,[60] though he could neither deny nor
affirm whether such partially formed fetuses would be resurrected as full
people at the time of the Second Coming.[61]

    
        * "Now who is there that is not rather disposed to think that unformed abortions perish, like seeds that have never fructified?"[59]
    * "And therefore the following question may be very carefully inquired into and discussed by learned men, though I do not know whether it is in man's power to resolve it: At what time the infant begins to live in the womb: whether life exists in a latent form before it manifests itself in the motions of the living being. To deny that the young who are cut out limb by limb from the womb, lest if they were left there dead the mother should die too, have never been alive, seems too audacious."[62]
    

The _Leges Henrici Primi_ , written c. 1115, treated pre-quickening abortion
as a misdemeanor, and post-quickening abortion as carrying a lesser penalty
than homicide.[63] "Quickening", a term often used interchangeably with
"ensoulment" or "animation", was associated with the first movement of the
fetus in utero. This movement is generally felt by women sometime in the third
to fifth month of pregnancy. Midwives who performed abortions were accused of
committing witchcraft in _Malleus Maleficarum_ ( _The Hammer of Witches_ ),
published in 1487 as a witch-hunting manual in Germany.[64]

Currently, the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Evangelical Protestant and
some mainline Protestant churches oppose abortion in varying degrees, while
other mainline Protestant churches favor – also in varying degrees –
permitting the practice.[65]

#### In Judaism[edit]

Main article: Judaism and abortion

From a Jewish perspective from biblical times, abortion is considered from a
social perspective more than from a theological perspective.[ _citation
needed_ ] The mother's life is considered as a priority.[ _citation needed_ ]

## Modern era[edit]

![Globe

icon.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/Ambox_globe_content.svg/48px-

Ambox_globe_content.svg.png)

|

The examples and perspective in this section **may not represent aworldwide
view of the subject**. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the
talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. _( April 2017)_ _(Learn
how and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

### Criminalization[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/03/JapaneseAbortionWoodblock.jpg/200px-

JapaneseAbortionWoodblock.jpg)

"Admonition against abortion". Late 19th-century Japanese Ukiyo-e woodblock
print.

19th-century medicine saw tremendous advances in the fields of surgery,
anaesthesia, and sanitation. Social attitudes towards abortion shifted in the
context of a backlash against the women's rights movement. Abortion had
previously been widely practiced and legal under common law in early pregnancy
(until quickening), but the English-speaking world passed laws against
abortion at all stages of pregnancy.[66]

There were a number of factors that contributed to this shift in opinion about
abortion in the early 19th century. In the United States, where physicians
were the leading advocates of abortion criminalization laws, some of them
argued that advances in medical knowledge showed that quickening was neither
more nor less crucial in the process of gestation than any other step, and
thus if one opposes abortion after quickening, one should oppose it before
quickening as well.[67] Practical reasons also influenced the medical field to
impose anti-abortion laws. For one, abortion providers tended to be untrained
and not members of medical societies. In an age where the leading doctors in
the nation were attempting to standardize the medical profession, these
"irregulars" were considered a nuisance to public health.[68] The "irregulars"
were also disliked by the more formalized medical profession because they were
competition, and often cheap competition. Though the physicians' campaign
against abortion began in the early 1800s, little progress was made in the
United States until after the Civil War.[69]

The English law on abortion was first codified in legislation under sections 1
and 2 of Malicious Shooting or Stabbing Act 1803. The Bill was proposed by the
Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, Edward Law, 1st Baron Ellenborough to
clarify the law relating to abortion and was the first law to explicitly
outlaw it. The Act provided that it was an offence for any person to perform
or cause an abortion. The punishment for performing or attempting to perform a
post quickening abortion was the death penalty (section 1) and otherwise was
transportation for fourteen years (section 2). In 19th-century America, there
was little regulation of abortion, in the tradition of English common law, pre
quickening abortions were considered at most a misdemeanor. These cases proved
difficult to prosecute as the testimony of the mother was usually the only
means to determine when quickening had occurred.[70]

The law was amended in 1828 and 1837 – the latter removed the distinction
between women who were quick with child (late pregnancy) and those who were
not. It also eliminated the death penalty as a possible punishment. The latter
half of the 19th century saw abortion become increasingly punished. One writer
justified this by claiming that the number of abortions among married women
had increased markedly since 1840.[71] The Offences against the Person Act
1861 created a new preparatory offence of procuring poison or instruments with
intent to procure abortion. During the 1860s however abortion services were
available in New York, New Orleans, Cincinnati, Louisville, Cleveland, Chicago
and Indianapolis; with estimates of one abortion for every 4 live births .[72]

Anti-abortion statutes began to appear in the United States from the 1820s. In
1821, a Connecticut law targeted apothecaries who sold poisons to women for
purposes of abortion; and New York made post-quickening abortions a felony and
pre-quickening abortions a misdemeanor eight years later.[73] Criminalization
accelerated from the late 1860s, through the efforts of concerned legislators,
doctors, and the American Medical Association.[74] In 1873, the Comstock Law
prohibited any methods of production or publication of information pertaining
to the procurement of abortion, the prevention of conception and the
prevention of venereal disease, even to students of medicine.[75] By 1909 the
penalty for violating these laws became a $5000 fine and up to five years
imprisonment. By 1910 nearly every state had anti-abortion laws,[76] but these
were unevenly enforced, at best.[77]:80–112

In contrast, in France social perceptions of abortion started to change. In
the first half of the 19th century, abortion was viewed as the last resort for
pregnant but unwed women. But as writers began to write about abortion in
terms of family planning for married women, the practice of abortion was
reconceptualized as a logical solution to unwanted pregnancies resulting from
ineffectual contraceptives.[78] The formulation of abortion as a form of
family planning for married women was made "thinkable" because both medical
and non-medical practitioners agreed on the relative safety of the
procedure.[78]

### Abortion methods[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/FrenchPeriodicalPills-

January61845%2CBostonDailyTimes.jpg/170px-FrenchPeriodicalPills-

January61845%2CBostonDailyTimes.jpg)

An 1845 ad for "French Periodical Pills" warns against use by women who might
be "en ciente [ _sic_ ]" (" _enceinte_ " is French for "pregnant").

From 1870 there was a steady decline in fertility in England, linked by some
commentators not to a rise in the use of artificial contraception but to more
traditional methods such as withdrawal and abstinence. This was linked to
changes in the perception of the relative costs of childrearing. Of course,
women did find themselves with unwanted pregnancies. Abortifacients were
discreetly advertised and there was a considerable body of folklore about
methods of inducing miscarriages. Amongst working-class women violent
purgatives were popular, pennyroyal, aloes and turpentine were all used. Other
methods to induce miscarriage were very hot baths and gin, extreme exertion, a
controlled fall down a flight of stairs, or veterinary medicines. So-called
'backstreet' abortionists were fairly common, although their bloody efforts
could be fatal. Estimates of the number of illegal abortions performed in
England varied widely: by one estimate, 100,000 women made efforts to procure
a miscarriage in 1914, usually by drugs.[ _citation needed_ ]

In New York, surgical abortion in 1800s carried a death rate of 30% regardless
of hospital setting, and the AMA launched an anti-abortion campaign that
resulted in abortion becoming the exclusive domain of doctors .[79] A paper
published in 1870 on the abortion services to be found in Syracuse, New York,
concluded that the method most often practiced there during this time was to
flush inside of the uterus with injected water. The article's author, Ely Van
de Warkle, claimed this procedure was affordable even to a maid, as a man in
town offered it for $10 on an installment plan.[80] Other prices which 19th-
century abortion providers are reported to have charged were much more steep.
In Britain, it could cost from 10 to 50 guineas, or 5% of the yearly income of
a lower middle class household.[5]

A rash of unexplained miscarriages in Sheffield, England were attributed to
lead poisoning caused by the metal pipes which fed the city's water supply.
Soon, women began using diachylon, a substance with a high concentration of
lead, as an abortifacient. In 1898, a woman confessed to having used diachylon
to induce a miscarriage.[5] The use of diachylon became prevalent in the
English Midlands up until World War I. Criminal investigation of an
abortionist in Calgary, Alberta in 1894 revealed through chemical analysis
that the concoction he had supplied to a man seeking an abortifacient
contained Spanish fly.[81]

Dr. Evelyn Fisher wrote of how women living in a mining town in Wales during
the 1920s used candles intended for Roman Catholic ceremonies to dilate the
cervix in an effort to self-induce abortion.[5] Similarly, the use of candles
and other objects, such as glass rods, penholders, curling irons, spoons,
sticks, knives, and catheters was reported during the 19th century in the
United States.[82] Women of Jewish descent in Lower East Side, Manhattan are
said to have carried the ancient Indian practice of sitting over a pot of
steam into the early 20th century.[10] Some commentators maintained that
abortion remained a dangerous procedure into the early 20th century, more
dangerous than childbirth until about 1930.[83] But others have said that in
the 19th century early abortions under the hygienic conditions in which
midwives usually worked were relatively safe.[84]:25 [85]:4[86]:59
[87]:223[88][89][90] In addition, some authors have written that, despite
improved medical procedures, the period from the 1930s until legalization also
saw more zealous enforcement of anti-abortion laws, and concomitantly an
increasing control of abortion providers by organized
crime.[77][91][92][93][94]

### Advertising for abortifacients and abortion services[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/3/3a/Beecham%27s_pills_advert.jpg/220px-

Beecham%27s_pills_advert.jpg)

Suggestive advertisement for the use of Beecham's Pills as an abortifacient.
The text at the bottom notes that the pills "assist nature in her wondrous
functions".

Despite bans enacted on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean, access to abortion
continued, as the disguised advertisement of abortion services, abortion-
inducing devices, and abortifacient medicines in the Victorian era would seem
to suggest.[95] Apparent print ads of this nature were found in the United
States,[96] the United Kingdom,[5] and Canada.[97] A British Medical Journal
writer who replied to newspaper ads peddling relief to women who were
"temporarily indisposed" in 1868 found that over half of them were in fact
promoting abortion.[5]

A few examples of surreptitiously marketed abortifacients include "Farrer's
Catholic Pills", "Hardy's Woman's Friend", "Dr. Peter's French Renovating
Pills", "Lydia Pinkham's Vegetable Compound",[98] and "Madame Drunette's Lunar
Pills".[5] Patent medicines which claimed to treat "female complaints" often
contained such ingredients as pennyroyal, tansy, and savin. Abortifacient
products were sold under the promise of "restor[ing] female regularity" and
"removing from the system every impurity".[98] In the vernacular of such
advertising, "irregularity", "obstruction", "menstrual suppression", and
"delayed period" were understood to be euphemistic references to the state of
pregnancy. As such, some abortifacients were marketed as menstrual
regulatives.[82]

Beecham's Pills were marketed primarily as a laxative from 1842. They were
invented by Thomas Beecham from St Helens, Lancashire, England. The pills were
a combination of aloe, ginger, and soap, with some other more minor
ingredients. The popularity of the pills produced a wide range of testimonials
that were used in advertising. The poet William Topaz McGonagall wrote a poem
advertising the pills, giving his recommendation in verse.[99] Beecham's
expenditure on advertising went from £22,000 to £95,000 in the 1880s.[100] An
1897 advertisement in the _Christian Herald_ edition for Queen Victoria's
Diamond Jubilee said: "Worth a guinea a box. Beecham's Pills for all bilious
and nervous disorders such as Sick Headache, Constipation, Weak Stomach,
Impaired Digestion, Disordered Liver and Female Ailments. The sale is now 6
million boxes per annum." The text was printed alongside a picture of a young
woman at a beach and was captioned "What are the wild waves saying? Try
Beecham's Pills."[101]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/National_Police_Gazette_Restell.jpg/170px-

National_Police_Gazette_Restell.jpg)

"The Female Abortionist". Madame Restell is portrayed as a villainess in an
1847 copy of the _National Police Gazette_.

"Old Dr. Gordon's Pearls of Health", produced by a drug company in Montreal,
"cure[d] all suppressions and irregularities" if "used monthly".[102] However,
a few ads explicitly warned against the use of their product by women who were
expecting, or listed miscarriage as its inevitable side effect. The copy for
"Dr. Peter's French Renovating Pills" advised, "... pregnant females should
not use them, as they invariably produce a miscarriage ...", and both "Dr.
Monroe's French Periodical Pills" and "Dr. Melveau's Portuguese Female Pills"
were "sure to produce a miscarriage".[5] F.E. Karn, a man from Toronto, in
1901 cautioned women who thought themselves pregnant not to use the pills he
advertised as "Friar's French Female Regulator" because they would "speedily
restore menstrual secretions."[102] Historian Ann Hibner Koblitz comments that
"Nineteenth-century customers would have understood this 'warning' exactly as
the sellers intended: as an advertisement for an abortifacient
preparation."[103]:44

In the mid 1930s abortifacients drugs were marketed in the United States to
women by various companies under various names such as Molex Pills and Cote
Pills. Since birth control devices and abortifacients were illegal to market
and sell at the time, they were offered to women who were "delayed". The
recommended dosage constituted seven grains of ergotin a day. These pills
generally contained ingredients such as ergotin, aloes, Black Hellebore. The
efficacy and safety of these pills are unknown. In 1940 the FTC[104] deemed
them unsafe and ineffective and demanded that these companies cease and desist
selling these product.

A well-known example of a Victorian-era abortionist was Madame Restell, or Ann
Lohman, who over a forty-year period illicitly provided both surgical abortion
and abortifacient pills in the northern United States. She began her business
in New York during the 1830s, and, by the 1840s, had expanded to include
franchises in Boston and Philadelphia. It is estimated that by 1870 her annual
expenditure on advertising alone was $60,000.[5] Because of her reputation,
_Restellism_ became a synonym for abortion.[105]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/1858AbortionAdReprint.jpg/160px-1858AbortionAdReprint.jpg)

"Dr. Miller's Female Monthly Powders" ad copy reprinted in an 1858 article
condemning such advertising.

One ad for Restell's medical services, printed in the New York Sun, promised
that she could offer the "strictest confidence on complaints incidental to the
female frame" and that her "experience and knowledge in the treatment of cases
of female irregularity, [was] such as to require but a few days to effect a
perfect cure".[106] Another, addressed to married women, asked the question,
"Is it desirable, then, for parents to increase their families, regardless of
consequences to themselves, or the well-being of their offspring, when a
simple, easy, healthy, and certain remedy is within our control?"[107]
Advertisements for the "Female Monthly Regulating Pills" she also sold vowed
to resolve "all cases of suppression, irregularity, or stoppage of the menses,
however obdurate".[106] Madame Restell was an object of criticism in both the
respectable and penny presses. She was first arrested in 1841, but, it was her
final arrest by Anthony Comstock which led to her suicide on the day of her
trial April 1, 1878.[107]

Such advertising aroused criticisms of quackery and immorality. The safety of
many nostrums was suspect and the efficacy of others non-existent.[82] Horace
Greeley, in a _New York Herald_ editorial written in 1871, denounced abortion
and its promotion as the "infamous and unfortunately common crime– so common
that it affords a lucrative support to a regular guild of professional
murderers, so safe that its perpetrators advertise their calling in the
newspapers".[96] Although the paper in which Greeley wrote accepted such
advertisements, others, such as the _New York Tribune_ , refused to print
them.[96] Elizabeth Blackwell, the first woman to obtain a Doctor of Medicine
in the United States, also lamented how such ads led to the contemporary
synonymity of "female physician" with "abortionist".[96]

### Turning point in abortion legislation[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a0/Stella_Browne.gif/220px-

Stella_Browne.gif)

The feminist Stella Browne was a major figure in the campaign for the
liberalization of abortion law.

Abortifacient advertising was highly effective in the United States, though
apparently less so across the Atlantic. Contemporary estimates of mid-19th
century abortion rates in the United States suggest between 20% and 25% of all
pregnancies in the United States during that era ended in abortion.[108] This
era also saw a marked shift in those who were obtaining abortions. Before the
start of the 19th century, most abortions were sought by unmarried women who
had become pregnant out of wedlock. But, out of 54 abortion cases published in
American medical journals between 1839 and 1880, over half were sought by
married women, and of the married women well over 60 percent already had at
least one child.[109] In the post-Civil War era, much of the blame was placed
on the burgeoning women's rights movement.[ _citation needed_ ]

Many feminists of the era were opposed to abortion.[110][111] In _The
Revolution_ , operated by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, an
anonymous contributor signing "A" wrote in 1869 about the subject, arguing
that instead of merely attempting to pass a law against abortion, the root
cause must also be addressed. Simply passing an anti-abortion law would, the
writer stated, "be only mowing off the top of the noxious weed, while the root
remains. [...] No matter what the motive, love of ease, or a desire to save
from suffering the unborn innocent, the woman is awfully guilty who commits
the deed. It will burden her conscience in life, it will burden her soul in
death; But oh! thrice guilty is he who drove her to the desperation which
impelled her to the crime."[111][112][113][114] To many feminists of this era,
abortion was regarded as an undesirable necessity forced upon women by
thoughtless men.[115] Even the "free love" wing of the feminist movement
refused to advocate abortion and treated the practice as an example of the
hideous extremes to which modern marriage was driving women.[116] Marital rape
and the seduction of unmarried women were societal ills which feminists
believed caused the need to abort, as men did not respect women's right to
abstinence.[116]

Socialist feminists tended to be more sympathetic to the need for abortion
options for the poor, and indeed socialist feminist doctors, such as Marie
Equi, Madeleine Pelletier, and William J. Robinson, themselves performed low-
cost or free abortions for poor women.[117][118][119]

### Abortion law reform campaign[edit]

The movement towards the liberalization of abortion law emerged in the 1920s
and '30s in the context of the victories that had been recently won in the
area of birth control. Campaigners including Marie Stopes in England and
Margaret Sanger in the US had succeeded in bringing the issue into the open,
and birth control clinics were established which offered family planning
advice and contraceptive methods to women in need.

In 1929, the Infant Life Preservation Act was passed in Britain, which amended
the law (Offences against the Person Act 1861) so that an abortion carried out
in good faith, for the sole purpose of preserving the life of the mother,
would not be an offence.[120]

Stella Browne was a leading birth control campaigner, who increasingly began
to venture into the more contentious issue of abortion in the 1930s. Browne's
beliefs were heavily influenced by the work of Havelock Ellis, Edward
Carpenter and other sexologists.[121] She came to strongly believe that
working women should have the choice to become pregnant and to terminate their
pregnancy while they worked in the horrible circumstances surrounding a
pregnant woman who was still required to do hard labour during her
pregnancy.[122] In this case she argued that doctors should give free
information about birth control to women that wanted to know about it. This
would give women agency over their own circumstances and allow them to decide
whether they wanted to be mothers or not.[123]

In the late 1920s Browne began a speaking tour around England, providing
information about her beliefs on the need for accessibility of information
about birth control for women, women’s health problems, problems related to
puberty and sex education and high maternal morbidity rates among other
topics.[121] These talks urged women to take matters of their sexuality and
their health into their own hands. She became increasingly interested in her
view of the woman’s right to terminate their pregnancies, and in 1929 she
brought forward her lecture "The Right to Abortion" in front of the World
Sexual Reform Congress in London.[121] In 1931 Browne began to develop her
argument for women’s right to decide to have an abortion.[121] She again began
touring, giving lectures on abortion and the negative consequences that
followed if women were unable to terminate pregnancies of their own choosing
such as: suicide, injury, permanent invalidism, madness and blood-
poisoning.[121]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/43/Aleck_bourne_trial.jpg)

Aleck Bourne was acquitted for performing an abortion on a rape victim in
1938, a landmark case in the movement for abortion rights.

Other prominent feminists, including Frida Laski, Dora Russell, Joan Malleson
and Janet Chance began to champion this cause – the cause broke dramatically
into the mainstream in July 1932 when the British Medical Association council
formed a committee to discuss making changes to the laws on abortion.[121] On
17 February 1936, Janet Chance, Alice Jenkins and Joan Malleson established
the Abortion Law Reform Association as the first advocacy organisation for
abortion liberalization. The association promoted access to abortion in the
United Kingdom and campaigned for the elimination of legal obstacles.[124] In
its first year ALRA recruited 35 members, and by 1939 had almost 400
members.[124]

The ALRA was very active between 1936 and 1939 sending speakers around the
country to talk about Labour and Equal Citizenship and attempted, though most
often unsuccessfully, to have letters and articles published in newspapers.
They became the most popular when a member of the ALRA’s Medico-Legal
Committee received the case of a fourteen-year-old girl who had been raped,
and received a termination of this pregnancy from Dr. Joan Malleson, a
progenitor of the ALRA.[124] This case gained a lot of publicity, however once
the war began, the case was tucked away and the cause again lost its
importance to the public.

In 1938, Joan Malleson precipitated one of the most influential cases in
British abortion law when she referred a pregnant fourteen-year-old rape
victim to gynaecologist Aleck Bourne. He performed an abortion, then illegal,
and was put on trial on charges of procuring abortion. Bourne was eventually
acquitted in _Rex v. Bourne_ as his actions were "an example of disinterested
conduct in consonance with the highest traditions of the profession".[125]
This court case set a precedent that doctors could not be prosecuted for
performing an abortion in cases where pregnancy would probably cause "mental
and physical wreck".

Finally, the Birkett Committee, established in 1937 by the British government
"to inquire into the prevalence of abortion, and the law relating thereto",
recommended a change to abortion laws two years later. The intervention of
World War II meant that all plans were shelved.[126]

### Liberalization of abortion law[edit]

See also: Timeline of reproductive rights legislation, Abortion law, and
History of Abortion Law Debate

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5e/RussianAbortionPoster.jpg/210px-

RussianAbortionPoster.jpg)

The Soviet Union first legalized abortion in 1920. The poster c. 1925 warns
against unsafe abortion. Title translation: "Abortions performed by either
trained or self-taught midwives not only maim the woman, they also often lead
to death."

The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic was the first government to
legalize abortion and make it available on request, often for no
cost.[127][128] The Soviet government hoped to provide access to abortion in a
safe environment performed by a trained doctor instead of _babki_.[129] While
this campaign was extremely effective in the urban areas (as much as 75% of
abortions in Moscow were performed in hospitals by 1925), it had much less
effect on rural regions where there was neither access to doctors,
transportation, or both and where women relied on traditional medicine.[130]
In the countryside in particular, women continued to see _babki_ , midwives,
hairdressers, nurses, and others for the procedure after abortion was
legalized in the Soviet Union.[131]

From 1936 until 1955 the Soviet Union made abortion illegal (except for
medically recommended cases) again, stemming largely from Joseph Stalin’s
worries about population growth. Stalin wanted to encourage population growth,
as well as place a stronger emphasis on the importance of the family unit to
communism.[132]

During the Spanish Civil War, on 25 December 1936, in Catalonia, free abortion
was legalized during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy with a decree signed by
Josep Tarradellas, First Minister of the Government of Catalonia, and
published on 9 January 1937 ( _Diari Oficial de la Generalitat de Catalunya,
núm.9_ ).[133][134][135]

In Britain, the Abortion Law Reform Association continued its campaigning
after the War, and this, combined with broad social changes brought the issue
of abortion back into the political arena in the 1960s. President of the Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists John Peel chaired the committee
advising the British Government on what became the 1967 Abortion Act. On the
grounds of reducing the amount of disease and death associated with illegal
abortion, the Abortion Act allowed for legal abortion on a number of grounds,
including to prevent grave permanent injury to the woman's physical or mental
health, to avoid injury to the physical or mental health of the woman or her
existing child(ren) if the pregnancy was still under 28 weeks, or if the child
was likely to be severely physically or mentally handicapped. The free
provision of abortions was provided through the National Health Service.[136]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/USSC_justice_group_photo-1973_current.jpg/350px-

USSC_justice_group_photo-1973_current.jpg)

The United States Supreme Court membership in 1973 at the time of _Roe v.
Wade_.

In America an abortion reform movement emerged in the 1960s. In 1963 The
Society for Human Abortions was formed, providing women with information on
how to obtain and perform abortions.[137] In 1964 Gerri Santoro of Connecticut
died trying to obtain an illegal abortion and her photo became the symbol of
the pro-choice movement. Some women's rights activist groups developed their
own skills to provide abortions to women who could not obtain them elsewhere.
As an example, in Chicago, a group known as "Jane" operated a floating
abortion clinic throughout much of the 1960s. Women seeking the procedure
would call a designated number and be given instructions on how to find
"Jane".[138]

In the late 1960s, a number of organizations were formed to mobilize opinion
both against and for the legalization of abortion. The forerunner of the NARAL
Pro-Choice America was formed in 1969 to oppose restrictions on abortion and
expand access to abortion.[139] In late 1973 NARAL became the National
Abortion Rights Action League.

In 1967, 21 members of the clergy announced in the New York Times that they
would help women find safe abortion providers.[140]

In 1967, Colorado became the first state to decriminalize abortion in cases of
rape, incest, or in which pregnancy would lead to permanent physical
disability of the woman. Similar laws were passed in California, Oregon, and
North Carolina. In 1970, Hawaii became the first state to legalize abortions
on the request of the woman,[141] and New York repealed its 1830 law and
allowed abortions up to the 24th week of pregnancy. Similar laws were soon
passed in Alaska and Washington. A law in Washington, D.C., which allowed
abortion to protect the life or health of the woman, was challenged in the
Supreme Court in 1971 in _United States v. Vuitch_. The court upheld the law,
deeming that "health" meant "psychological and physical well-being",
essentially allowing abortion in Washington, DC. By the end of 1972, 13 states
had a law similar to that of Colorado, while Mississippi allowed abortion in
cases of rape or incest only and Alabama and Massachusetts allowed abortions
only in cases where the woman's physical health was endangered.

The landmark judicial ruling of the Supreme Court in _Roe v. Wade_ ruled that
a Texas statute forbidding abortion except when necessary to save the life of
the mother was unconstitutional. The Court arrived at its decision by
concluding that the issue of abortion and abortion rights falls under the
right to privacy.

The Court held that a right to privacy existed and included the right to have
an abortion. The court found that a mother had a right to abortion until
viability, a point to be determined by the abortion doctor. After viability a
woman can obtain an abortion for health reasons, which the Court defined
broadly to include psychological well-being.

From the 1970s, and the spread of second-wave feminism, abortion and
reproductive rights became unifying issues among various women's rights groups
in Canada, the United States, the Netherlands, Britain, Norway, France,
Germany, and Italy.[142]

### Development of contemporary abortion methods[edit]

Although prototypes of the modern curette are referred to in ancient texts,
the instrument which is used today was initially designed in France in 1723,
but was not applied specifically to a gynecological purpose until 1842.[143]
Dilation and curettage has been practiced since the late 19th century.[143]

The 20th century saw improvements in abortion technology, increasing its
safety, and reducing its side-effects. Vacuum devices, first described by the
Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson in the 19th century, allowed for the
development of suction-aspiration abortion.[143] The process was improved by
the Russian doctor S. G. Bykov in 1927, where the method was used during its
period of liberal abortion laws from 1920 to 1936. The technology was also
used in China and Japan before being introduced to Britain and the United
States in the 1960s.[143] The invention of the Karman cannula, a flexible
plastic cannula which replaced earlier metal models in the 1970s, reduced the
occurrence of perforation and made suction-aspiration methods possible under
local anesthesia.[143]

In 1971, Lorraine Rothman and Carol Downer, founding members of the feminist
self-help movement, invented the Del-Em, a safe, cheap suction device that
made it possible for people with minimal training to perform early abortions
called menstrual extraction.[143] During the mid-1990s in the United States
the medical community showed renewed interest in manual vacuum aspiration as a
method of early surgical abortion. This resurgence is due to technological
advances that permit early pregnancy detection (as soon as a week after
conception) and a growing popular demand for safe, effective early abortion
options, both surgical and medical. An innovator in the development of early
surgical abortion services is Jerry Edwards, a physician, who developed a
protocol in which women are offered an abortion using a handheld vacuum
syringe as soon as a positive pregnancy test is received. This protocol also
allows the early detection of an ectopic pregnancy.[143]

Intact dilation and extraction was developed by Dr. James McMahon in 1983. It
resembles a procedure used in the 19th century to save a woman's life in cases
of obstructed labor, in which the fetal skull was first punctured with a
perforator, then crushed and extracted with a forceps-like instrument, known
as a cranioclast.[144][145]

In 1980, researchers at Roussel Uclaf in France developed mifepristone, a
chemical compound which works as an abortifacient by blocking hormone action.
It was first marketed in France under the trade name Mifegyne in 1988.[146]

## Abortion around the world[edit]

At various times abortion has been banned or restricted in countries around
the world. Multiple scholars have noticed that in many cases, this has caused
women to seek dangerous, illegal abortions underground or inspired trips
abroad for "reproductive tourism".[147][148][149] Half of the world's current
deaths due to unsafe abortions occur in Asia.[147]

But other authors have written that illegality has not always meant that
abortions were unsafe. For example, in the U.S. in the 19th century early
abortions under the hygienic conditions in which midwives usually worked were
relatively safe.[84]:25[150]:4[86]:59 [87]:223[88][89][151]

### China[edit]

See also: Abortion in China

In the early 1950s, the Chinese government made abortion illegal, with
punishments for those who received or performed illegal abortions written into
the law.[152] These restrictions were seen as the government's way of
emphasizing the importance of population growth.[152]

As the decade went on, however, the laws were relaxed with the intent of
reducing the number of deaths and lifelong injuries women sustained due to
illegal abortions as well as serving as a form of population control when used
in conjunction with birth control.[152] In the early 1980s, the state
implemented a form of family planning which used abortion as a "back-up
method"; and in 2005, there has been legislation trying to curb sex-selective
abortion.[152]

### India[edit]

See also: Abortion in India

India enforced the Indian Penal Code from 1860 to 1971, criminalizing abortion
and punishing both the practitioners and the women who sought out the
procedure.[149] As a result, women died in an attempt to obtain illegal
abortions from unqualified midwives and "doctors".[149] Abortion was made
legal under specific circumstances in 1971, but as scholar S. Chandrasekhar
notes, lower class women still find themselves at a greater risk of injury or
death as a result of a botched abortion.[149]

### Japan[edit]

See also: Abortion in Japan

Japan is known today worldwide for its acceptance of abortion.[147][153] It is
estimated that two-thirds of Japanese women have an abortion by age forty,
partially due to former government restrictions on contraceptive pills on
'public hygiene grounds'.[147]

The Eugenics Protection Law of 1948 made abortion on demand legal up to
twenty-two weeks' gestation so long as the woman's health was endangered; in
1949, this law was extended to consider the risk the child's birth would place
on a woman's economic welfare.[147][153] Originally, each case would have to
be approved by a local eugenics council, but this was removed from the law in
1952, making the decision a private one between a woman and her
physician.[147][153]

In 1964, the creation of the conservative right-wing nationalist political
lobbying group called Seicho-no-Ie brought about a strong opposition to the
abortion laws.[147] This campaign reached its peak strength in the early
1980s, but ultimately failed in 1983.[147]

### Romania[edit]

See also: Abortion in Romania

In 1957, Romania legalized abortion, but in 1966, after a decline in the
national birthrate, Nicolae Ceauşescu approved Decree 770, which criminalized
abortion and encouraged childbirth. As a result of this decree, women in want
of abortion turned to illegal procedures that caused the deaths of over 9,000
women and left unwanted children abandoned in orphanages. Abortion remained
illegal until 1989, when the decree was overturned.[154]

### Thailand[edit]

There was intense public debate throughout the 1980s and 1990s over legal
abortion reform.[147] These debates portrayed abortion as un-Buddhist and
anti-religious; abortion opponents ultimately labeled it as a form of Western
corruption that was inherently anti-Thai and threatened the integrity of the
nation.[147] Despite this, in 2006, abortions became legal in cases of rape or
foetal impairment.[147] Mental health also became a factor in determining the
legality of an abortion procedure.[147] The strict regulations involved in
qualifying for a legal abortion, however, cause approximately 300,000 women a
year to seek illegal avenues according to scholar Andrea Whittaker, with the
poorest undergoing the most dangerous of procedures.[147]

## See also[edit]

    
        * Susan B. Anthony abortion dispute
    * George Lotrell Timanus
    * Aleck Bourne
    * Henry Katz
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. **^** Brodie, Janet Farrell (1997). _Contraception and abortion in nineteenth-century America_. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. p. 254. ISBN 0-8014-8433-2. OCLC 37699745.
    2. **^** Constantin-Iulian Damian (January–March 2010). "Abortion from the Perspective of Eastern Religions: Hinduism and Buddhism" (PDF). _Romanian Journal of Bioethics_. **8** (1).
    3. **^** Valmiki Ramayana Sunderkand 28th Sarga 6th Shlok https://www.valmiki.iitk.ac.in/sloka?field_kanda_tid=5&language=dv&field_sarga_value=28
    4. **^** [1] Ancient History Sourcebook: The Code of the Assura, c. 1075 BC
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ Potts, Malcolm; Martha Campbell (2002). "History of Contraception" (PDF). _Gynecology and Obstetrics_. **6** (8). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2003-07-01. Retrieved 2013-09-12.Potts, Malcolm; Martha Campbell (2009). "History of Contraception". _GLOWM: The Global Library Of Women's Medicine_. doi:10.3843/GLOWM.10376. ISSN 1756-2228. Retrieved  2011-09-07.
    6. **^** Devereux, G (1967). "A typological study of abortion in 350 primitive, ancient, and pre-industrial societies". In Harold Rosen (ed.). _Abortion in America: Medical, psychiatric, legal, anthropological, and religious considerations_. Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press. OCLC 187445.
    7. **^** Devereux, George (1976). _A Study of Abortion in Primitive Societies_. International Universities Press. ISBN 978-0823662456.
    8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Macfarlane, Alan (2002). "Abortion methods in England" (PDF). _The Savage Wars of Peace_. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-0432-4. OCLC 50714989. Retrieved 2008-12-13.
    9. **^** Doerfler, Stephanie. "Abortion". Archived from the original on June 29, 2007. Retrieved 2008-12-10.
    10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ London, Kathleen (1982). "The History of Birth Control". _The Changing American Family: Historical and Comparative Perspectives_. Yale University. Retrieved  2008-12-10.
    11. **^** Obayashi M (December 1982). "[Historical background of the acceptance of induced abortion]". _Josanpu Zasshi_ (in Japanese). **36** (12): 1011–6. PMID 6759734.
    12. **^** Brookes, Anne Page (September–December 1981). "Mizuko kuyō and Japanese Buddhism" (PDF). _Japanese Journal of Religious Studies_. **8** (3–4): 119–47. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2004-05-03. Retrieved 2008-12-13.
    13. **^** Hunton RB (December 1977). "Maori abortion practices in pre and early European New Zealand". _The New Zealand Medical Journal_. **86** (602): 567–70. PMID 273782.
    14. **^** Gluckman LK (June 1981). "Abortion in the nineteenth century Maori: a historical and ethnopsychiatric review". _The New Zealand Medical Journal_. **93** (685): 384–6. PMID 7019788.
    15. **^** Depierri, Kate P. (March 1968). "One Way of Unearthing the Past". _The American Journal of Nursing_. Lippincott Williams  &#38. **68** (3): 521–524. doi:10.2307/3453443. JSTOR 3453443. PMID 4865614.
    16. **^** Plato (1921) [ c. 369 BC]. "149d". _Theaetetus_. in Harold North Fowler. _Plato in Twelve Volumes_. **12**. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
    17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Johannes M. Röskamp, _Christian Perspectives On Abortion-Legislation In Past And Present_ (GRIN Verlag 2005 ISBN 978-3-640-56931-1
    18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Sallares, J. Robert (2003), "abortion", in Hornblower, Simon; Spawforth, Anthony (eds.), _The Oxford Classical Dictionary_ (3rd ed.), Oxford: OxfordUP, p. 1, ISBN 978-0-19-860641-3
    19. **^** Pliny, XXII, Ch. 49
    20. **^** Hurst, W. Jeffrey; Deborah J. Hurst. "Rue (Ruta Graveolens)". _Medicina Antiqua_. The Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine at UCL. Retrieved  2008-12-10.
    21. **^** Riddle, John M. (1999). _Eve's Herbs: A History of Contraception and Abortion in the West_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-27026-6. OCLC 46766844.[ _page needed_]
    22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Young, Gordon (December 1995). "Lifestyle on Trial". _Metro_. Retrieved  2008-06-25.
    23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lefkowitz, Mary R.; Maureen R. Fant (1992). "Intercourse, conception and pregnancy". _Women's life in Greece & Rome: A source book in translation_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 341. ISBN 0-8018-4475-4. Retrieved 2008-09-21.
    24. **^** Klotz, John William (1973). "A Historical Summary of Abortion from Antiquity through Legalization" (PDF). _A Christian view of abortion_. St. Louis, Missouri: Concordia Publishing House. ISBN 0-570-06721-9. OCLC 750046. Retrieved 2008-09-21.
    25. **^** Soranus. _Gynaecology._ 1.59–65.
    26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Riddle, John M. (1992). _Contraception and abortion from the ancient world to the Renaissance_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-16875-5. OCLC 24428750.[ _page needed_]
    27. **^** Hurst, W. Jeffrey; Deborah J. Hurst. "Hellebore". _Medicina Antiqua_. The Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine at UCL. Retrieved  2008-12-10.
    28. **^** Tertullian (1885) [c. 203]. "Tertullian Refutes, Physiologically, the Notion that the Soul is Introduced After Birth". _A Treatise on the Soul_. in Philip Schaff. _Ante-Nicene Fathers_. **3**. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
    29. **^** Celsus (1935). "Prooemium". In W. G. Spencer (ed.). _De medicina_. London: Heinemann. p. 457. OCLC 186696262. Retrieved 2008-12-13.
    30. **^** Hippolytus (c. 1870). "The Personal History of Callistus; His Occupation ...". _Refutation of all Heresies_. in Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. _Ante-Nicene Fathers_. **5**. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
    31. **^** Shaikh, Sa'diyya (2003). "Family Planning, Contraception, and Abortion in Islam: Undertaking _Khilafa_ ". In Daniel C. Maguire (ed.). _Sacred Rights: The Case for Contraception and Abortion in World Religions_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 107. ISBN 0-19-516001-0. OCLC 50080419.
    32. **^** Felter, Harvey Wickes; John Uri Lloyd (1854). "Hedeoma (U. S. P.)—Hedeoma". _King's American Dispensatory_. Retrieved  2008-12-11.
    33. **^** Pennyroyal poisoning
    34. **^** Colorado death
    35. **^** MedLinePlus. "American pennyroyal (Hedeoma pulegioides L.), European pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium L.)". Retrieved  2009-05-05.
    36. **^** Charles T. Hildreth, MD (November 1834). "Fatal Poisoning by Oil of Tansy". _The Medical Magazine_. Boston: William D. Ticknor. **3** (7): 213. " From the days of Aristotle to the present time, a certain class of medical writers have recommended this plant as safe, and more or less efficacious, in cases involving a suppression of the catamenia." ( _Catamenia_ is blood or other material discharged from the uterus during menstruation.)
    37. **^** Long, George (1870). "Abortio". In William Smith (ed.). _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities_. **1**. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. p. 2. Archived from the original on 2010-02-13.
    38. **^** Aristotle (1944) [c. 325 BC]. "Politics". In H. Rackham (ed.). _Aristotle in 23 Volumes_. **21**. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 7.1335b. ISBN 0-674-99291-1. OCLC 29752140.
    39. **^** A companion to bioethics By Helga Kuhse, Peter Singer
    40. **^** ReligiousTolerance.org
    41. **^** W. den Boer, _Private Morality in Greece and Rome_ (Brill 1979 ISBN 978-90-04-05976-4), p. 272
    42. **^** Riddle, John M. (August 1991). "Oral contraceptives and early-term abortifacients during classical antiquity and the Middle Ages". _Past & Present_. **132** (1): 3–32. doi:10.1093/past/132.1.3. JSTOR 650819. PMID 11656135. "Contrary to popular opinion, the ancient Hippocratic Oath did not prohibit abortions; the oath prohibited 'vaginal suppositories' presumably because of the ulcerations they were said to cause." Riddle is citing Soranus, p.13.
    43. **^** Scribonius, _Compositiones_ Praef. 5. 20–23 (Translated and cited in Riddle's history of contraception and abortion)
    44. **^** Joffe, Carole (2009). M Paul; ES Lichtenberg; L Borgatta; DA Grimes; PG Stubblefield; MD Creinin (eds.). _Management of Unintended and Abnormal Pregnancy_ (1st ed.). Oxford, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-4443-1293-5.
    45. **^** https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/body/hippocratic-oath-today.html
    46. **^** "Scribonius Largus"
    47. **^** Soranus, Owsei Temkin (1956). _Soranus' Gynecology_. I.19.60: JHU Press. Retrieved  6 October 2015.
    48. **^** Jeffrey H. Reiman, _Abortion and the Ways We Value Life_ (Rowman and Littlefield 1998 ISBN 978-0-8476-9208-8), p, 19
    49. **^** _Pauli sententiae_ , PS 5.23.14 (BA PS 5.25.8).
    50. **^** Hopkins, Keith (October 1965). "Contraception in the Roman Empire". _Comparative Studies in Society and History_. **8** (1): 124–151. doi:10.1017/S0010417500003935. JSTOR 177539. "We know that Romans practiced abortion with little or no sense of shame." Hopkins cites R. Hähnel's _Der künstliche Abortus in Altertum_ , p. 127.
    51. **^** https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Exodus%2021:22-24
    52. **^** http://religion.blogs.cnn.com/2012/10/30/my-take-when-evangelicals-were-pro-choice/comment-page-30/
    53. **^** Bruce Waltke, "The Old Testament and Birth Control", _Christianity Today_ 13 no. 3 (1968) 3-6
    54. **^** http://blog.chron.com/goplifer/2014/03/when-evangelicals-were-pro-choice/
    55. **^** https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Judaism/abortion.html
    56. **^** Carlson, Allan C. (December 31, 2011). _Godly Seed: American Evangelicals Confront Birth Control, 1873-1973_. Transaction. p. 154. ISBN 9781412846516.
    57. **^** https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Numbers+5%3A11-31
    58. **^** Cyril Charles Richardson, ed. (1953) [c. 150]. "Didache". _Early Christian Fathers_. Philadelphia: Westminster Press. OCLC 832987. Retrieved  2008-12-12.
    59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Augustine (1885) [c. 420]. "The Case of Abortive Conceptions". _Enchiridion_. in Philip Schaff. _Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_. **3**. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
    60. **^** Robinson, B. A. (2000-05-28). "Roman Catholicism and abortion access: Pagan & Christian beliefs 400 BC −1980 AD". Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance. Retrieved 2008-12-09.
    61. **^** Augustine (1885) [c. 420]. "What Sins are Trivial and What Heinous is a Matter for God's Judgment". _Enchiridion_. in Philip Schaff. _Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_. **3**. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
    62. **^** Augustine (1885) [c. 420]. "If They Have Ever Lived, They Must of Course Have Died, and Therefore, Shall Have a Share in the Resurrection of the Dead". _Enchiridion_. in Philip Schaff. _Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_. **3**. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
    63. **^** quasi-homicide
    64. **^** Institoris, Heinrich; Jakob Sprenger (1971) [1487]. Montague Summers (ed.). _The Malleus maleficarum of Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger_. New York City: Dover Publications. p. 66. ISBN 0-486-22802-9. OCLC 246623.
    65. **^** http://www.pewforum.org/2013/01/16/religious-groups-official-positions-on-abortion/
    66. **^** Reagan, Leslie J. (1997). _When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United States, 1867-1973_. University of California Press. p. 8.
    67. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. pp. 35–36.
    68. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. p. 34.
    69. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. p. 147.
    70. **^** Alesha E. Doan (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation:The abortion wars and strategies of political harassment_. University of Michigan. p. 46.
    71. **^** Transactions of the Washington Obstetrical and Gynecological Society
    72. **^** g 2007, p. 46.
    73. **^** Alford, Suzanne M. (2003). "Is Self-Abortion a Fundamental Right?". _Duke Law Journal_. **52** (5): 1011–29. JSTOR 1373127. PMID 12964572.
    74. **^** Lewis, Jone Johnson. "Abortion History: A History of Abortion in the United States". _Women's History section of About.com_. About.com. Retrieved  2006-07-07.
    75. **^** https://archive.org/stream/anthonycomstockh00bennuoft#page/1017/mode/1up Anthony Comstock: His Career of Cruelty and Crime A Chapter from "Champions of the Church". DeRobigne Mortimer Bennett. 1878.
    76. **^** Doan 2007, p. 51.
    77. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Reagan, Leslie J. (1997). _When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United States, 1867-1973_. University of California Press.
    78. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McLaren, Angus (Spring 1978). "Abortion in France: Women and the Regulation of Family Size 1800–1914". _French Historical Studies_. Duke University Press. **10** (3): 461–484 [469]. doi:10.2307/286340. JSTOR 286340. PMID 11614490. Retrieved  2007-11-17. "Increasingly, writers in the latter half of the nineteenth century no longer referred to abortion as a last resort for the single, seduced girl but as a family planning measure employed by the married woman. As a result the very nature of the idea and practice of abortion was transformed."
    79. **^** Doan 2007, p. 47.
    80. **^** Van de Warker, Ely (1870). _The detection of criminal abortion and a study of fœticidal drugs_. Boston: James Campbell. Retrieved  2008-12-14.
    81. **^** Beahen, William (1986). "Abortion and Infanticide in Western Canada 1874 to 1916: A Criminal Case Study". _Historical Studies_. The Canadian Catholic Historical Association. **53** : 53–70. Retrieved 2008-12-10.
    82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ King CR (1992). "Abortion in nineteenth century America: a conflict between women and their physicians". _Womens Health Issues_. **2** (1): 32–9. doi:10.1016/S1049-3867(05)80135-5. PMID 1628000. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved  2008-12-10.
    83. **^** Abortion was more dangerous than childbirth throughout the 19th century. By 1930, medical procedures had improved for both childbirth and abortion but not equally, and induced abortion in the first trimester had become safer than childbirth. In 1973, _Roe vs. Wade_ acknowledged that abortion in the first trimester was safer than childbirth.
    

• "The 1970s". _Time communication 1940–1989: retrospective_. Time Inc. 1989.
" Blackmun was also swayed by the fact that most abortion prohibitions were
enacted in the 19th century when the procedure was more dangerous than now."  
• Will, George (1990). _Suddenly: the American idea abroad and at home,
1986–1990_. Free Press. p. 312. ISBN 0-02-934435-2.  
• Lewis, J.; Shimabukuro, Jon O. (January 28, 2001). "Abortion Law
Development: A Brief Overview". Congressional Research Service. Retrieved May
1, 2011.  
• Schultz, David Andrew (2002). _Encyclopedia of American law_. Infobase
Publishing. p. 1. ISBN 0-8160-4329-9.  
• Population Information Program, George Washington University; Dept. of
Medical and Public Affairs, Johns Hopkins University (1980). "Pregnancy
termination". _Population reports_. Population Information Program, The Johns
Hopkins University (7).  
• Lahey, Joanna N. (September 24, 2009). "Birthing a Nation: Fertility Control
Access and the 19th Century Demographic Transition". _Colloquium_. Pomona
College.

    
        84. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gordon, Linda (2002). _The Moral Property of Women_. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0252027647.
    85. **^** Solinger, Rickie (1998), "Introduction", in Solinger, Rickie (ed.), _Abortion Wars: A Half Century of Struggle, 1950-2000_ , University of California Press, pp. 1–9, ISBN 978-0520209527
    86. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bates, Jerome E.; Zawadzki, Edward S. (1964). _Criminal Abortion: A Study in Medical Sociology_. Charles C. Thomas. ISBN 9780398001094.
    87. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Taussig, Frederick J. (1936). _Abortion Spontaneous and Induced: Medical and Social Aspects_. C. V. Mosby.
    88. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lee, Charles A. (1838), "Report of a trial for murder", _American Journal of the Medical Sciences_ , **XXII** : 351–353
    89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bailey, Benjamin (1896), "Induction of abortion and premature labor", _North American Journal of Homeopathy_ , **XI** (3): 144–150
    90. **^** Simpson, Keith (1947), _Forensic Medicine_ , Edward Arnold Publishers, pp. 173–174
    91. **^** Evans, Max (2002). _Madam Millie: Bordellos from Silver City to Ketchikan_. University of New Mexico Press. pp. 209–218, 230, 267–286, 305.
    92. **^** Donner, James (1959). _Women in Trouble: The Truth about Abortion in America_. Monarch Books.
    93. **^** Oakley, Ann (1984). _The Captured Womb_. Basil Blackwell. p. 91.
    94. **^** Solinger, Rickie (1994). _The Abortionist: A Woman Against the Law_. The Free Press. pp. xi, 5, 16–17, 157–175.
    95. **^** DeHullu, James. "Histories of Abortion". Archived from the original on November 18, 2008. Retrieved 2008-12-11.
    96. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Product Advertisements". _American Women_. Library of Congress. 2001. Retrieved  2008-12-11.
    97. **^** McLaren, Angus (1978). "Birth control and abortion in Canada, 1870–1920". _Canadian Historical Review_. **59** (3): 319–40. doi:10.3138/CHR-059-03-02. PMID 11614314.
    98. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black, Barbara (2000-11-27). "Women win back reproductive rights". _North Shore News_. North Vancouver, British Columbia: Lower Mainland Publishing Group. Archived from the original on 2004-08-19. Retrieved  2008-12-11.
    99. **^** McGonagall Online - Beecham's Pills
    100. **^** T. C. Barker; R Harris (1954). _A Merseyside Town in the Industrial Revolution 1750-1900_. Liverpool University Press. pp. 378–9.
    101. **^** Geoffrey Davis (1974). _Interception of Pregnancy: Post-Conceptive Fertility Control, Emmenology Revisited_. HarperCollins Publishers Australia.
    102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ MacLaren, Angus; Arlene Tigar MacLaren (1986). _The bedroom and the state: the changing practices and politics of contraception and abortion in Canada, 1880–1980_. Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart. ISBN 0-7710-5532-3. OCLC 256809754.[ _page needed_]
    103. **^** Koblitz, Ann Hibner (2014). _Sex and Herbs and Birth Control: Women and Fertility Regulation Through the Ages_. Kovalevskaia Fund.
    104. **^** Federal Trade Commission (1941). "Federal Trade Commission Decisions". **30** : 833–838.
    105. **^** Dannenfelser, Marjorie (4 November 2015). "The Suffragettes Would Not Agree With Feminists Today on Abortion". _TIME_. Retrieved  4 November 2015.
    106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Olasky, Marvin N. (1988). "Crusading on Social and Political Issues: Personalization and Pesistence [ _sic_ ]". _Prodigal press: the anti-Christian bias of the American news media_. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books. ISBN 0-89107-476-7. OCLC 17865217. Retrieved 2008-12-11.
    107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Richardson, Cynthia Watkins (2002). "In the Eye of Power: The Notorious Madam Restell" (PDF). _Khronikos_. University of Maine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-17. Retrieved 2008-12-11.
    108. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. pp. 76–82.
    109. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. pp. 100–101.
    110. **^** Gordon, Sarah Barringer. "Law and Everyday Death: Infanticide and the Backlash against Woman's Rights after the Civil War". _Lives of the Law_. Austin Sarat, Lawrence Douglas, and Martha Umphrey, Editors. (University of Michigan Press 2006) p.67
    111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Schiff, Stacy. "Desperately Seeking Susan". October 13, 2006 _The New York Times'.' Retrieved February 5, 2009._
    112. **^** "Marriage and Maternity". __The Revolution__. Susan B. Anthony. July 8, 1869. Retrieved  2009-04-21.
    113. **^** Susan B. Anthony, "Marriage and Maternity", Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine _The Revolution_ (1869-07-08), via University Honors Program, Syracuse University.
    114. **^** Federer, William. _American Minute_ , page 81 (Amerisearch 2003).
    115. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. p. 110.
    116. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press/. p. 112.
    117. **^** Allen, Ann Taylor (2005). _Feminism and Motherhood in Western Europe, 1890-1970_. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 98, 173, 218.
    118. **^** Krieger, Nancy (1983), "Queen of the Bolsheviks: The Hidden History of Dr. Marie Equi", _Radical America_ , **17** (5): 54–73
    119. **^** Robinson, William J. (1931). _Doctor Robinson and Saint Peter: How Dr. Robinson Entered the Heavenly Gates and Became St. Peter's Assistant_. Eugenics Publishing. p. 25.
    120. **^** HL Deb. Vol 72. 269.
    121. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Hall, Lesley (2011). _The Life and Times of Stella Browne: Feminist and Free Spirit_. pp. 27–178.
    122. **^** Jones, Greta. "Women and eugenics in Britain: The case of Mary Scharlieb, Elizabeth Sloan Chesser, and Stella Browne." _Annals of Science_ 52 no. 5 (1995):481-502
    123. **^** Rowbotham, Sheila (1977). _A New World for Women: Stella Browne, social feminist_. pp. 66–67.
    124. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Hindell, Keith; Madeline Simms (1968). "How the Abortion Lobby Worked". _The Political Quarterly_ : 271–272.
    125. **^** R v Bourne [1939] 1 KB 687, [1938] 3 All ER 615, CCA
    126. **^** Hyde, H. Montgomery (1965). _Norman Birkett: The Life of Lord Birkett of Ulverston_. Hamish Hamilton. p. 462. ASIN B000O8CESO. OCLC 255057963.
    127. **^** Heer, David, "Abortion, Contraception, and Population Policy in the Soviet Union" Demography 2 (1965): 531-39.
    128. **^** Alexandre Avdeev, Alain Blum, and Irina Troitskaya. "The History of Abortion Statistics in Russia and the USSR from 1900 to 1991". _Population_ (English Edition) 7, (1995), 42.
    129. **^** I.S. Kon, _The Sexual Revolution in Russia: From the Age of the Czars to Today_ (New York: The Free Press, 1995), 61.
    130. **^** Michaels, Paula, "Motherhood, Patriotism, and Ethnicity: Soviet Kazakhstan and the 1936 Abortion Ban". _Feminist Studies_ 27 (2001): 309-11.
    131. **^** Barbara Evans Clements, Barbara Alpern Engel, and Christine Worobec. _Russia's Women: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 260.
    132. **^** Randall, Amy, "'Abortion Will Deprive You of Happiness!': Soviet Reproductive Politics in the Post-Stalin Era". _Journal of Women's History_ 23 (2011): 13-38.
    133. **^** La Segunda República despenalizó el aborto con la ley más avanzada de Europa, Público (España), Patricia Campello, 15/2/2014
    134. **^** Cataluña tuvo durante la República la ley del aborto más progresista de Europa, El País, 13/2/1983
    135. **^** Véase el texto del decreto Decreto de Regulación de la Interrupción Artificial del Embarazo, en cgtburgos; también el reportaje de José María Garat, publicó en Mundo Gráfico el 12 de mayo de 1937, descargable desde la Biblioteca Nacional de España -En Cataluña existe ya el aborto legal
    136. **^** House of Commons, Science and Technology Committee. "Scientific Developments Relating to the Abortion Act 1967". 1 (2006-2007). Print.
    137. **^** Alesha Doan (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation: The Abortion Wars and Strategies of Political Harassment_. University of Michigan Press. p. 58. ISBN 9780472069750.
    138. **^** Johnson, Linnea. "Something Real: Jane and Me. Memories and Exhortations of a Feminist Ex-Abortionist". CWLU Herstory Project. Archived from the original on 2011-07-25. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
    139. **^** National Women's Health Network | A Voice For Women, A Network For Change
    140. **^** Alesha Doan (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation: The Abortion Wars and Strategies of Political Harassment_. University of Michigan Press. p. 59. ISBN 9780472069750.
    141. **^** "Medicine: Abortion on Request". _Time_. March 9, 1970. Retrieved  2012-10-15. (subscription required)
    142. **^** LeGates, Marlene. _In Their Time: A History of Feminism in Western Society_ Routledge, 2001 ISBN 0-415-93098-7 p. 363-364
    143. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Joffe, C (1999). "Abortion in Historical Perspective". In Maureen Paul; E. Steven Lichtenberg; Lynn Borgatta; David A. Grimes; Phillip G. Stubblefield (eds.). _A clinician's guide to medical and surgical abortion_. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone. ISBN 0-443-07529-8. OCLC 40120288. Archived from the original on 2006-09-22. Retrieved 2008-12-10.
    144. **^** Gawande, Atul (2006-10-09). "The Score: How Childbirth Went Industrial". _The New Yorker_. Retrieved  2008-12-14.
    145. **^** Gapultos, F. C. "Destructive OB Forceps". _Accoucheur's Antique_. Retrieved  2008-12-14.
    146. **^** Baulieu, Étienne-Émile; Rosenblum, Mort (1991). _The "abortion pill" : RU-486, a woman's choice_. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-73816-X.
    

Lader, Lawrence (1991). _RU 486 : the pill that could end the abortion wars
and why American women don't have it_. Reading: Addison-Wesley. ISBN
0-201-57069-6.  
Villaran, Gilda (1998). "RU 486". In Schlegelmilch, Bodo B. (ed.). _Marketing
ethics : an international perspective_. London: Thomson Learning. pp. 155–190.
ISBN 1-86152-191-X.  
Ulmann, André (2000). "The development of mifepristone: a pharmaceutical drama
in three acts". _Journal of the American Medical Women's Association_. **55**
(3 Suppl): 117–20. PMID 10846319.

    
        147. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ Whittaker, Andrew. "Abortion in Asia: An Overview". In Whittaker, Andrea, ed. _Abortion in Asia: Local Dilemmas, Global Politics_ New York, NY: Berghahn Books, 2010: 11-38.
    148. **^** Kligman, Gail. _The Politics of Duplicity: Controlling Reproduction in Ceausescu's Romania_. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998.
    149. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Chandrasekhar, S. _India's Abortion Experience_ Denton, TX: University of North Texas Press, 1994.
    150. **^** Solinger, Rickie (1998), "Introduction", in Solinger, Rickie (ed.), _Abortion Wars: A Half Century of Struggle, 1950-2000_ , University of California Press, pp. 1–9, ISBN 978-0520209527
    151. **^** Simpson, Keith (1969), _Forensic Medicine_ , Edward Arnold Publishers, pp. 173–174
    152. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jing-Bao, Nie. _Behind the Silence: Chinese Voices on Abortion_ Lanham, ML: Rowman  & Litterfield Publishers, 2005.
    153. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Norgren, Tiana. _Abortion before Birth Control: The Politics of Reproduction in Postwar Japan_ Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
    154. **^** Kligman, Gail. "Political Demography: The Banning of Abortion in Ceausescu's Romania". In Ginsburg, Faye D.; Rapp, Rayna, eds. _Conceiving the New World Order: The Global Politics of Reproduction._ Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1995 :234-255. Unique Identifier : AIDSLINE KIE/49442.
    

## Further reading[edit]

    
        * Critchlow, Donald T. (1999). _Intended consequences: birth control, abortion, and the federal government in modern America_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-504657-9. OCLC 38542669.
    * Critchlow, Donald T. (1996). _The politics of abortion and birth control in historical perspective_. University Park, Pennsylvania: Penn State University Press. ISBN 0-271-01570-5. OCLC 33132898.
    * Garrow, David J. (1994). _Liberty and sexuality: the right to privacy and the making of Roe v. Wade_. New York City: Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 0-02-542755-5. OCLC 246873646.
    * Hartmann, Betsy (1995). _Reproductive Rights and Wrongs: The Global Politics of Population Control_. South End Press. ISBN 978-0896084919.
    * Hull, N. E. H.; Peter Charles Hoffer (2001). _Roe v. Wade: the abortion rights controversy in American history_. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0-7006-1142-8. OCLC 231958828.
    * Mohr, James C. (1978). _Abortion in America: the origins and evolution of national policy, 1800–1900_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-502249-1. OCLC 3016879.
    * Olasky, Marvin (1992). _Abortion Rites: A Social History of Abortion in America_. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books. ISBN 0-89107-687-5.
    * Staggenborg, Suzanne (1991). _The pro-choice movement: organization and activism in the abortion conflict_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-506596-4. OCLC 22809649.
    * Rubin, Eva R. (1994). _The Abortion controversy: a documentary history_. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-313-28476-8. OCLC 28213877.
    * Wiesner-Hanks, Merry E. (1999). _Christianity and Sexuality in the Early Modern World Regulating Desire, Reforming Practice_. Hoboken: Routledge. ISBN 9780203979419.
    

## External links[edit]

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Media related to History of abortion at Wikimedia Commons
    * Text of the Roe v Wade decision from Findlaw
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

    
        * History of abortion
    * Methods of abortion
    * Abortion debate
    * Abortion law
    

Movements|

    
        * Abortion-rights movements
    * Anti-abortion movements
    

Issues|

    
        * Abortion and mental health
    * Beginning of human personhood
    * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
    * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
    * Anti-abortion violence
    * Abortion under communism
    * Birth control
    * Crisis pregnancy center
    * Ethical aspects of abortion
    * Eugenics
    * Fetal rights
    * Forced abortion
    * Genetics and abortion
    * Late-term abortion
    * Legalized abortion and crime effect
    * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
    * Limit of viability
    * Men's rights
    * Minors and abortion
    * One-child policy
    * Paternal rights and abortion
    * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
    * Prenatal development
    * Reproductive rights
    * Self-induced abortion
    * Sex-selective abortion
    * Sidewalk counseling
    * Societal attitudes towards abortion
    * Toxic abortion
    * Unsafe abortion
    * Women's rights
    

By country|

| Africa|

    
        * Algeria
    * Angola
    * Benin
    * Botswana
    * Burkina Faso
    * Burundi
    * Cameroon
    * Cape Verde
    * Central African Republic
    * Chad
    * Egypt
    * Ghana
    * Namibia
    * Nigeria
    * South Africa
    * Uganda
    * Zimbabwe
    

---|---  
Asia|

    
        * Afghanistan
    * Armenia
    * Azerbaijan
    * Bahrain
    * Bangladesh
    * Bhutan
    * Brunei
    * Cambodia
    * China
    * Cyprus
    * Georgia
    * East Timor
    * India
    * Iran
    * Israel
    * Japan
    * Kazakhstan
    * Northern Cyprus
    * South Korea
    * Philippines
    * Qatar
    * Saudi Arabia
    * Turkey
    

Europe|

    
        * Albania
    * Andorra
    * Austria
    * Belarus
    * Belgium
    * Bosnia and Herzegovina
    * Bulgaria
    * Croatia
    * Czech Republic
    * Denmark
    * Estonia
    * Finland
    * France
    * Germany
    * Greece
    * Hungary
    * Iceland
    * Ireland
    * Italy
    * Kazakhstan
    * Latvia
    * Liechtenstein
    * Lithuania
    * Luxembourg
    * Malta
    * Moldova
    * Monaco
    * Montenegro
    * Netherlands
    * North Macedonia
    * Norway
    * Poland
    * Portugal
    * Romania
    * Russia
    * San Marino
    * Serbia
    * Slovakia
    * Slovenia
    * Spain
    * Sweden
    * Switzerland
    * Ukraine
    * United Kingdom
    

North America|

    
        * Belize
    * Canada
    * Costa Rica
    * Cuba
    * Dominican Republic
    * El Salvador
    * Guatemala
    * Mexico
    * Nicaragua
    * Panama
    * Trinidad and Tobago
    * United States
    

Oceania|

    
        * Australia
    * Micronesia
    * Fiji
    * Kiribati
    * Marshall Islands
    * New Zealand
    * Papua New Guinea
    * Samoa
    * Solomon Islands
    * Tonga
    * Tuvalu
    * Vanuatu
    

South America|

    
        * Argentina
    * Bolivia
    * Brazil
    * Chile
    * Colombia
    * Ecuador
    * Guyana
    * Paraguay
    * Peru
    * Suriname
    * Uruguay
    * Venezuela
    

Law|

    
        * Case law
    * Constitutional law
    * History of abortion law
    * Laws by country
    * Buffer zones
    * Conscientious objection
    * Fetal protection
    * Heartbeat bills
    * Informed consent
    * Late-term restrictions
    * Parental involvement
    * Spousal consent
    

Methods|

    
        * Vacuum aspiration
    * Dilation and evacuation
    * Dilation and curettage
    * Intact D&X
    * Hysterotomy
    * Instillation
    * Menstrual extraction
    * Abortifacient drugs
      * Methotrexate
      * Mifepristone
      * Misoprostol
      * Oxytocin
    * Self-induced abortion
    * Unsafe abortion
    

Religion|

    
        * Buddhism
    * Christianity
      * Catholicism
    * Hinduism
    * Islam
    * Judaism
    * Scientology
    
    * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_abortion&oldid=900348129"

Categories:

    
        * Human reproduction
    * History of women's rights
    * History of abortion
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)
    * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010
    * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
    * Webarchive template wayback links
    * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017
    * Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2017
    * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015
    * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017
    * Commons category link from Wikidata
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * العربية
    * Français
    * Italiano
    * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    * Português
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 02:14 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

