

![O&G Magazine](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/themes/og/library/images/logo.png)

    
        * Advertise
    * Contribute to O&G Magazine
    * About O&G Magazine
    * Contact Us
    * SEARCH THE ARCHIVE
    

__

    
        * Home
    * Latest Issue
    * Archive
    * Subscribe
    

![Hamlin](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Hamlin_OG_Online_Jun_2019.jpeg)

EXPLORE PAST ISSUES

Volume - Year Choose an option Vol. 21 - 2019 Vol. 20 - 2018 Vol. 19 - 2017
Vol. 18 - 2016 Vol. 17 - 2015 Vol. 16 - 2014 Vol. 15 - 2013 Vol. 14 - 2012
Vol. 13 - 2011 Vol. 12 - 2010 Vol. 11 - 2009 Issue / Season Choose a Year

Abortion

Vol. 20 No 2 | Winter 2018

    
        * Overview
    * Contents
    * Features
    * Women's Health
    * Letters
    * College
    

Feature

Ethically speaking, is a fetus a person?

![Xavier Symons](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/Xavier-Symons-photo-150x150.jpg)

Xavier Symons

MA(Research), University of Sydney

* * *
    
        * __SHARE
    * __TWEET
    

Abortion is one of the most divisive moral issues of our time. Since the
middle of the 20th century, when surgical abortion became more common in
Western countries, there has been intense philosophical debate about its
ethics. Abortion demands that we explore some of the most fundamental debates
in philosophical ethics, such as whether it is ever acceptable to kill another
person; whether the rights of one person (such as a mother) can trump the
rights of another (such as a fetus); and whether human life has intrinsic
value.

My aim is to provide an overview of just one subset of arguments: the
personhood of the fetus. The strengths and weaknesses of two well-known
personhood arguments will be considered. My central contention is that both
‘pro-life’ and ‘pro-choice’ concepts of personhood of a fetus lead us to
conclusions that are difficult to accept. A view that attributes personhood to
a fetus implies that all forms of abortion, including embryonic deaths caused
by contraceptives, are morally wrong. A view that denies the fetus the rights
of a person can be invoked to justify more than abortion. It has, on several
occasions, been used as a justification for infanticide.1 Considering how
radical the implications of these two positions are, the majority of people
adopt a hybrid account of the personhood of a fetus: an embryo is considered a
non-person, whereas a late-term fetus is sufficiently developed to be
considered a person.

### The central divide

Political debates about abortion revolve around the question, ‘Is a human
fetus a human being?’ Yet, in academic philosophical discussions about
abortion, the question of humanity of the fetus is largely uncontroversial.
Most academic philosophers argue that the fetus should be considered part of
the human species, as it shares our genetic code, and, if unimpeded in it’s
development, will grow and mature into an adult human being. There are
exceptions to this view. Philosopher Michael Sandel argues that a fetus is
distinct from an adult human being.2 However, it is notable that some of the
best-known defenders of abortion, such as Peter Singer and Jeff McMahan,3
concede that a fetus is, at the very least, a human organism. That is to say,
a fetus is a member of the species of homo sapiens.

This fact alone, however, does not settle the question of the moral status of
the fetus. Singer notes that, ‘The biological facts on which the boundary of
our species is based do not have moral significance’.4 Most arguments for
abortion stand or fall on a different question, namely, ‘Is the fetus a human
person?’

Personhood is believed to be the ground of the special moral status that human
beings enjoy. ‘Persons’ have the capacity for acquiring a sense of self and
engaging intelligently with the external world. Beings capable of these
operations are worthy of special respect (or so the argument goes). If
personhood is the ground of moral status, it is, therefore, of crucial
importance to determine whether the fetus is a human ‘person’. If the fetus is
a ‘person’, then it should be accorded the same rights and privileges as are
enjoyed by adult human beings. If it is not a ‘person’, it need not be.

Two conceptions of personhood are dominant in contemporary philosophical
literature. The first is a view that personhood is equivalent to ‘rational
self-awareness’.5 Personhood, therefore, refers to the ability of living
things to apprehend the world around them: to use language; to have a sense of
self; to have preferences and desires; and to have plans for the future. The
archetype of this personhood is a fully competent adult human being, who has a
rich sense of personal identity, aspirations and goals, and relationships with
significant others. According to proponents of this view, a person comes into
existence when they develop the proximate capacity for engaging in these sorts
of activities (such as when toddlers start to get a handle on conventional
language and develop a sense of self).

The alternative view of personhood focuses not on the proximate capacities of
a being, but rather on more radical metaphysical capacities that an entity
has. From this perspective, a person is a being that has the radical capacity
to develop into an adult human being capable of the sorts of activities listed
above (the use of language, the development of a sense of identity, and the
fostering of relationships with others). What a ‘thing’ can become is
considered more significant than what a ‘thing’ already is. This concept is
referred to as ‘potentiality’ in metaphysical terms. Proponents of this
alternative view of personhood argue that a fetus, though not capable of
rational activity yet, nevertheless, has the potential to develop into a being
capable of rational activity. It has the capacity to become a being of
sophisticated operations, therefore it is a ‘person’.

These two views of personhood are ascribed various labels. The first is
sometimes called the ‘Lockean view’, named after the 17th century philosopher
John Locke, who inspired much of the literature on this kind of personhood.
The second is the ‘Aristotelian view’, named after Aristotle, the ancient
Greek philosopher responsible for the notion of metaphysical potentiality.

These two views of personhood, one counts the fetus as a person and one does
not, lead us to different conclusions about the moral status of the fetus. In
one view, the fetus is a person and has the same special moral status as an
adult human being. In the alternative view, a fetus is not a person and, while
it may have some sort of moral status, does not have the same rights and
privileges as a fully developed human being.

In the Lockean view, abortion does not involve the termination of the life of
a person. All other things being equal, abortion is therefore morally
permissible. In the Aristotelian view, abortion is morally as serious as
terminating the life of an adult human being, as both an adult and a fetus are
people.

### Objections and nuances

Both positions have been subject to strong and sustained criticism since they
were first expounded. The Aristotelian view is seen by many as being overly
dependent on vague metaphysical terminology. Ideas such as ‘potentiality’ are
difficult to accept for people living in a post-Enlightenment age that is
generally suspicious of essentialist conceptions of human nature. It is also
difficult to accept its implications in the context of embryonic deaths caused
by contraceptives. The Aristotelian view leads us to see abortifacient
contraceptives as being just as morally reprehensible as a third-trimester
abortion. This would be an unacceptable conclusion for most people in
societies where contraception is widely used and generally seen as being
morally unproblematic. The Aristotelian view also leads us to regard
spontaneous abortion as being just as tragic as the death of a post-birth
human being. Yet sociologically, we do not mourn the death of a fetus in the
same way we mourn the death of an infant or toddler. The Aristotelian view is
counter-intuitive in this respect.6

The Lockean view, however, invites what may be even stronger objections. It
supposes that only those individuals who have preferences, a sense of identity
and a grasp on language have special moral status. This has radical
conclusions for the way we treat infants, intellectually disabled people and
the demented elderly. Where someone has either not yet developed or lost the
capacity for rational and free activity, can we treat them as we treat other
animals? This sort of question is often dismissed as a form of scaremongering.
Yet, Italian philosophers Alberto Giubilini and Francesca Minerva answer it in
the affirmative, and have argued in favour of post-birth infanticide up to two
years of age.7 The Lockean view, in this sense, seems to be ageist and ableist
in the extreme. It is not only philosophically implausible, it is close to
horrifying.

### Conclusion

This discussion is a far cry from the empirical commentaries typically
published in O&G Magazine. Yet, it is crucially important to step back from
the neutral language of empirical analysis and consider the ethical issues
attendant to practices in obstetrics and gynaecology. Ethics performs the
important task of making us less complacent in our moral views. Many readers
may be in favour of abortion up to some point. Yet, honest ethical reflection
on the issues will hopefully lead us to acknowledge the difficulties involved
in defending a ‘pro-life’ or ‘pro-choice’ position on abortion. Awareness of
this will hopefully lead people to refrain from glib, rhetorical dismissals of
viewpoints that conflict with their own.

Ultimately, most people adopt a hybrid account of personhood, according to
which an embryo is a non-person, while a late-term fetus is a person. Embryos
have no capacity for sentience (yet alone consciousness), whereas a late-term
fetus has basic capacities for processing stimuli from the external world. The
main question for defenders of this hybrid position is whether these
biological differences can be translated into a morally defensible position on
early abortion. Singer and McMahan are suspicious of arguments that use
biological facts to justify moral positions on abortion.

#### References

    
        1. See, for example, Michael Tooley. Abortion and Infanticide. Philosophy and Public Affairs. 1972 2(1):37-65; Alberto Giubilini and Francesca Minerva. After-birth Abortion: Why Should the Baby Live? Journal of Medical Ethics 2013 39:261-263.
    2. Michael Sandel. Embryo Ethics. The Moral Logic of Stem Cell Research. New England Journal of Medicine 2004 351(3): 207-209.
    3. Peter Singer. Practical Ethics 3rd ed. London: Cambridge University Press, 2011; Jeff McMahan. Killing embryos for stem cell research. Metaphilosophy 2007 38:170-89.
    4. Singer 2011, 75.
    5. Cf. Singer 2011, 74-75.
    6. For a response to this criticism, see John Finnis, ‘Abortion and healthcare ethics’, in Peter Singer and Helga Kuhse (eds), Bioethics: an anthology hoboken: Wiley 2016. 15-22;17.
    7. Giubilini and Minerva 2013.
    

SUBMIT A LETTER TO THE EDITOR >

![](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/3084_OG_digital_display_banner_750x250_opt.jpg)

* * *

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

![Worldwide, 40–50 million abortions occur annually. Nearly half of these

abortions are performed unsafely, with an estimated 50,000 deaths a year as a

result.](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/OG-

Winter-2018-Abortion-Cover-724x1024.jpg)

< BACK TO ISSUE

* * *

RELATED ARTICLES

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 21 No 2

Case report: the local effects of fertility tourism

Dr Vidhu Krishnan

Dr Raiyomand Dalal

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 21 No 2

College Statements update March 2019

RANZCOG

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

From the President

Prof Steve Robson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Guest Editorial

Dr Gillian Gibson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Advocacy for abortion

Dr Rudy Lopes

Michelle Thompson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

The unfinished business of abortion law reform

Julie Hamblin

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

NZ’s abortion law: time for change

Courtney Naughton

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Early medical abortion: reflections on current practice

Dr Lisa Rasmussen

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Online access to mifepristone and misoprostol

Dr Katrina Calvert

Dr Mathias Epee-Bekima

Dr Jared Watts

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Mid-trimester surgical abortion

Dr Mei Lin Tan

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Feticide and late termination of pregnancy

Dr Lauren Megaw

Prof Jan Dickinson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

In reproductive health, is it unconscionable to object?

Dr Ashleigh Seiler

Dr Nicole Woodrow

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

The tyranny of distance for Australian women seeking abortion

Dr Philip Goldstone

Michelle Thompson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

We need to talk about conscientious objection in our hospitals

Dr Tina Ngorora

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Post-abortion contraception

A/Prof Deborah Bateson

Dr Mary Stewart

Dr Philip Goldstone

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Psychological effects of abortion

Dr Brett Daniels

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

‘For the sake of the woman’s life and health’

Prof Caroline de Costa

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Reporting the facts on abortion

Gina Rushton

Marni Cordell

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 20 No 2

Ectopic pregnancy masquerading as a molar pregnancy

Dr Paramapathan Shobanan

Dr Elvira Sikora

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 19 No 2

The leg-up

Dr Nicole Woodrow

A/Prof Vinay S Rane

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 4

Doris Gordon: a flawed legacy

Dame Margaret Sparrow DNZM MBE

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Consent for clinical research trials

Dr Rosalie Grivell

Pat Ashwood

Andrea Deussen

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Postmortem sperm retrieval

Dr Ben Kroon

Dr Frederick Kroon

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Issues of consent for fetal pathology

Dr Michael Harrison

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Participation in novel treatments and procedures

Dr Brett Daniels

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Blurred lines: a doctor practising in the family

Dr Jess McMicking

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 3

Q&A: refusal of caesarean section

Kate Gillman

Ruanne Bell

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 2

Who’s your daddy? Paternity testing in the DNA era

Prof Steve Robson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 18 No 1

RU486: behind the headlines

Prof Caroline de Costa

Dr Michael Carrette

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 17 No 4

Decreasing patient harms from surgical innovations

Dr Nicole Woodrow

Dr Emily Price

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 16 No 2

The enduring duo

Dr Elizabeth Todd

Dr Brett Daniels

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 15 No 3

Walking in their shoes

Dr Anne Coffey

Dr Brad Robinson

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 15 No 1

Induced abortion and maternal death

Prof Caroline de Costa

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 13 No 4

Who is being unethical?

Prof Michael Permezel

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 11 No 2

Ethical aspects of screening and diagnosing chromosomal and other
abnormalities in the second trimester

Dr Cliff Saunders

    
        * * * *
    

Vol. 11 No 1

Monitoring maternal mortality and morbidity in Australia

A/Prof James King

![](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/FSEP-EBOOK-

RECTANGLE-300x600.jpg)

![O&G Logo](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/themes/og/library/images/logo_white_og.png)

(C) 2019 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists  
ABN: 34 100 268 969  
All rights reserved

**For further information  
about O &G; Magazine,  
please contact:**

O&G; Magazine  
+61 3 9417 1699  
[email protected]

![Ranzcog Logo](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/themes/og/library/images/logo_ranzcog.png)

**Royal Australian and New Zealand  
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists**

254–260 Albert Street  
East Melbourne  
Victoria 3002  
Australia  
+61 3 9417 1699 | +61 3 9419 0672 | [email protected]  
Disclaimer | Privacy Policy  
ABN: 34 100 268 969

    
        * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    * __LinkedIn
    

![O&G Magazine](https://www.ogmagazine.org.au/wp-

content/themes/og/library/images/logo.png)

    
        * Home
    * Latest Issue
    * Archive
    * Subscribe
    * Advertise
    * Contribute to O&G Magazine
    * About O&G Magazine
    * Contact Us
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

