

Skip to content

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

![Evolution News Logo](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/Logo-Box.png)

## EVOLUTION NEWS

### & SCIENCE TODAY

__Menu

    
        * Science
    
      *         * ![Evolution](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/EvolutionDPC_27133116.jpg)Evolution
        * ![Medicine](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MedicineDPC_84464601.jpg)Medicine
      *         * ![Human Origins](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/HumOrigDPC_72928194.jpg)Human Origins
        * ![Neuroscience and Mind](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/NeuroDPC_73644416.jpg)Neuroscience & Mind
      *         * ![Intelligent Design](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/IDFot_25819564_L.jpg)Intelligent Design
        * ![Physics, Earth, and Space](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/PhysicsDPC_87198884.jpg)Physics, Earth & Space
      *         * ![Life Sciences](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/LifeScienceDPC_42544342.jpg)Life Sciences
    

__Close

    
        * Culture
      *         * ![Culture & Ethics](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Culture_Fot43627219_L.jpg)Culture & Ethics
        * ![Newsmedia](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MediaDPC_100511339.jpg)News Media
      *         * ![Education](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/EducationDPCv2_96189282.jpg)Education
      *         * ![Faith & Science](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/FaithSciDPC_73794006.jpg)Faith & Science
      *         * ![Free Speech](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/FreeSpeechDPC_74898708.jpg)Free Speech
      *  __Close
    * Writers
      *         * ![andrew-mcdiarmid-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Andrew-McDiarmid-headshot-64x64.jpg)Andrew McDiarmid
        * ![Bioinformation Symposium](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Denyse-OLeary-CREDIT-Laszlo-Bencze-headshot-64x64.jpg)Denyse O’Leary
        * ![behe](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Behe-64x64.jpg)Michael Behe
        * ![paul-nelson-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Paul-Nelson-headshot-64x64.jpg)Paul Nelson
        * ![witt](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Witt.jpg)Jonathan Witt
      *         * ![ann-gauger-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Ann-Gauger-headshot-64x64.jpg)Ann Gauger
        * ![douglas-axe-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Douglas-Axe-headshot-64x64.jpg)Douglas Axe
        * ![michael-denton-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Michael-Denton-headshot-64x64.jpg)Michael Denton
        * ![stephen-meyer-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Stephen-Meyer-headshot-64x64.jpg)Stephen Meyer
        * ![chaffee-1](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Chaffee-1.jpg)Sarah Chaffee
      *         * ![david-berlinski-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/David-Berlinski-headshot-64x64.jpg)David Berlinski
        * ![john-west-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/John-West-headshot-64x64.jpg)John West
        * ![egnor](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Egnor.jpg)Michael Egnor
        * ![smith](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Smith.jpg)Wesley Smith
        * ![aldrich](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Aldrich.jpg)Rachel Adams
      *         * ![david-klinghoffer-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/David-Klinghoffer-headshot-64x64.jpg)David Klinghoffer
        * ![wells](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Wells.jpg)Jonathan Wells
        * ![dr_brian_miller_headshot-22](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Dr_Brian_Miller_Headshot-22-1.jpg)Brian Miller
        * ![michael-flannery-headshot](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Michael-Flannery-headshot-64x64.jpg)Michael Flannery
        * ![en-orange-box](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/en-orange-box-64x64.jpg)Evolution News
      *  __Close
    * Contact
    * Subscribe
    * Donate
    * About
    * Spanish Edition
    
    * 06.07.19
    * |
    * Search
    

###### ![Culture & Ethics Icon](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/culture_ethics.png) Culture & Ethics

###### ![Life Sciences Icon](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/life_science.png) Life Sciences

###### ![Medicine Icon](https://evolutionnews.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/medicine.png) Medicine

# A (New) Argument for Abortion

Michael Egnor

May 12, 2017, 11:28 AM

    
        * __Email
    * __Print
    * __Google+
    * __Linkedin
    * __Twitter
    * __Share
    * There’s an argument making the rounds in the pro-abortion movement that’s important, both for the inanity of its logic and its implications for the state of the debate about human exceptionalism and the protection of innocent life.
    

Dr. Willie Parker is an abortionist in Alabama, and in his new book, _Life’s
Work: A Moral Argument for Choice_ , he defends abortion from his _Christian_
perspective (he’s an Evangelical). Parker’s argument is this: there is no
question that a baby in the womb is alive (he calls it “the pregnancy”); but
it is not life that warrants protection, but persons. And the mother is a
person, whereas, according to Parker, the baby is not. So the mother’s
suffering with an unwanted pregnancy takes precedence over the life of “the
pregnancy” (the baby), because the baby is not a person, has no rights, and
cannot suffer.

From an interview with Parker, with my commentary:

> Here’s the thing: Life is a process, not an event. If I thought I was
killing a person, I wouldn’t do abortions. A fetus is not a person; it’s a
human entity. In the moral scheme of things, I don’t hold fetal life and the
life of a woman equally. I value them both, but in the precedence of things,
when a woman comes to me, I find myself unable to demote her aspirations
because of the aspirations that someone else has for the fetus that she’s
carrying.

Life is not a “process,” in Parker’s sense of the word. Parker means that, in
his view, human life has no sharp beginning, but gradually develops from
gametes to being a human being. He is mistaken about the science.

Life is an activity, a state, of an individual organism. It entails processes,
of course (growth, metabolism, sensation, perception, etc.), but there is
_not_ a seamless continuum between inanimate matter, parts of human beings,
and a human being.

A human life begins at fertilization of the egg by the sperm. I am alive. A
fetus in the womb is alive, as is an embryo, as is a zygote. A cell in my body
is alive in the sense that it is part of me, but a somatic cell is not a human
life itself. A sperm cell is not a human life. Nor is an egg cell.

A zygote _is_ a human life, because it is, from a biological perspective, a
human being. Human life begins at fertilization: the new human being at this
stage has its genetic complement and will, if nourished and unimpeded, mature
to an embryo, a fetus, a baby, a child, and an adult.

Human life begins at fertilization, and ends at death. Individual parts of
human beings -- cells and tissues and organs -- are not lives in themselves,
but are parts of a human being.

There is no scientific debate about the fact that human life begins at
fertilization and ends at death. This is a simple biological fact, known since
the 19th century when the science of human reproduction was established.

Whether a human being at the stage of an embryo or a fetus is a “person” is
another matter. A person is (in this context) a human being who is worthy of
moral respect and legal protection. It is on the question of personhood of the
child in the womb that the abortion debate hinges, not on the question of
whether the child, from zygote to embryo to fetus, is a human being.

A fetus isn’t a “human entity.” He or she is a human being. Human life begins
at fertilization. That is a fact of biology, and has been settled by science
for two centuries, and it’s regrettable that Dr. Parker, an abortionist,
misrepresents the science to defend his trade.

The real question in the abortion debate is this: Are all human beings
persons, or does personhood depend on certain characteristics of human beings?
One hopes that African-Americans especially will reject Dr. Parker’s argument
that a certain class of human beings, because of their condition of
vulnerability, aren’t persons and aren’t entitled to respect and legal
protection.

#### Share

    
        * __Email
    * __Print
    * __Google+
    * __Linkedin
    * __Twitter
    * __Share
    * #### Tags
    

abortionAlabamaEvangelicalfetushuman exceptionalismhuman lifepersonhoodWillie
Brownzygote

## Trending

    
        * First Episode of _Science Uprising_ Is Out: Fake Science and Toxic Materialism
    * “Teleology in Nature” Gains a Beachhead in Germany
    * Jay Richards: The Many Dilemmas of Materialism
    * What Is a Parent to Do? Here’s What
    * Robert Marks: Materialism and the AI Delusion
    

## Recommended

    
        * James Tour: “Show Me the Chemistry” of Abiogenesis
    * Fossil Human Species Thwarts Darwinian Predictions
    * Bacteria Eject Their Flagella to Avoid Starvation
    * Testing Behe’s Principle that Darwin Devolves
    * Letter from Paris: The Bells Are Silent
    
    * Contact
    * Subscribe
    * Donate
    * About
    * Privacy
    * Search
    

(C) 2019 Discovery Institute

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

