

you are here: home > explore > **Brain Development**

# Neuroscience For Kids

### Brain Development

![](gif/deve1.gif) The brain grows at an amazing rate during development. At
times during brain development, **250,000 neurons** are added every minute! At
birth, a person's brain will have almost all the neurons that it will ever
have. The brain continues to grow for a few years after a person is born and
by the age of 2 years old, the brain is about 80% of the adult size.

You may wonder, "How does the brain continue to grow, if the brain has most of
the neurons it will get when you are born?". The answer is in glial cells.
Glia continues to divide and multiply. Glia carries out many important
functions for normal brain function including insulating nerve cells with
myelin. The neurons in the brain also make many new connections after birth.

### The Brain During Development

The nervous system develops from embryonic tissue called the **ectoderm**. The
first sign of the developing nervous system is the **neural plate** that can
be seen at about the 16th day of development. Over the next few days, a
"trench" is formed in the neural plate - this creates a **neural groove**. By
the 21st day of development, a **neural tube** is formed when the edges of the
neural groove meet. The rostral (front) part of the neural tubes goes on to
develop into the brain and the rest of the neural tube develops into the
spinal cord. Neural crest cells become the peripheral nervous system.

![](gif/tube1.gif)

At the front end of the neural tube, three major brain areas are formed: the
prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencepalon (midbrain) and rhombencephalon
(hindbrain). By the 7th week of development, these three areas divide again.
This process is called **encephalization**.

![](develop.gif)

#### Average brain weights (BW)

    
    
    AGE          BW - Male (grams)   BW - Female (grams)
    --------     -----------------   -----------------
    Newborn           380                  360     
    1 year            970                  940
    2 years         1,120                1,040
    3 years         1,270                1,090
    10-12 years     1,440                1,260
    19-21 years     1,450                1,310
    56-60 years     1,370                1,250
    81-85 years     1,310                1,170
    

(Data from Dekaban, A.S. and Sadowsky, D., Changes in brain weights during the
span of human life: relation of brain weights to body heights and body
weights, _Ann. Neurology_ , 4:345-356, 1978)

### Brain Weight

![](gif/brweight.gif) The top graph on the left shows the brain weights of
males and females at different ages. The bottom graph shows the brain weight
to total body weight ratio (expressed as a percentage). The adult brain makes
up about 2% of the total body weight.  
(Data from Dekaban, A.S. and Sadowsky, D., Changes in brain weights during the
span of human life: relation of brain weights to body heights and body
weights, _Ann. Neurology_ , 4:345-356, 1978)

DID YOU KNOW? Touch is the first sense to develop. The developing fetus
responds to touch of the lips and cheeks by 8 weeks and to other parts of its
body at 14 week. The sense of taste may develop by 12 weeks and that of sound
at 22-24 weeks. (Reference: Hepper, P., "Unraveling our beginnings", _The
Psychologist,_ 18:474-477, 2005.)

### More about Brain Development

![](gif/omg.gif)

  * Secret Life of the Brain - a PBS special exploring the brain from birth to old age 
  * Development and Neurobiology Column
  * The TEEN Brain - articles from US News and World Report (August 9, 1999). 
  * Inside the Teenage Brain - PBS
  * Zero to Three
  * The brain during old age

Copyright (C) 1996-2015, Eric H. Chudler, University of Washington

home _|_ search _|_ explore _|_ experiment _|_ questions / answers _|_ contact
_|_ links _|_ donate

newsletter _|_ brain awareness week _|_ Neuroscience in the News _|_ writing
contest _|_ books and articles _|_ postcards _|_ survey _|_ about _|_ privacy
_|_ disclaimer _|_ site map

![](gif/neuron2.gif)

