

See Tribune columnist Heidi Stevens talk to “In Her Shoes” author Jennifer
Weiner on June 20

Weather Alert in McHenry and Kane counties.

June 6

Tribune Voices Steve Chapman

Column:

# I don't think abortion is murder, and neither do you

Alex Wong / Getty Images

An anti-abortion rights activist prays during the annual March for Life event
in front of U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 22, 2010, in Washington, D.C.

An anti-abortion rights activist prays during the annual March for Life event
in front of U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 22, 2010, in Washington, D.C. (Alex
Wong / Getty Images)

![Steve Chapman](http://www.trbimg.com/img-53fbfde6/turbine/chinews-steve-

chapman-20130507/70/70x70)Steve ChapmanContact Reporter

At the heart of the pro-life movement is a basic premise: Abortion is murder.
An Idaho state senator, however, got unusual attention in February when he
voiced that sentiment to a group of students lobbying for birth control
measures.

Conservative writer Kevin Williamson was recently hired by The Atlantic — and
promptly fired over old tweets in which he referred to the procedure as
“homicide” that should be treated “like any other homicide.” He added that
those who support capital punishment (which he doesn’t) should favor the death
penalty for women who get abortions.

The view that terminating a pregnancy amounts to baby-killing is standard
among anti-abortion activists, but it has currency beyond them. Karlyn Bowman,
a polling expert at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, writes,
“When pollsters ask Americans whether abortion is an act of murder or the
taking of a human life, pluralities or majorities say that it is.”

But this is a rhetorical device or a moral conceit, not a well-thought-out
conviction. The vast majority of people who endorse it really don’t mean it.
Even they exhibit a deep sense that a fetus has an appreciably lower status
than an actual person.

Williamson’s controversy is proof. What doomed him was a comment suggesting
that women who get abortions should be hanged — though he later wrote, “I was
making a point about the sloppy rhetoric of the abortion debate, not a public-
policy recommendation.”

If abortion is morally indistinguishable from killing a newborn, though, why
shouldn’t those who procure abortions be severely punished? It’s the clear
logical implication of the pro-life argument.

Donald Trump inadvertently deviated from the pro-life playbook in 2016 when he
said women who get abortions should face “some sort of punishment,” only to
recant. Mike Pence insisted that he and Trump “would never support legislation
against women who make the heartbreaking choice to end a pregnancy.”

Jeanne Mancini, president of the March for Life Education and Defense Fund,
said then, “No pro-lifer would ever want to punish a woman who has chosen
abortion. We invite a woman who has gone down this route to consider paths to
healing, not punishment.”

“Healing” is not what people normally think is appropriate for cold-blooded
killers, and murder is rarely portrayed as a “heartbreaking choice.” Those who
speak this way are effectively conceding that abortion is fundamentally
different from homicide.

Trump is one of them. He regularly calls for tough measures to curb Chicago’s
homicides, which totaled 650 last year. Nationally, however, there are some
650,000 abortions annually. If they amount to murder, then the nonfetuses who
die are a small share of the homicide total.

But hardly anyone truly regards having an abortion as equal in evil to killing
an adult or a child. Hardly anyone thinks a woman who has an abortion belongs
in a cell next to a guy who strangles his child.

About 1 of every 4 American women will have an abortion by age 45, according
to the Guttmacher Institute. If you regard abortion as murder and think your
sister, daughter, aunt, niece, cousin or friend should go to prison for
decades — or be executed — if she ever terminated a pregnancy, you’re being
consistent. If you regard abortion as murder and think they deserve a gentle
path to healing, you’re not.

But few opponents of abortion grasp what it would mean to seriously regard the
embryo as a full human starting at conception. As Northwestern University
bioethicist Katie Watson notes in her recent book “Scarlet A: The Ethics, Law
and Politics of Ordinary Abortion,” half of fertilized eggs fail to implant,
and up to 20 percent of pregnancies end in miscarriage.

“If fertilized eggs are morally equivalent to born people,” she asks, “why
aren’t we devoting tremendous research dollars to stopping miscarriages?” The
silence on “natural” losses in pregnancy speaks volumes.

If abortion is not murder, it is impossible to justify banning it, early in
pregnancy or later. Women have the right to control their own bodies — have
knee surgery or not, donate blood or not, go sky diving or not. The freedom to
end a pregnancy is part of that physical autonomy.

You may be able to justify forcing a woman to carry a fetus in her womb for
nine months and then endure the pain and physical trauma of delivering a baby
— if you genuinely believe abortion is murder. But I’m pretty sure you don’t.

_Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at
**_www.chicagotribune.com/chapman_**._

_Download “Recalculating: Steve Chapman on a New Century”
atchicagotribune.com/ebooks_

_schapman@chicagotribune.com_

_Twitter @SteveChapman13_

Copyright (C) 2019, Chicago Tribune

    
        * Donald Trump
    

* * *

* * *
    
        * Sports
    * Breaking
    * Business
    * E-newspaper
    * Opinion
    * Entertainment
    * Best Reviews
    * Advertising
    * Death Notices
    

69°

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

