

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# The Holocaust

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Genocide of the European Jews by Nazi Germany and other groups

"Holocaust" and "Shoah" redirect here. For other uses, see Holocaust
(disambiguation) and Shoah (disambiguation).

## The Holocaust

Part of World War II  
![Selection Birkenau

ramp.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/89/Selection_Birkenau_ramp.jpg/300px-

Selection_Birkenau_ramp.jpg)

Hungarian Jews arriving at Auschwitz II-Birkenau in German-occupied Poland,
May 1944. Most were "selected" to go straight to the gas chambers.[1]  
(from the Auschwitz Album)

Location| Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe  
Date| 1941–1945[2]

Attack type

| Genocide, ethnic cleansing  
Deaths|

    
        * Around 6 million European Jews[a]
    * Other victims of Nazi persecution: 11 million[3]
    

Perpetrators| Nazi Germany and its collaborators  
Motive| Antisemitism

**The Holocaust** , also known as **the Shoah** ,[b] was a genocide in German-
occupied Europe between 1941 and 1945 during World War II, in which Nazi
Germany, aided by local collaborators, systematically murdered some six
million Jews, around two-thirds of Europe's Jewish population.[a][c] The
murders were carried out in pogroms and mass shootings; by a policy of
extermination through labour in concentration camps; and in gas chambers and
gas vans in German extermination camps in occupied Poland: Auschwitz, Bełżec,
Chełmno, Majdanek, Sobibór, and Treblinka.[5]

Germany implemented the persecution in stages. Following Adolf Hitler's
appointment as Chancellor in January 1933, the regime built a network of
concentration camps in Germany for political opponents and those deemed
"undesirable", starting with Dachau on 22 March 1933.[6] After the passing of
the Enabling Act on 24 March,[7] which gave Hitler plenary powers, the
government began isolating Jews from civil society, which included a boycott
of Jewish businesses in April 1933, and enacting the Nuremberg Laws in
September 1935. On 9–10 November 1938, during _Kristallnacht_ (the "Night of
Broken Glass"), Jewish businesses and other buildings were ransacked, smashed
or set on fire throughout Germany and Austria, which Germany had annexed in
March that year. After Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, triggering
World War II, the regime set up ghettos to segregate Jews from the rest of the
population. Eventually thousands of camps and other detention sites were
established across German-occupied Europe.

The segregation of Jews in ghettos culminated in the policy of extermination
the Nazis called the "Final Solution to the Jewish Question", discussed by
senior Nazi officials at the Wannsee Conference in Berlin in January 1942. As
German forces captured territories in the East, all anti-Jewish measures were
radicalized. Under the coordination of the SS, with directions from the
highest leadership of the Nazi Party, killings were committed within Germany
itself, throughout occupied Europe, and within territories controlled by
Germany's allies. Paramilitary death squads called _Einsatzgruppen_ , in
cooperation with the _Wehrmacht_ and local collaborators, murdered around 1.3
million Jews in mass shootings and pogroms between 1941 and 1945. By mid-1942,
victims were being deported from ghettos across Europe in sealed freight
trains to extermination camps where, if they survived the journey, they were
worked to death or gassed. The killing continued until the end of World War II
in Europe in May 1945.

Jews were targeted for extermination as part of a larger event during the
Holocaust era, usually defined as beginning in January 1933,[8] in which
Germany and its collaborators persecuted and murdered other groups, including
Slavs (chiefly ethnic Poles, Soviet prisoners of war, and Soviet citizens),
the Roma, the "incurably sick", political and religious dissenters such as
communists and Jehovah's Witnesses, and gay men.[d] Taking into account all
the victims of Nazi persecution, the death toll rises to 17 million.[3]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Terminology and scope
      * 1.1 Terminology
      * 1.2 Definition
    * 2 Distinctive features
      * 2.1 Genocidal state
      * 2.2 Extermination camps and gas chambers
      * 2.3 Collaboration
      * 2.4 Medical experiments
    * 3 Origins
      * 3.1 Antisemitism and the völkisch movement
      * 3.2 Germany after World War I, Hitler's world view
    * 4 Rise of Nazi Germany
      * 4.1 Dictatorship and repression (1933–1939)
      * 4.2 Sterilization Law, _Aktion T4_
      * 4.3 Nuremberg Laws, Jewish emigration
      * 4.4 _Anschluss_
      * 4.5 _Kristallnacht_
      * 4.6 Territorial solution and resettlement
    * 5 World War II
      * 5.1 Occupied countries
        * 5.1.1 Poland
        * 5.1.2 Other occupied countries
        * 5.1.3 Soviet Union
      * 5.2 Germany's allies
        * 5.2.1 Romania
        * 5.2.2 Bulgaria, Slokavia, Hungary
        * 5.2.3 Other allies
      * 5.3 Gas vans
      * 5.4 Ghettos
      * 5.5 Concentration and labor camps
    * 6 Final Solution
      * 6.1 Wannsee Conference
      * 6.2 Extermination camps
      * 6.3 Jewish resistance
      * 6.4 Flow of information about the mass murder
      * 6.5 Climax, Holocaust in Hungary
      * 6.6 Death marches
      * 6.7 Liberation
      * 6.8 Death toll
    * 7 Other victims of Nazi persecution
      * 7.1 Roma
      * 7.2 Ethnic Poles
      * 7.3 Soviet citizens and POWs
      * 7.4 Political and religious opponents
      * 7.5 Gay men
      * 7.6 Black people
    * 8 Aftermath
      * 8.1 Trials
      * 8.2 Reparations
      * 8.3 Motivation
      * 8.4 Uniqueness question
      * 8.5 Awareness
    * 9 See also
    * 10 Sources
      * 10.1 Notes
      * 10.2 Citations
      * 10.3 Works cited
    * 11 External links
    

## Terminology and scope

### Terminology

Main article: Names of the Holocaust

## Part of a series on

The Holocaust  
![Bundesarchiv Bild 183-N0827-318, KZ Auschwitz, Ankunft ungarischer

Juden.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-N0827-318%2C_KZ_Auschwitz%2C_Ankunft_ungarischer_Juden.jpg/180px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-N0827-318%2C_KZ_Auschwitz%2C_Ankunft_ungarischer_Juden.jpg)

Jews on selection ramp at Auschwitz, May 1944

Responsibility

## | Nazi Germany

_People_  
* _Major perpetrators_ * Adolf Hitler * Heinrich Himmler * Heinrich Müller * Reinhard Heydrich * Adolf Eichmann * Odilo Globocnik * Theodor Eicke * Richard Glücks * Ernst Kaltenbrunner * Rudolf Höss * Christian Wirth * Joseph Goebbels  
_Organizations_  
* Nazi Party * Gestapo * _Schutzstaffel_ (SS) * _Totenkopfverbände_ (SS-TV) * _Einsatzgruppen_ * _Sturmabteilung_ (SA) * _Verfügungstruppe_ (SS-VT) * _Wehrmacht_

Collaborators during World War II

Nazi ideologues

Early policies

    
        * Racial policy
    * Nazi eugenics
    * Nuremberg Laws
    * Haavara Agreement
    * Madagascar Plan
    * Forced euthanasia
    

Victims

    
        * Jews during World War II
      * Europe
      * Germany
    * Romani people (Gypsies)
    * Poles
    * Soviet POWs
    * Slavs in Eastern Europe
    * Homosexuals
    * People with disabilities
    * Freemasons
    * Jehovah's Witnesses
    

Ghettos

    
        * Białystok
    * Budapest
    * Kaunas
    * Kraków
    * Łódź
    * Lublin
    * Lwów
    * Minsk
    * Riga
    * Warsaw
    * Vilnius
    

* * *

Jewish ghettos in  
German-occupied Poland

    
        * List of selected ghettos
    

Camps

## | _Nazi extermination camps_

    
        * Auschwitz II-Birkenau
    * Bełżec
    * Chełmno
    * Jasenovac
    * Majdanek
    * Maly Trostenets
    * Sajmište
    * Sobibor
    * Treblinka
    

_Nazi concentration camps_  
* Auschwitz I * Bergen-Belsen * Bogdanovka * Buchenwald * Dachau * Dora * Gonars (Italy) * Gross-Rosen * Herzogenbusch * Janowska * Kaiserwald * Mauthausen-Gusen * Neuengamme * Rab * Ravensbrück * Sachsenhausen * Salaspils * Stutthof * Theresienstadt * Uckermark * Warsaw  
_Transit and collection camps_

Belgium

    
        * Breendonk
    * Mechelen
    

France

    
        * Gurs
    * Drancy
    

Italy

    
        * Bolzano
    

Netherlands

    
        * Amersfoort
    * Westerbork
    

Slovakia

    
        * Sereď
    

_Divisions_  
* _SS-Totenkopfverbände_ * Concentration Camps Inspectorate * _Politische Abteilung_ * _Sanitätswesen_  
_Extermination methods_  
* Gas van * Gas chamber * Extermination through labour * Einsatzgruppen * Human medical experimentation 

Atrocities

## | _Pogroms_

    
        * Kristallnacht
    * Bucharest
    * Dorohoi
    * Iaşi
    * Izieu
    * Szczuczyn
    * Jedwabne
    * Plungė
    * Kaunas
    * Lviv (Lvov)
    * Marseille
    * Tykocin
    * Vel' d'Hiv
    * Wąsosz
    

_Einsatzgruppen_  
* Babi Yar * Bydgoszcz * Częstochowa * Kamianets-Podilskyi * Ninth Fort * Odessa * Piaśnica * Ponary * Rumbula * Erntefest  
_"Final Solution"_  
* Wannsee Conference * Mogilev Conference * Operation "Reinhard" * Holocaust trains * Extermination camps  
_End of World War II_  
* Wola massacre * Death marches 

Resistance

|

    
        * Auschwitz Protocols
      * Vrba–Wetzler report
      * Czesław Mordowicz
      * Jerzy Tabeau
      * Rudolf Vrba
      * Alfréd Wetzler
    * Bricha
    * Jewish partisans
    * _Sonderkommando_ photographs
    * Witold Pilecki
      * Resistance movement in Auschwitz
      * Związek Organizacji Wojskowej
      * Witold's Report
    

* * *

_Ghetto uprisings_  
* Warsaw * Białystok * Łachwa * Częstochowa 

Allied response

Joint Declaration by Members of  
the United Nations

    
        * Auschwitz bombing debate
    * Nuremberg trials
    * Denazification
    

Aftermath

    
        * Bricha
    * Displaced persons
    * Central Committee of the Liberated Jews
    

Reparations Agreement between  
Israel and West Germany

Lists

    
        * Holocaust survivors
    

Deportations of French Jews  
to death camps

    
        * Survivors of Sobibor
    * Timeline of Treblinka extermination camp
    * Victims of Nazism
    * Rescuers of Jews
    * Memorials and museums
    

Resources

    
        * Bibliography
    * List of books about Nazi Germany
    

_The Destruction of the  
European Jews_

    
        * _Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos_
    

Functionalism versus  
intentionalism

Remembrance

    
        * Days of remembrance
    * Memorials and museums
    * Righteous Among the Nations
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

The term _holocaust_ , first used in 1895 to describe the massacre of
Armenians,[9] comes from the Greek: ὁλόκαυστος, romanized: _holókaustos_ ;
ὅλος _hólos_ , "whole" + καυστός _kaustós_ , "burnt offering".[10][e] The
_Century Dictionary_ defined it in 1904 as "a sacrifice or offering entirely
consumed by fire, in use among the Jews and some pagan nations".[f]

The biblical term _shoah_ (Hebrew: שׁוֹאָה), meaning "destruction", became the
standard Hebrew term for the murder of the European Jews, first used in a
pamphlet in 1940, _Sho'at Yehudei Polin_ ("Sho'ah of Polish Jews"), published
by the United Aid Committee for the Jews in Poland.[13] On 3 October 1941 the
cover of the magazine _The American Hebrew_ used the phrase "before the
Holocaust", apparently to refer to the situation in France,[14] and in May
1943 _The New York Times_ , discussing the Bermuda Conference, referred to the
"hundreds of thousands of European Jews still surviving the Nazi
Holocaust".[15] In 1968 the Library of Congress created a new category,
"Holocaust, Jewish (1939–1945)".[16] The term was popularized in the United
States by the NBC mini-series _Holocaust_ (1978), about a fictional family of
German Jews,[17] and in November 1978 the President's Commission on the
Holocaust was established.[18] As non-Jewish groups began to include
themselves as Holocaust victims too, many Jews chose to use the terms _Shoah_
or _Churban_ instead.[14][g] The Nazis used the phrase "Final Solution to the
Jewish Question" (German: _die Endlösung der Judenfrage_ ).[20]

### Definition

Most Holocaust historians define the Holocaust as the enactment, between 1941
and 1945, of the German state policy to exterminate the European Jews.[a] In
_Teaching the Holocaust_ (2015), Michael Gray, a specialist in Holocaust
education,[29] offers three definitions: (a) "the persecution and murder of
Jews by the Nazis and their collaborators between 1933 and 1945", which views
the events of _Kristallnacht_ in Germany in 1938 as an early phase of the
Holocaust; (b) "the systematic mass murder of the Jews by the Nazi regime and
its collaborators between 1941 and 1945", which acknowledges the shift in
German policy in 1941 toward the extermination of the Jewish people in Europe;
and (c) "the persecution and murder of various groups by the Nazi regime and
its collaborators between 1933 and 1945", which includes all the Nazis'
victims. The third definition fails, Gray writes, to acknowledge that only the
Jewish people were singled out for annihilation.[30]

The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum defines the Holocaust as the
"systematic, bureaucratic, state-sponsored persecution and murder of six
million Jews by the Nazi regime and its collaborators",[31] distinguishing
between the Holocaust and the targeting of other groups during "the era of the
Holocaust".[32] According to Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust memorial, most
historians regard the start of the "Holocaust era" as January 1933, when
Hitler was named Chancellor of Germany.[8] Other victims of the Holocaust era
include those viewed as inferior (such as the Roma, ethnic Poles, Russians,
and the disabled); and those targeted because of their beliefs or behavior
(such as Jehovah's Witnesses, communists, and homosexuals).[32] Hitler came to
see the Jews as "uniquely dangerous to Germany", according to Peter Hayes,
"and therefore uniquely destined to disappear completely from the Reich and
all territories subordinate to it". The persecution and murder of other groups
was much less consistent. For example, he writes, the Nazis regarded the Slavs
as "sub-human", but their treatment consisted of "enslavement and gradual
attrition", while "some Slavs—Slovaks, Croats, Bulgarians, some
Ukrainians—[were] allotted a favored place in Hitler's New Order".[22]

Dan Stone, a specialist in the historiography of the Holocaust, lists ethnic
Poles, Ukrainians, Soviet prisoners of war, Jehovah's Witnesses, black
Germans, and homosexuals as among the groups persecuted by the Nazis; he
writes that the occupation of eastern Europe can also be viewed as genocidal.
But the German attitude toward the Jews was different in kind, he argues. The
Nazis regarded the Jews not as racially inferior, deviant, or enemy nationals,
as they did other groups, but as a " _Gegenrasse_ : a 'counter-race', that is
to say, not really human at all". The Holocaust, for Stone, is therefore
defined as the genocide of the Jews, although he argues that it cannot be
"properly historically situated without understanding the 'Nazi empire' with
its grandiose demographic plans".[d] Donald Niewyk and Francis Nicosia, in
_The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust_ (2000), favour a definition that focuses
on the Jews, Roma, and Aktion T4 victims: "The Holocaust—that is, Nazi
genocide—was the systematic, state-sponsored murder of entire groups
determined by heredity. This applied to Jews, Gypsies, and the
handicapped."[34]

## Distinctive features

### Genocidal state

Further information: List of Nazi concentration camps

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/World_War_II_in_Europe%2C_1942.svg/200px-

World_War_II_in_Europe%2C_1942.svg.png)

German-occupied Europe, 1942

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/25/Extermination_camps_in_occupied_Europe_%282007_borders%29.png/200px-

Extermination_camps_in_occupied_Europe_%282007_borders%29.png)

Concentration camps, extermination camps, and ghettos (2007 borders;
extermination camps circled in red)

The logistics of the mass murder turned Germany into what Michael Berenbaum
called a "genocidal state".[35] Eberhard Jäckel wrote in 1986 that it was the
first time a state had thrown its power behind the idea that an entire people
should be wiped out.[h] Anyone with three or four Jewish grandparents was to
be exterminated,[37] and complex rules were devised to deal with _Mischlinge_
("mixed breeds": half and quarter Jews).[38] Bureaucrats identified who was a
Jew, confiscated property, and scheduled trains to deport them. Companies
fired Jews and later used them as slave labor. Universities dismissed Jewish
faculty and students. German pharmaceutical companies tested drugs on camp
prisoners; other companies built the crematoria.[35] As prisoners entered the
death camps, they were ordered to surrender all personal property, which was
catalogued and tagged before being sent to Germany for reuse or recycling.[39]
Through a concealed account, the German National Bank helped launder valuables
stolen from the victims.[40]

### Extermination camps and gas chambers

Further information: § Extermination camps

Victims were transported in sealed freight trains from all over Europe to
extermination camps equipped with gas chambers.[41] The stationary facilities
grew out of Nazi experiments with poison gas during the Aktion T4 mass murder
("euthanasia") programme against the disabled and mentally ill, which began in
1939.[42] The Germans set up six extermination camps in Poland: Auschwitz II-
Birkenau (established October 1941); Majdanek (October 1941); Chełmno
(December 1941); and the three Operation Reinhard camps: Bełżec, Sobibór, and
Treblinka (1942).[5] Discussions at the Wannsee Conference in January 1942
made it clear that the German "final solution of the Jewish question" was
intended eventually to include Britain and all the neutral states in Europe,
including Ireland, Switzerland, Turkey, Sweden, Portugal, and Spain.[43]

### Collaboration

Main articles: Responsibility for the Holocaust, Collaboration with the Axis
Powers, German-occupied Europe, and Resistance during World War II

Historians increasingly view the Holocaust as a pan-European phenomenon, or a
series of holocausts impossible to conduct without the help of local
collaborators.[44][45] The industrialization and scale of the murder was
unprecedented. Killings were systematically conducted in virtually all areas
of occupied Europe—more than 20 occupied countries.[46] Close to three million
Jews in occupied Poland and between 700,000 and 2.5 million Jews in the Soviet
Union were killed. Hundreds of thousands more died in the rest of Europe.[47]
Before the death camps were erected, the mass murder in the east, according to
Timothy Snyder, "required tens of thousands of participants and was witnessed
by hundreds of thousands of people".[48]

    
            Without collaborators, the Germans would not have been able to extend the Holocaust across most of the continent. Donald Bloxham writes that in many parts of Europe "extreme collective violence was becoming an accepted measure of resolving identity crises. ... The Third Reich was a product of the continent as well as the most destructive shaper of it."[49] Some Christian churches tried to defend the Jews by declaring that converted Jews were "part of the flock," according to Saul Friedländer, "but even then only up to a point". Otherwise, Friedländer writes, "[n]ot one social group, not one religious community, not one scholarly institution or professional association in Germany and throughout Europe declared its solidarity with the Jews."[50]
    

### Medical experiments

Main articles: Nazi human experimentation and Doctors' trial

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Doctors%27_trial%2C_Nuremberg%2C_1946%E2%80%931947.jpg/220px-

Doctors%27_trial%2C_Nuremberg%2C_1946%E2%80%931947.jpg)

The 23 defendants during the Doctors' trial, Nuremberg, 9 December 1946 – 20
August 1947

Medical experiments conducted on camp inmates by the SS were another
distinctive feature.[51] At least 7,000 prisoners were subjected to
experiments; most died as a result, during the experiments or later.[52]
Twenty-three senior physicians and other medical personnel were charged at
Nuremberg, after the war, with crimes against humanity. They included the head
of the German Red Cross, tenured professors, clinic directors, and biomedical
researchers.[53] Experiments took place at Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Dachau,
Natzweiler-Struthof, Neuengamme, Ravensbrück, Sachsenhausen, and elsewhere.
Some dealt with sterilization of men and women, the treatment of war wounds,
ways to counteract chemical weapons, research into new vaccines and drugs, and
the survival of harsh conditions.[52]

The most notorious physician was Josef Mengele, an SS officer who became the
Auschwitz camp doctor on 30 May 1943.[54] Interested in genetics[54] and keen
to experiment on twins, he would pick out subjects from the new arrivals
during "selection" on the ramp, shouting " _Zwillinge heraus!_ " (twins step
forward!).[55] They would be measured, killed, and dissected. One of Mengele's
assistants said in 1946 that he was told to send organs of interest to the
directors of the "Anthropological Institute in Berlin-Dahlem". This is thought
to refer to Mengele's academic supervisor, Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer,
director from October 1942 of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Anthropology,
Human Heredity, and Eugenics in Berlin-Dahlem.[56][55][i] Mengele's
experiments included placing subjects in pressure chambers, testing drugs on
them, freezing them, attempting to change their eye color by injecting
chemicals into children's eyes, and amputations and other surgeries.[59]

## Origins

### Antisemitism and the völkisch movement

See also: History of the Jews in Germany, Christianity and antisemitism,
Martin Luther and antisemitism, Religious antisemitism, and Racial
antisemitism

Throughout the Middle Ages in Europe, Jews were subjected to antisemitism
based on Christian theology, which blamed them for killing Jesus. Even after
the Reformation, Catholicism and Lutheranism continued to persecute Jews,
accusing them of blood libels and subjecting them to pogroms and
expulsions.[60][61] The second half of the 19th century saw the emergence in
the German empire and Austria-Hungary of the _völkisch_ movement, which was
developed by such thinkers as Houston Stewart Chamberlain and Paul de Lagarde.
The movement embraced a pseudo-scientific racism that viewed Jews as a race
whose members were locked in mortal combat with the Aryan race for world
domination.[62] These ideas became commonplace throughout Germany,[63] with
the professional classes adopting an ideology that did not see humans as
racial equals with equal hereditary value.[64] Although the _völkisch_ parties
had support in elections at first, by 1914 they were no longer influential.
This did not mean that antisemitism had disappeared; instead it was
incorporated into the platforms of several mainstream political parties.[63]

### Germany after World War I, Hitler's world view

Further information: Treaty of Versailles; Adolf Hitler, antisemitism and the
Holocaust; and Historiography of Adolf Hitler

The political situation in Germany and elsewhere in Europe after World War I
(1914–1918) contributed to the rise of virulent antisemitism. Many Germans did
not accept that their country had been defeated, which gave birth to the stab-
in-the-back myth. This insinuated that it was disloyal politicians, chiefly
Jews and communists, who had orchestrated Germany's surrender. Inflaming the
anti-Jewish sentiment was the apparent over-representation of Jews in the
leadership of communist revolutionary governments in Europe, such as Ernst
Toller, head of a short-lived revolutionary government in Bavaria. This
perception contributed to the canard of Jewish Bolshevism.[65]

The economic strains of the Great Depression led some in the German medical
establishment to advocate murder (euphemistically called "euthanasia") of the
"incurable" mentally and physically disabled as a cost-saving measure to free
up funds for the curable.[66] By the time the National Socialist German
Workers' Party, or Nazi Party,[j] came to power in 1933, there was already a
tendency to seek to save the racially "valuable", while ridding society of the
racially "undesirable".[68] The party had originated in 1920[67] as an
offshoot of the _völkisch_ movement, and it adopted that movement's
antisemitism.[69] Early antisemites in the party included Dietrich Eckart,
publisher of the _Völkischer Beobachter_ , the party's newspaper, and Alfred
Rosenberg, who wrote antisemitic articles for it in the 1920s. Rosenberg's
vision of a secretive Jewish conspiracy ruling the world would influence
Hitler's views of Jews by making them the driving force behind communism.[70]
The origin and first expression of Hitler's antisemitism remain a matter of
debate.[71] Central to his world view was the idea of expansion and
_lebensraum_ (living space) for Germany. Open about his hatred of Jews, he
subscribed to the common antisemitic stereotypes.[72] From the early 1920s
onwards, he compared the Jews to germs and said they should be dealt with in
the same way. He viewed Marxism as a Jewish doctrine, said he was fighting
against "Jewish Marxism", and believed that Jews had created communism as part
of a conspiracy to destroy Germany.[73]

## Rise of Nazi Germany

### Dictatorship and repression (1933–1939)

Further information: Anti-Jewish legislation in prewar Nazi Germany, Racial
policy of Nazi Germany, and Haavara Agreement

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Bundesarchiv_Bild_102-14469%2C_Berlin%2C_Boykott-

Posten_vor_j%C3%BCdischem_Warenhaus.jpg/260px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_102-14469%2C_Berlin%2C_Boykott-

Posten_vor_j%C3%BCdischem_Warenhaus.jpg)

Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses: SA troopers urge a boycott outside Israel's
Department Store, Berlin, 1 April 1933. All signs read: "Germans! Defend
yourselves! Don't buy from Jews."[74]

With the appointment in January 1933 of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of Germany,
and the Nazi's completed seizure of power, German leaders proclaimed the
rebirth of the _Volksgemeinschaft_ ("people's community").[75] Nazi policies
divided the population into two groups: the _Volksgenossen_ ("national
comrades") who belonged to the _Volksgemeinschaft_ , and the
_Gemeinschaftsfremde_ ("community aliens") who did not. Enemies were divided
into three groups: the "racial" or "blood" enemies, such as the Jews and Roma;
political opponents of Nazism, such as Marxists, liberals, Christians, and the
"reactionaries" viewed as wayward "national comrades"; and moral opponents,
such as gay men, the work-shy, and habitual criminals. The latter two groups
were to be sent to concentration camps for "re-education", with the aim of
eventual absorption into the _Volksgemeinschaft_. "Racial" enemies could never
belong to the _Volksgemeinschaft_ ; they were to be removed from society.[76]

Before and after the March 1933 _Reichstag_ elections, the Nazis intensified
their campaign of violence against opponents.[77] They set up concentration
camps for extrajudicial imprisonment.[78] One of the first, at Dachau, opened
on 9 March 1933.[79] Initially the camp contained mostly Communists and Social
Democrats.[80] Other early prisons were consolidated by mid-1934 into purpose-
built camps outside the cities, run exclusively by the SS.[81] The initial
purpose of the camps was to serve as a deterrent by terrorizing Germans who
did not conform.[82]

Throughout the 1930s, the legal, economic, and social rights of Jews were
steadily restricted.[83] On 1 April 1933, there was a boycott of Jewish
businesses.[84] On 7 April 1933, the Law for the Restoration of the
Professional Civil Service was passed, which excluded Jews and other "non-
Aryans" from the civil service.[85] Jews were disbarred from practising law,
being editors or proprietors of newspapers, joining the Journalists'
Association, or owning farms.[86] In Silesia, in March 1933, a group of men
entered the courthouse and beat up Jewish lawyers; Friedländer writes that, in
Dresden, Jewish lawyers and judges were dragged out of courtrooms during
trials.[87] Jewish students were restricted by quotas from attending schools
and universities.[85] Jewish businesses were targeted for closure or
"Aryanization", the forcible sale to Germans; of the approximately 50,000
Jewish-owned businesses in Germany in 1933, about 7,000 were still Jewish-
owned in April 1939. Works by Jewish composers,[88] authors, and artists were
excluded from publications, performances, and exhibitions.[89] Jewish doctors
were dismissed or urged to resign. The _Deutsches Ärzteblatt_ (a medical
journal) reported on 6 April 1933: "Germans are to be treated by Germans
only."[90]

### Sterilization Law, _Aktion T4_

Main article: Aktion T4

Further information: Nazi eugenics and Erbkrank

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9b/Neues_Volk_eugenics_poster%2C_c._1937_%28brightened%29.jpeg/200px-

Neues_Volk_eugenics_poster%2C_c._1937_%28brightened%29.jpeg)

The poster reads: "60,000 RM is what this person with hereditary illness costs
the community in his lifetime. Fellow citizen, that is your money too. Read
_Neues Volk_ , the monthly magazine of the Office of Racial Policy of the
NSDAP."[91]

The Nazis used the phrase _Lebensunwertes Leben_ (life unworthy of life) in
reference to the disabled and mentally ill.[92] On 14 July 1933, the Law for
the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring ( _Gesetz zur Verhütung
erbkranken Nachwuchses_ ), the Sterilization Law, was passed, allowing for
compulsory sterilization.[93][94] The _New York Times_ reported on 21 December
that year: "400,000 Germans to be sterilized"..[95] There were 84,525
applications from doctors in the first year. The courts reached a decision in
64,499 of those cases; 56,244 were in favor of sterilization.[96] Estimates
for the number of involuntary sterilizations during the whole of the Third
Reich range from 300,000 to 400,000.[97]

In October 1939 Hitler signed a "euthanasia decree" backdated to 1 September
1939 that authorized _Reichsleiter_ Philipp Bouhler, the chief of Hitler's
Chancellery, and Karl Brandt, Hitler's personal physician, to carry out a
program of involuntary "euthanasia"; after the war this program was named
_Aktion T4_.[98] It was named after Tiergartenstraße 4, the address of a villa
in the Berlin borough of Tiergarten, where the various organizations involved
were headquartered.[99] T4 was mainly directed at adults, but the "euthanasia"
of children was also carried out.[100] Between 1939 and 1941, 80,000 to
100,000 mentally ill adults in institutions were killed, as were 5,000
children and 1,000 Jews, also in institutions. In addition there were
specialized killing centres, where the deaths were estimated at 20,000,
according to Georg Renno, the deputy director of Schloss Hartheim, one of the
"euthanasia" centers, or 400,000, according to Frank Zeireis, the commandant
of the Mauthausen concentration camp.[101] Overall, the number of mentally and
physically handicapped murdered was about 150,000.[102]

Although not ordered to take part, psychiatrists and many psychiatric
institutions were involved in the planning and carrying out of _Aktion T4_ at
every stage.[103] After protests from the German Catholic and Protestant
churches, Hitler ordered the cancellation of the T4 program in August
1941,[104] although the disabled and mentally ill continued to be killed until
the end of the war.[102] The medical community regularly received bodies and
body parts for research. Eberhard Karl University received 1,077 bodies from
executions between 1933 and 1945. The neuroscientist Julius Hallervorden
received 697 brains from one hospital between 1940 and 1944: "I accepted these
brains of course. Where they came from and how they came to me was really none
of my business."[105]

### Nuremberg Laws, Jewish emigration

Main article: Nuremberg Laws

See also: Jews escaping from German-occupied Europe to the United Kingdom

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/10/Jewish_refugees_at_Croydon_airport_1939.jpg/220px-

Jewish_refugees_at_Croydon_airport_1939.jpg)

Czechoslovakian Jews at Croydon airport, England, 31 March 1939, before
deportation to Poland[106]

On 15 September 1935, the _Reichstag_ passed the _Reich_ Citizenship Law and
the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honor, known as the
Nuremberg Laws. The former said that only those of "German or kindred blood"
could be citizens. Anyone with three or more Jewish grandparents was
classified as a Jew.[107] The second law said: "Marriages between Jews and
subjects of the state of German or related blood are forbidden." Sexual
relationships between them were also criminalized; Jews were not allowed to
employ German women under the age of 45 in their homes.[108] The laws referred
to Jews but applied equally to the Roma and black Germans.[107]

Fifty thousand German Jews had left Germany by the end of 1934,[109] and by
the end of 1938, approximately half the German Jewish population had left the
country.[110] Among the prominent Jews who left was the conductor Bruno
Walter, who fled after being told that the hall of the Berlin Philharmonic
would be burned down if he conducted a concert there.[111] Albert Einstein,
who was in the United States when Hitler came to power, never returned to
Germany; he was expelled from the Kaiser Wilhelm Society and the Prussian
Academy of Sciences and his citizenship was revoked.[112] Other Jewish
scientists, including Gustav Hertz, lost their teaching positions and left the
country.[113]

### _Anschluss_

Main article: Anschluss

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/03741Vienna1938.jpg/220px-03741Vienna1938.jpg)

March or April 1938: Jews are forced to scrub the pavement in Vienna.

On 12 March 1938, Germany annexed Austria. Austrian Nazis broke into Jewish
shops, stole from Jewish homes and businesses, and forced Jews to perform
humiliating acts such as scrubbing the streets or cleaning toilets.[114]
Jewish businesses were "Aryanized", and all the legal restrictions on Jews in
Germany were imposed.[115] In August that year, Adolf Eichmann was put in
charge of the Central Agency for Jewish Emigration in Vienna ( _Zentralstelle
für jüdische Auswanderung in Wien_ ). About 100,000 Austrian Jews had left the
country by May 1939, including Sigmund Freud and his family, who moved to
London.[116] The Évian Conference was held in France in July 1938 by 32
countries, as an attempt to help the increased refugees from Germany, but
aside from establishing the largely ineffectual Intergovernmental Committee on
Refugees, little was accomplished and most countries participating did not
increase the number of refugees they would accept.[117]

### _Kristallnacht_

Main article: Kristallnacht

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/53/Le_M%C3%A9morial_aux_juifs_assassin%C3%A9s_dEurope_%28Berlin%29_%282704805986%29.jpg/240px-

Le_M%C3%A9morial_aux_juifs_assassin%C3%A9s_dEurope_%28Berlin%29_%282704805986%29.jpg)

Potsdamer Straße 26, Berlin, the day after _Kristallnacht_ , November 1938

On 7 November 1938, Herschel Grynszpan, a Polish Jew, shot the German diplomat
Ernst vom Rath in the German Embassy in Paris, in retaliation for the
expulsion of his parents and siblings from Germany.[118][k] When vom Rath died
on 9 November, the government used his death as a pretext to instigate a
pogrom against the Jews. The government claimed it was spontaneous, but in
fact it had been ordered and planned by Adolf Hitler and Joseph Goebbels,
although with no clear goals, according to David Cesarani. The result, he
writes, was "murder, rape, looting, destruction of property, and terror on an
unprecedented scale".[120]

Known as _Kristallnacht_ (or "Night of Broken Glass"), the attacks on 9–10
November 1938 were partly carried out by the SS and SA,[121] but ordinary
Germans joined in; in some areas, the violence began before the SS or SA
arrived.[122] Over 7,500 Jewish shops (out of 9,000) were looted and attacked,
and over 1,000 synagogues damaged or destroyed. Groups of Jews were forced by
the crowd to watch their synagogues burn; in Bensheim they were made to dance
around it, and in Laupheim to kneel before it.[123] At least 90 Jews died. The
damage was estimated at 39 million Reichmarks.[124] Cesarani writes that
"[t]he extent of the desolation stunned the population and rocked the
regime."[125] Thirty-thousand Jews were sent to the Dachau, Buchenwald and
Sachsenhausen concentration camps.[126] Many were released within weeks; by
early 1939, 2,000 remained in the camps.[127] German Jewry was held
collectively responsible for restitution of the damage; they also had to pay
an "atonement tax" of over a billion Reichmarks. Insurance payments for damage
to their property were confiscated by the government. A decree on 12 November
1938 barred Jews from most remaining occupations.[128] _Kristallnacht_ marked
the end of any sort of public Jewish activity and culture, and Jews stepped up
their efforts to leave the country.[129]

### Territorial solution and resettlement

Further information: Madagascar Plan

Before World War II, Germany considered mass deportation from Europe of
German, and later European, Jewry.[130] Among the areas considered for
possible resettlement were British Palestine[131] and French Madagascar.[132]
After the war began, German leaders considered deporting Europe's Jews to
Siberia.[133][134] Palestine was the only location to which any German
relocation plan produced results, via the Haavara Agreement between the
Zionist Federation of Germany and the German government.[135] This resulted in
the transfer of about 60,000 German Jews and $100 million from Germany to
Palestine, but it ended with the outbreak of World War II.[136] In May 1940
Madagascar became the focus of new deportation efforts[132] because it had
unfavorable living conditions that would hasten deaths.[137] Several German
leaders had discussed the idea in 1938, and Adolf Eichmann's office was
ordered to carry out resettlement planning, but no evidence of planning exists
until after the fall of France in June 1940.[138] But the inability to defeat
Britain prevented the movement of Jews across the seas,[139] and the end of
the Madagascar Plan was announced on 10 February 1942.[140]

## World War II

### Occupied countries

#### Poland

Main articles: Holocaust in Poland, ghettos, and camps

Further information: Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, Invasion of Poland, Occupation
of Poland, Jews in Poland, and Collaboration in Poland

Further information: Jedwabne pogrom, Lviv pogroms, Szczuczyn pogrom, and
Wąsosz pogrom

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-H27915%2C_Danzig%2C_Enfernen_eines_polnischen_Hoheitszeichens.jpg/200px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-H27915%2C_Danzig%2C_Enfernen_eines_polnischen_Hoheitszeichens.jpg)

The _Wehrmacht_ removes Polish government signs, Gdynia, Poland, September
1939

There were pogroms in around 100 towns in Poland between 1935 and 1937,[141]
before the German invasion in 1939. Organized by Polish nationalists—including
the ONR-Falanga, Camp of Great Poland, the National Party and the Camp of
National Unity—the attacks saw Jewish students beaten and excluded, and Jewish
businesses boycotted.[142] Three Jewish students were killed in 1937 in Lwów
(which was 40 percent Jewish),[143] and in May 1937, anti-Jewish rioting took
place in Kobryn, Terespol, and Czernowczyce, near Brzesc, after a Jewish man
killed a police officer.[144][45]

When Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, it gained control of about
two million Jews in the occupied territory. The rest of Poland, with a pre-war
population of 3.3–3.5 million Jews, was occupied by the Soviet Union, which
invaded Poland from the east on 17 September 1939.[145] German plans for
Poland included expelling gentile Poles from large areas, confining Jews, and
settling Germans on the emptied lands.[146] The Germans initiated a policy of
sending Jews from all territories they had recently annexed (Austria,
Czechoslovakia, and western Poland) to the central section of Poland, which
they called the _Generalgouvernement_. There, the Jews were concentrated in
ghettos in major cities,[147] chosen for their railway lines to facilitate
later deportation.[148] Food supplies were restricted, public hygiene was
difficult, and the inhabitants were often subjected to forced labor.[149] In
the work camps and ghettos, at least half a million Jews died of starvation,
disease, and poor living conditions.[150] Jeremy Black writes that the ghettos
were not intended, in 1939, as a step towards the extermination of the Jews.
Instead, they were viewed as part of a policy of creating a territorial
reservation to contain them.[151][l]

During the Lviv pogroms in Lwów, Poland (now Lviv, Ukraine), in June and July
1941, some 6,000 Polish Jews were murdered in the streets, on top of 3,000
arrests and mass shootings by _Einsatzgruppe C_.[161] During the Jedwabne
pogrom, on 10 July 1941, a group of Poles in Jedwabne killed the town's Jewish
community (some 1,600 men, women and children, according to Jan T. Gross),
including several hundred who were burned alive in a barn.[162] The attack may
have been engineered by the German Security Police.[163] A long debate about
who was responsible for the murders was triggered in 2001 by the publication
of Gross's book _Neighbors: The Destruction of the Jewish Community in
Jedwabne, Poland_.[164]

#### Other occupied countries

Main articles: Rescue of the Danish Jews, Holocaust in Norway, in Belgium, in
Luxembourg, in Serbia, in Croatia, in the Netherlands, and in France

Further information: The Diary of Anne Frank and Deportation of French Jews to
death camps

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/40/Germans_in_Oslo_9_April_1940.jpg/240px-

Germans_in_Oslo_9_April_1940.jpg)

German troops in Oslo, 9 April 1940

Germany invaded Norway and Denmark on 9 April 1940, during Operation
Weserübung. Denmark was overrun so quickly that there was no time for an
organized resistance to form. Consequently, the Danish government stayed in
power and the Germans found it easier to work through it. Because of this, few
measures were taken against the Danish Jews before 1942.[165] By June 1940
Norway was completely occupied.[166] In late 1940, the country's 1,800 Jews
were banned from certain occupations, and in 1941 all Jews had to register
their property with the government.[167] On 26 November 1942, 532 Jews were
taken by police officers, at four o'clock in the morning, to Oslo harbour,
where they boarded a German ship. From Germany they were sent by freight train
to Auschwitz. According to Dan Stone, only nine survived the war.[168]

In May 1940, Germany invaded the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Belgium, and France.
After Belgium's surrender, it was ruled by a German military governor,
Alexander von Falkenhausen, who enacted anti-Jewish measures against the
country's 90,000 Jews, many of whom were refugees from Germany or Eastern
Europe.[169]

In the Netherlands, the Germans installed Arthur Seyss-Inquart as
_Reichskommissar_ , who began to persecute the country's 140,000 Jews. Jews
were forced out of their jobs and had to register with the government. In
February 1941, non-Jewish Dutch citizens staged a strike in protest that was
quickly crushed.[170] From July 1942, over 107,000 Dutch Jews were deported;
only 5,000 survived the war. Most were sent to the extermination camp at
Auschwitz; the first transport of 1,135 Jews left Holland for Auschwitz on 15
July 1942. Between 2 March and 20 July 1943, 34,313 Jews were sent in 19
transports to the Sobibór extermination camp, where all but 18 are thought to
have been gassed on arrival.[171]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-N0619-506%2C_Paris%2C_J%C3%BCdische_Frauen_mit_Stern.jpg/170px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_183-N0619-506%2C_Paris%2C_J%C3%BCdische_Frauen_mit_Stern.jpg)

Jewish women wearing yellow badges in occupied Paris, June 1942

France had approximately 300,000 Jews, divided between the German-occupied
north and the unoccupied collaborationist southern areas in Vichy France
(named after the town Vichy). The occupied regions were under the control of a
military governor, and there, anti-Jewish measures were not enacted as quickly
as they were in the Vichy-controlled areas.[172] In July 1940, the Jews in the
parts of Alsace-Lorraine that had been annexed to Germany were expelled into
Vichy France.[173] Vichy France's government implemented anti-Jewish measures
in French Algeria and the two French Protectorates of Tunisia and
Morocco.[174] Tunisia had 85,000 Jews when the Germans and Italians arrived in
November 1942; an estimated 5,000 Jews were subjected to forced labor.[175]

Yugoslavia and Greece were invaded in April 1941 and surrendered before the
end of the month. Germany and Italy divided Greece into occupation zones but
did not eliminate it as a country. Yugoslavia, home to around 80,000 Jews, was
dismembered; regions in the north were annexed by Germany and regions along
the coast made part of Italy. The rest of the country was divided into the
Independent State of Croatia, nominally an ally of Germany, and Serbia, which
was governed by a combination of military and police administrators.[176]
According to historian Jeremy Black, Serbia was declared free of Jews in
August 1942.[177] Croatia's ruling party, the Ustashe, killed the country's
Jews, and killed or expelled Orthodox Christian Serbs and Muslims.[176] Jews
and Serbs alike were "hacked to death and burned in barns", according to
Black. One difference between the Germans and Croatians was that the Ustashe
allowed its Jewish and Serbian victims to convert to Catholicism so they could
escape death.[177]

#### Soviet Union

Main article: Invasion of the Soviet Union

Further information: The Holocaust in Russia, in Belarus, in Ukraine, in
Latvia, in Lithuania, in Estonia, and Collaboration in the Soviet Union

Further information: Babi Yar, Rumbula massacre, Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre,
Ponary massacre, and Kaunas pogrom

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e8/Einsatzgruppe_shooting.jpg/240px-

Einsatzgruppe_shooting.jpg)

_Einsatzgruppe_ shooting women and children from the Mizocz Ghetto, Poland, 14
October 1942

Germany invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, a day Timothy Snyder calls
"one of the most significant days in the history of Europe ... the beginning
of a calamity that defies description".[178] By the end of 1941,
500,000–800,000 Jews had been killed. According to Jürgen Matthäus, between
the early fall 1941 and late spring 1942, 2–3.5 million captured Soviet
soldiers had been executed or had died of neglect and abuse: "By the time of
their final withdrawal in 1944, the Germans had destroyed most of the
infrastructure of the occupied territory, burned thousands of villages, and
depopulated vast areas. Total Soviet losses are difficult to estimate, but a
figure of at least twenty million seems likely."[179]

German propaganda portrayed the war against the Soviet Union as both an
ideological one between German National Socialism and Jewish Bolshevism, and a
racial war between the Germans and the Jewish, Romani and Slavic
_Untermenschen_ ("sub-humans").[180] Local populations in some occupied Soviet
territories actively participated in the killing of Jews and others, and
helped identify and round up Jews.[181] German involvement ranged from active
instigation and involvement to general guidance.[182] In Lithuania, Latvia,
and western Ukraine, locals were deeply involved in the murder of Jews from
the beginning of the German occupation. Some of these Latvian and Lithuanian
units also participated in the murder of Jews in Belarus. In the south,
Ukrainians killed about 24,000 Jews and some went to Poland to serve as
concentration and death-camp guards.[181]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/LiepajaLatvia1941.jpg/220px-

LiepajaLatvia1941.jpg)

Members of a Latvian Auxiliary Police unit assemble a group of Jewish women
for execution on a beach near Liepāja, 15 December 1941

The mass killings of Jews in the occupied Soviet territories were assigned to
four SS formations called _Einsatzgruppen_ ("task groups"), which were under
Heydrich's overall command.[183] The _Einsatzgruppen_ 's commanders were
ordinary citizens: the great majority were professionals and most were
intellectuals.[184] By the winter of 1941–1942, the four _Einsatzgruppen_ and
their helpers had murdered almost 500,000 people.[185] In the Kamianets-
Podilskyi massacre, nearly 24,000 Jews were killed between 27 and 30 August
1941.[179] The largest massacre was at a ravine called Babi Yar outside Kiev,
Ukraine (then part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), where 33,771
Jews were killed in a single operation on 29–30 September 1941.[186][m] A
mixture of SS and Security Police, assisted by Ukrainian police, carried out
the killings.[188] Although they did not actively participate in the killings,
men of the German 6th Army helped round up the Jews of Kiev and transport them
to be shot.[189] By the end of the war, around two million are thought to have
been victims of the _Einsatzgruppen_ and their collaborators in the local
population and German Army. Of those, about 1.3 million were Jews; up to a
quarter of a million were Roma.[190]

### Germany's allies

Further information: Axis powers

#### Romania

Main articles: The Holocaust in Romania, Bucharest pogrom, Iaşi pogrom, 1941
Odessa massacre, and Dorohoi Pogrom

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Death_train_from_Ia%C5%9Fi.jpg/240px-

Death_train_from_Ia%C5%9Fi.jpg)

Bodies being pulled out of a train carrying Romanian Jews from the Iași
pogrom, July 1941

Dan Stone writes that, although the murder of Jews in Romania took place under
the umbrella of the Nazis, it was "essentially an independent
undertaking".[191] Romania implemented anti-Jewish measures in May and June
1940 as part of its efforts towards an alliance with Germany. Jews were forced
from government service, pogroms were carried out, and by March 1941 all Jews
had lost their jobs and had their property confiscated.[192] In June 1941
Romania joined the invasion of the Soviet Union. Thousands of Jews were killed
in January and June 1941 in the Bucharest pogrom and Iaşi pogrom.[193]
According to a 2004 report by Tuvia Friling and others, up to 14,850 Jews died
during the Iaşi pogrom.[194] The Romanian military killed up to 25,000 Jews
during the Odessa massacre between 18 October 1941 and March 1942, assisted by
gendarmes and the police.[195] Mihai Antonescu, Romania's deputy prime
minister, was reported to have said it was "the most favorable moment in our
history" to solve the "Jewish problem".[196] In July 1941 he said it was time
for "total ethnic purification, for a revision of national life, and for
purging our race of all those elements which are foreign to its soul, which
have grown like mistletoes and darken our future".[197] Romania set up
concentration camps under its control in Transnistria, where 154,000–170,000
Jews were deported from 1941 to 1943.[192]

#### Bulgaria, Slokavia, Hungary

Further information: The Holocaust in Bulgaria, in Slovakia, and in Hungary

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/%C4%BDudov%C3%A9_noviny_1941.jpg/220px-%C4%BDudov%C3%A9_noviny_1941.jpg)

A Slovakian propaganda ministry's publication, _Ľudové noviny_ , 21 September
1941: "Už odbilo Židom! Najprísnejšie rasové zákony na Židov sú slovenské"
("We've dealt with the Jews! The strictest anti-Jewish laws are Slovakian")

Bulgaria introduced anti-Jewish measures in 1940 and 1941, including the
requirement to wear a yellow star, the banning of mixed marriages, and the
loss of property. It annexed Thrace and Macedonia, and in February 1943 agreed
to deport 20,000 Jews to Treblinka; all 11,000 Jews from the annexed
territories were sent to their deaths, and plans were made to deport an
additional 6,000–8,000 Bulgarian Jews from Sofia to meet the quota.[198] When
the plans became public, the Orthodox Church and many Bulgarians protested,
and King Boris III canceled the deportation of Jews native to Bulgaria.[199]
Instead, they were expelled to the interior pending further decision.[198]

Dan Stone writes that Slovakia, led by Roman Catholic priest Jozef Tiso
(president of the Slovak State, 1939–1945), was "one of the most loyal of the
collaborationist regimes". It deported 7,500 Jews in 1938 on its own
initiative; introduced anti-Jewish measures in 1940; and by the autumn of 1942
had deported around 60,000 Jews to ghettos and concentration camps in Poland.
Another 2,396 were deported and 2,257 killed that autumn during an uprising,
and 13,500 were deported between October 1944 and March 1945.[200] According
to Stone, "the Holocaust in Slovakia was far more than a German project, even
if it was carried out in the context of a 'puppet' state."[201]

Although Hungary expelled Jews who were not citizens from its newly annexed
lands in 1941, it did not deport most of its Jews[202] until the German
invasion of Hungary in March 1944. Between 15 May and 9 July 1944, 440,000
Hungarian Jews were deported to Auschwitz.[203] In late 1944 in Budapest,
nearly 80,000 Jews were killed by the Hungarian Arrow Cross battalions.[204]

#### Other allies

Further information: The Holocaust in Italy, in Italian Libya, and in Finland

See also: Jewish settlement in Japan

Italy introduced some antisemitic measures, but there was less antisemitism
there than in Germany, and Italian-occupied countries were generally safer for
Jews than German-occupied territories. In some areas, the Italian authorities
even tried to protect Jews, such as in the Croatian areas of the Balkans. But
while Italian forces in Russia were not as vicious towards Jews as the
Germans, they did not try to stop German atrocities either. There were no
deportations of Italian Jews to Germany while Italy remained an ally.[205]
Several forced labor camps for Jews were established in Italian-controlled
Libya. Almost 2,600 Libyan Jews were sent to camps, where 562 died.[206]

Finland was pressured in 1942 to hand over its 150–200 non-Finnish Jews to
Germany. After opposition from the government and public, eight non-Finnish
Jews were deported in late 1942; only one survived the war.[207] Japan had
little antisemitism in its society and did not persecute Jews in most of the
territories it controlled. Jews in Shanghai were confined, but despite German
pressure they were not killed.[208]

### Gas vans

Main article: Gas van

As the mass shootings continued in Russia, the Germans began to search for
more efficient methods of mass murder. Himmler and his subordinates in the
field feared that the shootings were causing psychological problems in the
SS.[209] In December 1939 and January 1940, experimental gas vans equipped
with gas cylinders and a sealed compartment were used to kill the disabled and
mentally-ill in occupied Poland.[210] Similar vans, but using the exhaust
fumes rather than bottled gas, were introduced to the Chełmno extermination
camp in December 1941,[211] and some were used in the occupied Soviet Union,
for example in smaller clearing actions in the Minsk ghetto.[212] They also
were used in Yugoslavia.[213] Apparently, like the mass shootings, the vans
also caused emotional problems for the operators, and the small number of
victims the vans could handle made them ineffective.[214]

### Ghettos

Main articles: Ghettos in Nazi-occupied Europe, Jewish ghettos in German-
occupied Poland, and List of Nazi-era ghettos

    
        _Main ghettos:Białystok, Budapest, Kraków, Kovno, Łódź, Lvov, Riga, Vilna, Warsaw._
    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c6/Bundesarchiv_Bild_101I-134-0771A-39%2C_Polen%2C_Ghetto_Warschau%2C_Kind_in_Lumpen.jpg/220px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_101I-134-0771A-39%2C_Polen%2C_Ghetto_Warschau%2C_Kind_in_Lumpen.jpg)

Warsaw Ghetto, May 1941

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/50/Zw%C5%82oki_dzieci_getto_warszawskie_05.jpg/220px-

Zw%C5%82oki_dzieci_getto_warszawskie_05.jpg)

Bodies of children in the Warsaw Ghetto, 1941 or 1942

After invading Poland, the Germans established ghettos in the incorporated
territories and General Government to confine Jews.[147] The ghettos were
formed and closed off from the outside world at different times and for
different reasons.[215][216] For example, the Łódź ghetto was closed in April
1940,[147] to force the Jews inside to give up money and valuables;[217] the
Warsaw ghetto was closed for health considerations (for the people outside,
not inside, the ghetto),[218] but this did not happen until November
1940;[147] and the Kraków ghetto was not established until March 1941.[219]
The Warsaw Ghetto contained 380,000 people[147] and was the largest ghetto in
Poland; the Łódź Ghetto was the second largest,[220] holding between
160,000[221] to 223,000.[222] Because of the long drawn-out process of
establishing ghettos, it is unlikely that they were originally considered part
of a systematic attempt to eliminate Jews completely.[223]

The Germans required each ghetto to be run by a _Judenrat_ , or Jewish
council.[224] Councils were responsible for a ghetto's day-to-day operations,
including distributing food, water, heat, medical care, and shelter. The
Germans also required councils to confiscate property, organize forced labor,
and, finally, facilitate deportations to extermination camps.[225] The
councils' basic strategy was one of trying to minimize losses, by cooperating
with German authorities, bribing officials, and petitioning for better
conditions or clemency.[226]

Eventually, the Germans ordered the councils to compile lists of names of
deportees to be sent for "resettlement".[227] Although most ghetto councils
complied with these orders,[228] many councils tried to send the least useful
workers or those unable to work.[229] Leaders who refused these orders were
shot. Some individuals or even complete councils committed suicide rather than
cooperate with the deportations.[230] Others, like Chaim Rumkowski, who became
the "dedicated autocrat" of Łódź,[231] argued that their responsibility was to
save the Jews who could be saved and that therefore others had to be
sacrificed.[232] The councils' actions in facilitating Germany's persecution
and murder of ghetto inhabitants was important to the Germans.[233] When
cooperation crumbled, as happened in the Warsaw ghetto after the Jewish Combat
Organisation displaced the council's authority, the Germans lost control.[234]

Ghettos were intended to be temporary until the Jews were deported to other
locations, which never happened. Instead, the inhabitants were sent to
extermination camps. The ghettos were, in effect, immensely crowded prisons
serving as instruments of "slow, passive murder."[235] Though the Warsaw
Ghetto contained 30% of Warsaw's population, it occupied only 2.5% of the
city's area, averaging over 9 people per room.[236] Between 1940 and 1942,
starvation and disease, especially typhoid, killed many in the ghettos.[237]
Over 43,000 Warsaw ghetto residents, or one in ten of the total population,
died in 1941;[238] in Theresienstadt, more than half the residents died in
1942.[235]

Himmler ordered the closure of ghettos in Poland in mid-July 1942; most
inhabitants were sent to extermination camps. Those Jews needed for war
production would be confined in concentration camps.[239] The deportations
from the Warsaw Ghetto began on 22 July; over the almost two months of the
_Aktion_ , until 12 September, the population was reduced from 350,000 to
65,000. Those deported were transported in freight trains to the Treblinka
extermination camp.[240] Similar deportations happened in other ghettos, with
many ghettos totally emptied.[241] The first ghetto uprisings occurred in
mid-1942 in small community ghettos.[242] Although there were armed resistance
attempts in both the larger and smaller ghettos in 1943, in every case they
failed against the overwhelming German military force, and the remaining Jews
were either killed or deported to the death camps.[243]

### Concentration and labor camps

Further information: Nazi concentration camps, List of Nazi concentration
camps, and Extermination through labor

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Bundesarchiv_Bild_192-269%2C_KZ_Mauthausen%2C_H%C3%A4ftlinge_im_Steinbruch.jpg/220px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_192-269%2C_KZ_Mauthausen%2C_H%C3%A4ftlinge_im_Steinbruch.jpg)

The "stairs of death" at the Weiner Graben quarry, Mauthausen concentration
camp, Austria, 1942[244]

Germany first used concentration camps as places of unlawful incarceration of
political opponents and other "enemies of the state". Large numbers of Jews
were not sent there until after _Kristallnacht_ in November 1938.[245]
Although death rates were high, the camps were not designed as killing
centers.[246] After war broke out in 1939, new camps were established, some
outside Germany in occupied Europe.[247] In January 1945, the SS reports had
over 700,000 prisoners in their control, of which close to half had died by
the end of May 1945, according to most historians.[248] Most wartime prisoners
of the camps were not Germans but belonged to countries under German
occupation.[249]

After 1942, the economic functions of the camps, previously secondary to their
penal and terror functions, came to the fore. Forced labor of camp prisoners
became commonplace.[245] The guards became much more brutal, and the death
rate increased as the guards not only beat and starved prisoners, but killed
them more frequently.[249] _Vernichtung durch Arbeit_ ("extermination through
labor") was a policy—camp inmates would literally be worked to death, or to
physical exhaustion, at which point they would be gassed or shot.[250] The
Germans estimated the average prisoner's lifespan in a concentration camp at
three months, due to lack of food and clothing, constant epidemics, and
frequent punishments for the most minor transgressions.[251] The shifts were
long and often involved exposure to dangerous materials.[252]

Transportation between camps was often carried out in freight cars with
prisoners packed tightly. Long delays would take place; prisoners might be
confined in the cars on sidings for days.[253] In mid-1942 work camps began
requiring newly arrived prisoners to be placed in quarantine for four
weeks.[254] Prisoners wore colored triangles on their uniforms, the color of
the triangle denoting the reason for their incarceration. Red signified a
political prisoner, Jehovah's Witnesses had purple triangles, "asocials" and
criminals wore black and green. Badges were pink for gay men and yellow for
Jews.[255] Jews had a second yellow triangle worn with their original
triangle, the two forming a six-pointed star.[256][257] In Auschwitz,
prisoners were tattooed with an identification number on arrival.[258]

## Final Solution

### Wannsee Conference

Further information: Wannsee Conference and Final solution

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Haus_der_Wannsee-

Konferenz_02-2014.jpg/220px-Haus_der_Wannsee-Konferenz_02-2014.jpg)

Am Großen Wannsee 56–58, Berlin

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/17/Wannsee_Conference_-

_List_of_Jews_in_European_countries.JPG/220px-Wannsee_Conference_-

_List_of_Jews_in_European_countries.JPG)

Page from the Wannsee Conference minutes[259] listing the number of Jews in
every European country

SS- _Obergruppenführer_ Reinhard Heydrich, head of the Reich Main Security
Office ( _Reichssicherheitshauptamt_ or RSHA), convened what became known as
the Wannsee Conference on 20 January 1942 at Am Großen Wannsee 56–58, a villa
in Berlin's Wannsee suburb.[259][260] The meeting had been scheduled for 9
December 1941, and invitations had been sent on 29 November, but it had been
postponed.[261]

In the view of Christian Gerlach, Hitler announced his decision to annihilate
the Jews on or around 12 December 1941, probably on 12 December during a
speech to the _Gauleiters_ , part of the Nazi Party leadership.[262] This was
one day after the German declaration of war against the United States, which
followed the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour on 7 December and the United
States declaration of war on Japan on 8 December.[263] According to Deborah
Dwork and Robert Jan van Pelt, Hitler had trusted American Jews, whom he
assumed were all powerful, to keep their government out of the war in the
interests of German Jews. When America declared war, the Jews were
blamed.[264] Joseph Goebbels, the Reich Minister of Propaganda, noted of
Hitler's speech: "He warned the Jews that if they were to cause another world
war, it would lead to their destruction. ... Now the world war has come. The
destruction of the Jews must be its necessary consequence."[263][n]

The 15 men present at Wannsee included Adolf Eichmann (head of Jewish affairs
for the RSHA and the man who organized the deportation of Jews), Heinrich
Müller (head of the Gestapo), and other party leaders and department
heads.[259] Thirty copies of the minutes were made. Copy no. 16 was found by
American prosecutors in March 1947 in a German Foreign Office folder.[266]
Written by Eichmann and stamped "Top Secret", the minutes were written in
"euphemistic language" on Heydrich's instructions, according to Eichmann's
later testimony.[267] The conference had several purposes. Discussing plans
for a "final solution to the Jewish question" (" _Endlösung der Judenfrage_
"), and a "final solution to the Jewish question in Europe" (" _Endlösung der
europäischen Judenfrage_ "),[259] it was intended to share information and
responsibility, coordinate efforts and policies (" _Parallelisierung der
Linienführung_ "), and ensure that authority rested with Heydrich. There was
also discussion about whether to include the German _Mischlinge_ (half-
Jews).[268] Heydrich told the meeting: "Another possible solution of the
problem has now taken the place of emigration, i.e. the evacuation of the Jews
to the East, provided that the Fuehrer gives the appropriate approval in
advance."[259] He continued:

> Under proper guidance, in the course of the final solution the Jews are to
be allocated for appropriate labor in the East. Able-bodied Jews, separated
according to sex, will be taken in large work columns to these areas for work
on roads, in the course of which action doubtless a large portion will be
eliminated by natural causes.

>

> The possible final remnant will, since it will undoubtedly consist of the
most resistant portion, have to be treated accordingly because it is the
product of natural selection and would, if released, act as the seed of a new
Jewish revival (see the experience of history.) In the course of the practical
execution of the final solution, Europe will be combed through from west to
east. Germany proper, including the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, will
have to be handled first due to the housing problem and additional social and
political necessities. The evacuated Jews will first be sent, group by group,
to so-called transit ghettos, from which they will be transported to the
East.[259]

These evacuations were regarded as provisional or "temporary solutions" ("
_Ausweichmöglichkeiten_ ").[269][o] The final solution would encompass the 11
million Jews living not only in territories controlled by Germany, but
elsewhere in Europe and adjacent territories, such as Britain, Ireland,
Switzerland, Turkey, Sweden, Portugal, Spain, and Hungary, "dependent on
military developments".[269] There was little doubt what the final solution
was, writes Peter Longerich: "the Jews were to be annihilated by a combination
of forced labour and mass murder".[271]

### Extermination camps

Main article: Extermination camp

Death figures in extermination camps Camp | Location | Killed | Gas  
chambers | Gas  
vans | Source  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Auschwitz  
(all camps) | Oświęcim, Brzezinka  
and elsewhere  
occupied Poland | 1,100,000 | Yes | | [272]  
Bełżec | Bełżec  
occupied Poland | 600,000 | Yes | | [273]  
Chełmno | Chełmno nad Nerem  
near Łódź  
occupied Poland | 320,000 | No | Yes | [274]  
Majdanek | Lublin  
occupied Poland | 78,000 | Yes | | [275]  
Sobibór | Sobibór  
occupied Poland | 250,000 | Yes | | [276]  
Treblinka | Treblinka  
occupied Poland | 870,000 | Yes | | [277]  
**Total** | | **3,218,000** | |

Killing on a mass scale using gas chambers or gas vans was the difference
between the extermination and concentration camps.[278] From the end of 1941,
the Germans built six extermination camps in occupied Poland: Auschwitz II,
Majdanek, Chełmno, Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka; the last three are known as
the Operation Reinhard camps.[5][279] Christian Gerlach writes that over three
million Jews were murdered in 1942, the year that "marked the peak" of the
mass murder.[280] At least 1.4 million of these were in the General Government
area of Poland.[281]

Using gas vans, Chełmno had its roots in the Aktion T4 euthanasia
program.[282] Majdanek began as a POW camp but had gas chambers installed in
August 1942.[283] A few other camps are sometimes described as extermination
camps, including Maly Trostinets, a camp and extermination site near Minsk in
the occupied Soviet Union, where 65,000 are thought to have died, mostly by
shooting but also in gas vans.[284] Other camps commonly mentioned as death
camps are Mauthausen in Austria;[285] Stutthof, near Gdańsk, Poland;[286] and
Sachsenhausen and Ravensbrück in Germany, which all had gas chambers to kill
inmates deemed unable to work.[42]

Victims usually arrived at the extermination camps by freight train.[287]
Almost all arrivals at Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka were sent directly to
the gas chambers,[288] with individuals occasionally selected to replace dead
workers.[289] At Auschwitz, about 25 percent[290] of new arrivals were
selected to work.[291] Those selected for death at all camps were told to
undress and hand their valuables to camp workers.[292] They were then herded
naked into the gas chambers. To prevent panic, they were told the gas chambers
were showers or delousing chambers.[293] The procedure at Chełmno was slightly
different. Victims there were placed in a mobile gas van and asphyxiated,
while being driven to prepared burial pits in the nearby forests. There the
corpses were unloaded and buried.[294]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f9/Auschwitz-birkenau-

main_track.jpg/220px-Auschwitz-birkenau-main_track.jpg)

Auschwitz II gatehouse, shot from inside the camp

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b1/Auschwitz_Resistance_282_cropped.JPG/220px-

Auschwitz_Resistance_282_cropped.JPG)

Women on their way to the gas chamber, near Crematorium V, Auschwitz II,
August 1944. The Polish resistance reportedly smuggled the film, known as the
_Sonderkommando_ photographs, out of the camp in a toothpaste tube.[295]

At Auschwitz, after the chambers were filled, the doors were shut and pellets
of Zyklon-B were dropped into the chambers through vents,[296] releasing toxic
prussic acid, or hydrogen cyanide.[297] Those inside died within 20 minutes;
the speed of death depended on how close the inmate was standing to a gas
vent, according to the commandant Rudolf Höss, who estimated that about one-
third of the victims died immediately.[298] Johann Kremer, an SS doctor who
oversaw the gassings, testified that: "Shouting and screaming of the victims
could be heard through the opening and it was clear that they fought for their
lives."[299] The gas was then pumped out, the bodies were removed, gold
fillings in their teeth were extracted, and women's hair was cut.[300] The
work was done by the _Sonderkommando,_ work groups of mostly Jewish
prisoners.[301] At Auschwitz, the bodies were at first buried in deep pits and
covered with lime, but between September and November 1942, on the orders of
Himmler, they were dug up and burned. In early 1943, new gas chambers and
crematoria were built to accommodate the numbers.[302]

At Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka, the victims were killed in gas chambers by
the exhaust fumes of stationary diesel engines.[288] Gold fillings were pulled
from the corpses before burial, but the women's hair was cut before death. At
Treblinka, to calm the victims, the arrival platform was made to look like a
train station, complete with fake clock.[303] Majdanek used Zyklon-B gas in
its gas chambers.[304] In contrast to Auschwitz, Bełżec, Sobibór, and
Treblinka were relatively small.[305] Most of the victims at these camps were
buried in pits at first. Sobibór and Bełżec began exhuming and burning bodies
in late 1942, to hide the evidence, as did Treblinka in March 1943. The bodies
were burned in open fire pits and the remaining bones crushed into
powder.[306]

### Jewish resistance

Main article: Jewish resistance in German-occupied Europe

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0c/Stroop_Report_-

_Warsaw_Ghetto_Uprising_08.jpg/220px-Stroop_Report_-

_Warsaw_Ghetto_Uprising_08.jpg)

Stroop Report photograph: captured insurgents from the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising,
May 1943; the woman on the right is Hasia Szylgold-Szpiro.[307]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/Stroop_Report_-

_Warsaw_Ghetto_Uprising_06b.jpg/220px-Stroop_Report_-

_Warsaw_Ghetto_Uprising_06b.jpg)

Another Stroop report image of the aftermath of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising;
the SS man on the right with the gun is Josef Blösche.

There was "practically no resistance" in the ghettos in Poland by the end of
1942, according to Peter Longerich.[308] Raul Hilberg accounted for this by
evoking the history of Jewish persecution: as had been the case before,
appealing to their oppressors and complying with orders might avoid inflaming
the situation until the onslaught abated.[309] Henri Michel argued that
resistance consisted not only of physical opposition but of any activity that
gave the Jews humanity in inhumane conditions, while Yehuda Bauer defined
resistance as actions that in any way opposed the German directives, laws, or
conduct.[310] Hilberg cautioned against overstating the extent of Jewish
resistance, arguing that turning isolated incidents into resistance elevates
the slaughter of innocent people into some kind of battle, diminishes the
heroism of those who took active measures to resist, and deflects questions
about the survival strategies and leadership of the Jewish community.[311]
Timothy Snyder noted that it was only during the three months after the
deportations of July–September 1942 that agreement on the need for armed
resistance was reached.[312]

Several resistance groups were formed, such as the Jewish Combat Organization
in the Warsaw Ghetto and the United Partisan Organization in Vilna.[313] Over
100 revolts and uprisings occurred in at least 19 ghettos and elsewhere in
Eastern Europe. The best known is the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of 1943, when
around 1,000 poorly armed Jewish fighters held the SS at bay for four
weeks.[314][p] During a revolt in Treblinka on 2 August 1943, inmates killed
five or six guards and set fire to camp buildings; several managed to
escape.[319][320] In the Białystok Ghetto on 16 August 1943, Jewish insurgents
fought for five days when the Germans announced mass deportations.[321] On 14
October 1943, Jewish prisoners in Sobibór, including Jewish-Soviet prisoners
of war, attempted an escape,[322] killing 11 SS officers and a couple of
Ukrainian camp guards.[323] Around 300 escaped, but 100 were recaptured and
shot.[324] On 7 October 1944, 300 Jewish members of the _Sonderkommando_ at
Auschwitz, who learned they were about to be killed, attacked their guards and
blew up crematorium IV. Three SS officers were killed, one of whom was stuffed
into an oven, as was a German kapo. None of the _Sonderkommando_ rebels
survived the uprising.[325]

Estimates of Jewish participation in partisan units throughout Europe range
from 20,000 to 100,000.[326] In the occupied Polish and Soviet territories,
thousands of Jews fled into the swamps or forests and joined the
partisans,[327] although the partisan movements did not always welcome
them.[328] An estimated 20,000 to 30,000 joined the Soviet partisan
movement.[329] One of the famous Jewish groups was the Bielski partisans in
Belarus, led by the Bielski brothers.[327] Jews also joined Polish forces,
including the Home Army. According to Timothy Snyder, "more Jews fought in the
Warsaw Uprising of August 1944 than in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of April
1943".[330][q]

### Flow of information about the mass murder

Further information: The New York Times § World War II

See also: The Black Book of Polish Jewry, The Polish White Book, The Black
Book of Poland, Raczyński's Note, and Witold's Report

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/Witold_Pilecki_in_color.jpg/150px-

Witold_Pilecki_in_color.jpg)

Captain Witold Pilecki

The Polish government-in-exile in London learned about the extermination camps
from the Polish leadership in Warsaw, who from 1940 "received a continual flow
of information about Auschwitz", according to historian Michael Fleming.[336]
This was in large measure thanks to Captain Witold Pilecki of the Polish Home
Army, who allowed himself to be arrested in Warsaw and spent 945 days in
Auschwitz from September 1940 until April 1943, organizing the resistance
movement inside the camp.[337]

On 6 January 1942, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Vyacheslav Molotov,
sent out diplomatic notes about German atrocities. The notes were based on
reports about bodies surfacing from poorly covered graves in pits and
quarries, as well as mass graves found in areas the Red Army had liberated,
and on witness reports from German-occupied areas.[338] The following month,
Szlama Ber Winer escaped from the Chełmno concentration camp in Poland, and
passed detailed information about it to the Oneg Shabbat group in the Warsaw
Ghetto. His report, known by his pseudonym as the Grojanowski Report, had
reached London by June 1942.[274][339] Also in 1942, Jan Karski sent
information to the Allies after being smuggled into the Warsaw Ghetto
twice.[340] On 27 April 1942, Vyacheslav Molotov sent out another note about
atrocities.[338] In late July or early August 1942, Polish leaders learned
about the mass killings taking place inside Auschwitz. The Polish Interior
Ministry prepared a report, _Sprawozdanie 6/42_ ,[341] which said at the end:

> There are different methods of execution. People are shot by firing squads,
killed by an "air hammer", and poisoned by gas in special gas chambers.
Prisoners condemned to death by the Gestapo are murdered by the first two
methods. The third method, the gas chamber, is employed for those who are ill
or incapable of work and those who have been brought in transports especially
for the purpose/Soviet prisoners of war, and, recently Jews.[336]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/33/The_Mass_Extermination_of_Jews_in_German_Occupied.pdf/page1-170px-

The_Mass_Extermination_of_Jews_in_German_Occupied.pdf.jpg)

_The Mass Extermination of Jews in German Occupied Poland_ by the Polish
government-in-exile, addressed to the United Nations, 10 December 1942

_Sprawozdanie 6/42_ was sent to Polish officials in London by courier and had
reached them by 12 November 1942, when it was translated into English and
added to another report, "Report on Conditions in Poland". Dated 27 November,
this was forwarded to the Polish Embassy in the United States.[342] On 10
December 1942, the Polish Foreign Affairs Minister, Edward Raczyński,
addressed the fledgling United Nations on the killings; the address was
distributed with the title _The Mass Extermination of Jews in German Occupied
Poland_. He told them about the use of poison gas; about Treblinka, Bełżec and
Sobibór; that the Polish underground had referred to them as extermination
camps; and that tens of thousands of Jews had been killed in Bełżec in March
and April 1942.[343] One in three Jews in Poland were already dead, he
estimated, from a population of 3,130,000.[344] Raczyński's address was
covered by the _New York Times_ and _The Times_ of London. Winston Churchill
received it, and Anthony Eden presented it to the British cabinet. On 17
December 1942, 11 Allies issued the Joint Declaration by Members of the United
Nations condemning the "bestial policy of cold-blooded
extermination".[345][346]

The British and American governments were reluctant to publicize the
intelligence they had received. A BBC Hungarian Service memo, written by
Carlile Macartney, a BBC broadcaster and senior Foreign Office adviser on
Hungary, stated in 1942: "We shouldn't mention the Jews at all." The British
government's view was that the Hungarian people's antisemitism would make them
distrust the Allies if Allied broadcasts focused on the Jews.[347] The US
government similarly feared turning the war into one about the Jews;
antisemitism and isolationism were common in the US before its entry into the
war.[348] Although governments and the German public appear to have understood
what was happening, it seems the Jews themselves did not. According to Saul
Friedländer, "[t]estimonies left by Jews from all over occupied Europe
indicate that, in contradistinction to vast segments of surrounding society,
the victims did not understand what was ultimately in store for them." In
Western Europe, he writes, Jewish communities seem to have failed to piece the
information together, while in Eastern Europe, they could not accept that the
stories they heard from elsewhere would end up applying to them too.[349]

### Climax, Holocaust in Hungary

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Birkenau%2C_Poland%2C_Selection_on_the_platform.jpg/220px-

Birkenau%2C_Poland%2C_Selection_on_the_platform.jpg)

Jews from the Tét ghetto in Hungary arrive at Auschwitz II, c. May 1944.

Most of the Jewish ghettos of General Government were liquidated in 1942–1943,
and their populations shipped to the camps for extermination.[350] The only
exception was Lodz Ghetto, which was not liquidated until mid-1944.[351] About
42,000 Jews were shot during the Operation Harvest Festival on 3–4 November
1943.[352] At the same time, rail shipments arrived regularly from western and
southern Europe at the extermination camps.[353] Few Jews were shipped from
the occupied Soviet territories to the camps: the killing of Jews in this zone
was mostly left in the hands of the SS, aided by locally recruited
auxiliaries.[354][r]

Shipments of Jews to the camps had priority on the German railways over
anything but the army's needs, and continued even in the face of the
increasingly dire military situation at the end of 1942.[356] Army leaders and
economic managers complained about this diversion of resources and the killing
of skilled Jewish workers,[357] but Nazi leaders rated ideological imperatives
above economic considerations.[358]

By 1943 it was evident to the armed forces leadership that Germany was losing
the war.[359] The mass murder continued nevertheless, reaching a "frenetic"
pace in 1944.[360] Auschwitz was gassing up to 6,000 Jews a day by spring that
year.[361] On 19 March 1944, Hitler ordered the military occupation of Hungary
and dispatched Eichmann to Budapest to supervise the deportation of the
country's Jews.[362] From 22 March, Jews were required to wear the yellow
star; forbidden from owning cars, bicycles, radios or telephones; then forced
into ghettos.[363] From 15 May to 9 July, 440,000 Jews were deported from
Hungary to Auschwitz-Birkenau, almost all to the gas chambers.[s] A month
before the deportations began, Eichmann offered to exchange one million Jews
for 10,000 trucks and other goods from the Allies, the so-called "blood for
goods" proposal.[366] _The Times_ called it "a new level of fantasy and self-
deception".[367]

### Death marches

Main article: Death marches (Holocaust)

By mid-1944 those Jewish communities within easy reach of the Nazi regime had
been largely exterminated,[368] in proportions ranging from about 25 percent
in France[369] to more than 90 percent in Poland.[370] On 5 May Himmler
claimed in a speech that "the Jewish question has in general been solved in
Germany and in the countries occupied by Germany".[371] As the Soviet armed
forces advanced, the camps in eastern Poland were closed down, with surviving
inmates shipped to camps closer to Germany.[372] Efforts were made to conceal
evidence of what had happened. The gas chambers were dismantled, the
crematoria dynamited, and the mass graves dug up and the corpses
cremated.[373] Local commanders continued to kill Jews, and to shuttle them
from camp to camp by forced "death marches".[374] Already sick after months or
years of violence and starvation, some were marched to train stations and
transported for days at a time without food or shelter in open freight cars,
then forced to march again at the other end to the new camp. Others were
marched the entire distance to the new camp. Those who lagged behind or fell
were shot. Around 250,000 Jews died during these marches.[375]

### Liberation

Main articles: Death of Adolf Hitler and End of World War II in Europe

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e1/Mass_Grave_at_Bergen-

Belsen_concentration_camp_-_Fritz_Klein_-_IWM_BU4260.jpg/220px-

Mass_Grave_at_Bergen-Belsen_concentration_camp_-_Fritz_Klein_-_IWM_BU4260.jpg)

Fritz Klein, the camp doctor, standing in a mass grave at Bergen-Belsen after
the camp's liberation by the British 11th Armoured Division, April 1945

The first major camp to be encountered by Allied troops, Majdanek, was
discovered by the advancing Soviets on 25 July 1944.[376] Treblinka, Sobibór,
and Bełżec were never liberated, but were destroyed by the Germans in
1943.[377] Auschwitz was liberated, also by the Soviets, on 27 January
1945;[378] Buchenwald by the Americans on 11 April;[379] Bergen-Belsen by the
British on 15 April;[380] Dachau by the Americans on 29 April;[381]
Ravensbrück by the Soviets on 30 April;[382] and Mauthausen by the Americans
on 5 May.[383] The Red Cross took control of Theresienstadt on 4 May, days
before the Soviets arrived.[384][385]

The Soviets found 7,600 inmates in Auschwitz.[386] Some 60,000 prisoners were
discovered at Bergen-Belsen by the British 11th Armoured Division;[387] 13,000
corpses lay unburied, and another 10,000 people died from typhus or
malnutrition over the following weeks.[388] The BBC's war correspondent,
Richard Dimbleby, described the scenes that greeted him and the British Army
at Belsen, in a report so graphic the BBC declined to broadcast it for four
days, and did so, on 19 April, only after Dimbleby had threatened to
resign.[389]

> Here over an acre of ground lay dead and dying people. You could not see
which was which. ... The living lay with their heads against the corpses and
around them moved the awful, ghostly procession of emaciated, aimless people,
with nothing to do and with no hope of life, unable to move out of your way,
unable to look at the terrible sights around them ... Babies had been born
here, tiny wizened things that could not live. ... A mother, driven mad,
screamed at a British sentry to give her milk for her child, and thrust the
tiny mite into his arms. ... He opened the bundle and found the baby had been
dead for days. This day at Belsen was the most horrible of my life.

>

> — Richard Dimbleby, 15 April 1945[390]

### Death toll

Country | Death toll of Jews[t]  
---|---  
Albania | 591  
Austria | 65,459  
Baltic states | 272,000  
Belgium | 28,518  
Bulgaria | 11,393  
Croatia | 32,000  
Czechoslovakia | 143,000  
Denmark | 116  
France | 76,134  
Germany | 165,000  
Greece | 59,195  
Hungary | 502,000  
Italy | 6,513  
Luxembourg | 1,200  
Netherlands | 102,000  
Norway | 758  
Poland | 2,100,000  
Romania | 220,000  
Serbia | 10,700  
Soviet Union | 2,100,000  
**Total** | **5,896,577**

According to the Yad Vashem Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance
Authority in Jerusalem, "[a]ll the serious research" confirms that between
five and six million Jews died.[392] Early postwar calculations were 4.2 to
4.5 million from Gerald Reitlinger;[393] 5.1 million from Raul Hilberg; and
5.95 million from Jacob Lestschinsky.[394] In 1986 Lucy S. Dawidowicz used the
pre-war census figures to estimate 5.934 million.[395] Yehuda Bauer and Robert
Rozett in the _Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_ (1990) estimated 5.59–5.86
million.[396] A 1996 study led by Wolfgang Benz suggested 5.29 to 6.2 million,
based on comparing pre- and post-war census records and surviving German
documentation on deportations and killings.[392] Martin Gilbert arrived at a
minimum of 5.75 million.[397] The figures include over one million
children.[398]

The Jews killed represented around one third of the world population of
Jews,[399] and about two-thirds of European Jewry, based on an estimate of 9.7
million Jews in Europe at the start of the war.[400] Much of the uncertainty
stems from the lack of a reliable figure for the number of Jews in Europe in
1939, numerous border changes that make avoiding double-counting of victims
difficult, lack of accurate records from the perpetrators, and uncertainty
about whether deaths occurring months after liberation, but caused by the
persecution, should be counted.[393]

Almost all Jews within areas occupied by the Germans were killed. There were
3,020,000 Jews in the Soviet Union in 1939, and the losses were 1–1.1
million.[401] Around one million Jews were killed by the _Einsatzgruppen_ in
the occupied Soviet territories.[402] Of Poland's 3.3 million Jews, about 90
percent were killed.[370] Many died in the ghettos of Poland before they could
be deported.[403] The death camps accounted for half the number of Jews
killed; 80–90 percent of death-camp victims are estimated to have been
Jews.[395] At Auschwitz-Birkenau the Jewish death toll was 1.1
million;[272][404] Treblinka 870,000–925,000;[405] Bełżec
434,000–600,000;[406][273] Chełmno 152,000–320,000;[407][274] Sobibór
170,000–250,000;[408][276] and Majdanek 79,000.[275]

## Other victims of Nazi persecution

### Roma

Main article: Pořajmos

Further information: Antiziganism

Group | Estimate killed | Source  
---|---|---  
Soviet civilians (excl. 1.3 million Jews) | 5.7 million | USHMM[3]  
Soviet POWs | 2–3 million | Berenbaum[409]  
Ethnic Poles | 1.8–1.9 million | USHMM[410]  
Roma | 196,000–220,000 | USHMM[3]  
Disabled | Up to 250,000 | USHMM[3]  
Jehovah's Witnesses | 1,400–2,500 | USHMM[411] Milton[412]  
Gay men | Unknown | USHMM[413]

The Roma refer to the genocide of the Romani people as the _Pořajmos_.[414]
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum estimates that Germans and its
allies killed up to 220,000 Roma, around 25 percent of the community in
Europe.[415] In May 1942, the Roma were placed under similar laws to the Jews,
and on 16 December 1942, Himmler issued a decree that "Gypsy Mischlinge [mixed
breeds], Roma Gypsies, and members of the clans of Balkan origins who are not
of German blood" should be sent to Auschwitz, unless they had served in the
_Wehrmacht_.[416] He adjusted the order on 15 November 1943; in the occupied
Soviet areas, "sedentary Gypsies and part-Gypsies are to be treated as
citizens of the country. Nomadic Gypsies and part-Gypsies are to be placed on
the same level as Jews and placed in concentration camps."[417] Yehuda Bauer
writes that this adjustment reflected Nazi ideology that the Roma, originally
an Aryan population, had been "spoiled" by non-Romani blood.[418]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e4/Bundesarchiv_R_165_Bild-244-52%2C_Asperg%2C_Deportation_von_Sinti_und_Roma.jpg/220px-

Bundesarchiv_R_165_Bild-244-52%2C_Asperg%2C_Deportation_von_Sinti_und_Roma.jpg)

German troops round up Romani in Asperg, Germany in May 1940

The treatment of the Roma was not consistent across German-occupied
territories. Those in Belgium, France, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands were
subject to restrictions on movement and confinement to collection camps, while
in Central and Eastern Europe they were sent to concentration camps and
murdered by soldiers and execution squads.[419] The German view of the Roma as
hereditary criminals and "asocials" was reflected in their classification in
the concentration camps, where they were usually counted among the asocials
and required to wear black triangles.[420] Before being sent to the camps,
they were herded into ghettos, including several hundred into the Warsaw
Ghetto.[238] Further east, teams of _Einsatzgruppen_ tracked down Romani
encampments and murdered the inhabitants on the spot, leaving no records of
the victims.[419] After the Germans occupied Hungary, 1,000 Roma were deported
to Auschwitz.[421] The Roma were also targeted by Germany's allies, such as
the Ustaše regime in Croatia, where a large number were killed in the
Jasenovac concentration camp;[419] the total killed in Croatia numbered around
28,000.[422]

### Ethnic Poles

Main articles: Nazi crimes against the Polish nation and Generalplan Ost

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Execution_of_Poles_by_German_Einsatzkommando_Oktober_1939.jpg/220px-

Execution_of_Poles_by_German_Einsatzkommando_Oktober_1939.jpg)

Execution of Poles by _Einsatzkommando_ , Leszno, October 1939

The Nazis regarded the Slavs as _Untermenschen_ (subhuman),[423] In November
1939 German planners called for "the complete destruction" of all Poles[424]
and resettlement of the land by German colonists.[425] In a secret memorandum
dated 25 May 1940, Himmler stated that it was in German interests to foster
divisions between the ethnic groups in the East. He wanted to restrict non-
Germans in the conquered territories to schools that would only teach them how
to write their own name, count up to 500, and obey Germans.[426] The Polish
political leadership was the target of a campaign of murder (Intelligenzaktion
and AB-Aktion).[427]

Between 1.8 and 1.9 million non-Jewish Polish citizens perished at German
hands during the course of the war; about four-fifths were ethnic Poles and
the rest Ukrainians and Belarusians.[410] At least 200,000 died in
concentration camps, around 146,000 in Auschwitz. Others died in massacres or
in uprisings such as the Warsaw Uprising, where 120,000–200,000 were
killed.[428] During the occupation, the Germans adopted a policy of
restricting food and medical services, as well as degrading sanitation and
public hygiene.[429] The death rate rose from 13 per 1000 before the war to 18
per 1000 during the war.[430] Around 6 million of World War II victims were
Polish citizens; half the death toll were Jews. Over the course of the war
Poland lost 20 percent of its pre-war population.[431] Over 90 percent of the
death toll came through non-military losses, through various deliberate
actions by Germany and the Soviet Union.[428] Polish children were also
kidnapped by Germans to be "Germanized".[432]

### Soviet citizens and POWs

Further information: German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war, German
occupation of Byelorussia during World War II, and Reichskommissariat Ukraine

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/59/Bundesarchiv_Bild_192-208%2C_KZ_Mauthausen%2C_Sowjetische_Kriegsgefangene.jpg/220px-

Bundesarchiv_Bild_192-208%2C_KZ_Mauthausen%2C_Sowjetische_Kriegsgefangene.jpg)

Soviet POWs in the Mauthausen concentration camp, Austria

Soviet civilian populations in the occupied areas were heavily
persecuted.[433] Villages throughout the Soviet Union were destroyed by German
troops.[434] Germans rounded up civilians for forced labor in Germany and
caused famine by taking foodstuffs (see Hunger Plan).[435] In Belarus, Germany
imposed a regime that deported some 380,000 people for slave labor and killed
hundreds of thousands of civilians. Over 600 villages had their entire
populations killed, and at least 5,295 Belarusian settlements were destroyed
by the Germans. According to Timothy Snyder, of "the nine million people who
were in the territory of Soviet Belarus in 1941, some 1.6 million were killed
by the Germans in actions away from battlefields, including about 700,000
prisoners of war, 500,000 Jews, and 320,000 people counted as partisans (the
vast majority of whom were unarmed civilians)".[436] The United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum has estimated that 3.3 million of 5.7 million Soviet
POWs died in German custody.[437] The death rates decreased as the POWs were
needed to help the German war effort; by 1943, half a million had been
deployed as slave labor.[409]

### Political and religious opponents

Further information: German resistance to Nazism and Persecution of Jehovah's
Witnesses in Nazi Germany

German communists, socialists and trade unionists were among the earliest
opponents of the Nazis[438] and among the first to be sent to concentration
camps.[439] Before the invasion of the Soviet Union, Hitler issued the
Commissar Order, which ordered the execution of all political commissars and
Communist Party members captured.[440] _Nacht und Nebel_ ("Night and Fog") was
a directive of Hitler in December 1941, resulting in the disappearance of
political activists throughout the German-occupied territories.[441]

Because they refused to pledge allegiance to the Nazi party or serve in the
military, Jehovah's Witnesses were sent to concentration camps, where they
were identified by purple triangles and given the option of renouncing their
faith and submitting to the state's authority.[442] The United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum estimates that between 2,700 and 3,300 were sent to
the camps, where 1,400 died;[411] in _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_ (2001),
Sybil Milton estimates that 10,000 were sent and 2,500 died.[412] According to
German historian Detlef Garbe, "no other religious movement resisted the
pressure to conform to National Socialism with comparable unanimity and
steadfastness."[443]

### Gay men

Further information: Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the
Holocaust, Institut für Sexualwissenschaft, and Pink triangle

Around 50,000 German gay men were jailed between 1933 and 1945, and
5,000–15,000 are estimated to have been sent to concentration camps. It is not
known how many died during the Holocaust era.[413][444] James Steakley writes
that what mattered in Germany was criminal intent or character, rather than
acts, and the _"gesundes Volksempfinden"_ ("healthy sensibility of the
people") became the guiding legal principle.[445] In 1936, Himmler created the
Reich Central Office for the Combating of Homosexuality and Abortion.[446] The
Gestapo raided gay bars, tracked individuals using the address books of those
they arrested, used the subscription lists of gay magazines to find others,
and encouraged people to report suspected homosexual behavior and to
scrutinize the behavior of their neighbors.[445] Lesbians were left relatively
unaffected;[413] the Nazis saw them as "asocials", rather than sexual
deviants.[447] Gay men convicted between 1933 and 1944 were sent to camps for
"rehabilitation", where they were identified by pink triangles.[445] Hundreds
were castrated, sometimes "voluntarily" to avoid criminal sentences.[448]
Steakley writes that the full extent of gay suffering was slow to emerge after
the war. Many victims kept their stories to themselves because homosexuality
remained criminalized in postwar Germany.[445]

### Black people

Further information: Persecution of black people in Nazi Germany and Rhineland
Bastard

The number of Afro-Germans in Germany when the Nazis came to power is
variously estimated at 5,000–25,000.[449] It is not clear whether these
figures included Asians. Although blacks, including prisoners of war, in
Germany and German-occupied Europe were subjected to incarceration,
sterilization, murder, and other abuse, there was no programme to kill them
all as there was for the Jews.[450]

## Aftermath

Main article: Aftermath of the Holocaust

### Trials

Main articles: Nuremberg trials, Dachau trials, Auschwitz trial, and Frankfurt
Auschwitz trials

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9f/Defendants_in_the_dock_at_the_Nuremberg_Trials.jpg/220px-

Defendants_in_the_dock_at_the_Nuremberg_Trials.jpg)

Defendants in the dock at the Nuremberg trials, 1945–1946.  
(Front row, left to right): Hermann Göring, Rudolf Heß, Joachim von
Ribbentrop, Wilhelm Keitel  
(Second row, left to right): Karl Dönitz, Erich Raeder, Baldur von Schirach,
Fritz Sauckel

The Nuremberg trials were a series of military tribunals, held after the war
by the Allies in Nuremberg, Germany, to prosecute the German leadership. The
first was the 1945–1946 trial of the major war criminals before the
International Military Tribunal (IMT).[451] This tribunal tried 22 political
and military leaders,[452] except for Adolf Hitler, Heinrich Himmler, and
Joseph Goebbels, all of whom had committed suicide several months before.[451]

The prosecution entered indictments against 24 major war criminals[u] and
seven organizations: the Reich Cabinet, the Schutzstaffel (SS),
Sicherheitsdienst (SD), the Gestapo, the Sturmabteilung (SA) and the "General
Staff and High Command". The indictments were for participation in a common
plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of a crime against peace; planning,
initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace; war
crimes; and crimes against humanity. The tribunal passed judgements ranging
from acquittal to death by hanging.[453] Eleven defendants were executed,
including Joachim von Ribbentrop, Wilhelm Keitel, Alfred Rosenberg, and Alfred
Jodl. Ribbentrop, the judgement declared, "played an important part in
Hitler's 'final solution of the Jewish question'".[454]

Further trials at Nuremberg took place between 1946 and 1949, which tried
another 185 defendants.[455] West Germany initially tried few ex-Nazis, but
after the 1958 Ulm _Einsatzkommando_ trial, the government set up a
governmental agency to investigate crimes.[456] Other trials of Nazis and
collaborators took place in Western and Eastern Europe. In 1960, Mossad agents
captured Adolf Eichmann in Argentina and brought him to Israel to stand trial
on 15 indictments, including war crimes, crimes against humanity, and crimes
against the Jewish people. He was convicted in December 1961 and executed in
June 1962. Eichmann's trial and death revived interest in war criminals and
the Holocaust in general.[457]

### Reparations

Main articles: Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, List of
companies involved in the Holocaust, and Holocaust Era Asset Restitution
Taskforce

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Stolpersteine%2C_Berlin-

Mitte%2C_Germany%2C_30_December_2011.jpg/220px-Stolpersteine%2C_Berlin-

Mitte%2C_Germany%2C_30_December_2011.jpg)

Stolpersteine, Berlin-Mitte, 2011

In March 1951, the government of Israel requested $1.5 billion from the
Federal Republic of Germany to finance the rehabilitation of 500,000 Jewish
survivors, arguing that Germany had stolen $6 billion from the European Jews.
Israelis were divided about the idea of taking money from Germany. The
Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany (known as the Claims
Conference) was opened in New York, and after negotiations, the claim was
reduced to $845 million.[458][459]

In 1988, West Germany allocated another $125 million for reparations.
Companies such as BMW, Deutsche Bank, Ford, Opel, Siemens, and Volkswagen
faced lawsuits for their use of forced labor during the war.[458] In response,
Germany set up the "Remembrance, Responsibility and Future" Foundation in
2000, which paid €4.45 billion to former slave laborers (up to €7,670
each).[460] In 2013, Germany agreed to provide €772 million to fund nursing
care, social services, and medication for 56,000 Holocaust survivors around
the world.[461] The French state-owned railway company, the SNCF, agreed in
2014 to pay $60 million to Jewish-American survivors, around $100,000 each,
for its role in the transport of 76,000 Jews from France to extermination
camps between 1942 and 1944.[462]

### Motivation

Main articles: Responsibility for the Holocaust, List of major perpetrators of
the Holocaust, and German collective guilt

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Obersalzberg_meeting_-

_May_1939.png/220px-Obersalzberg_meeting_-_May_1939.png)

Holocaust perpetrators Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and Karl Wolff at
the Berghof, from silent color film shot by Eva Braun, May 1939

In his 1965 essay "Command and Compliance", which originated in his work as an
expert witness for the prosecution at the Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials, the
German historian Hans Buchheim wrote there was no coercion to murder Jews and
others, and all who committed such actions did so out of free will. Buchheim
wrote that chances to avoid executing criminal orders "were both more numerous
and more real than those concerned are generally prepared to admit",[463] and
that he found no evidence that SS men who refused to carry out criminal orders
were sent to concentration camps or executed.[464] Moreover, SS rules
prohibited acts of gratuitous sadism, as Himmler wished for his men to remain
"decent"; acts of sadism were carried out on the initiative of those who were
either especially cruel or wished to prove themselves ardent National
Socialists.[463] Finally, he argued that those of a non-criminal bent who
committed crimes did so because they wished to conform to the values of the
group they had joined and were afraid of being branded "weak" by their
colleagues if they refused.[465]

Similarly, in _Ordinary Men_ (1992), Christopher Browning examined the deeds
of German Reserve Police Battalion 101 of the _Ordnungspolizei_ ("order
police"), used to commit massacres and round-ups of Jews, as well as mass
deportations to the death camps. The members of the battalion were middle-aged
men of working-class background from Hamburg, who were too old for regular
military duty. They were given no special training. During the murder of 1,500
Jews from Józefów in Poland, their commander allowed them to opt out of direct
participation. Fewer than 12 men out of a battalion of 500 did so. Influenced
by the Milgram experiment on obedience, Browning argued that the men killed
out of peer pressure, not bloodlust.[466]

In his 1983 book, _Popular Opinion and Political Dissent in the Third Reich_ ,
Ian Kershaw examined the _Alltagsgeschichte_ (history of everyday life) in
Bavaria during the Nazi period. The most common viewpoint of Bavarians was
indifference towards what was happening to the Jews, he wrote. Most Bavarians
were vaguely aware of the genocide, but they were vastly more concerned about
the war.[467] Kershaw argued that "the road to Auschwitz was built by hate,
but paved with indifference".[468] His assessment faced criticism from
historians Otto Dov Kulka and Michael Kater. Kater maintained that Kershaw had
downplayed the extent of popular antisemitism. Although most of the
"spontaneous" antisemitic actions of Nazi Germany had been staged, Kater
argued that these had involved substantial numbers of Germans, and therefore
it was wrong to view the extreme antisemitism of the Nazis as coming solely
from above.[469] Kulka argued that "passive complicity" would be a better term
than "indifference".[470] Focusing on the views of Germans opposed to the Nazi
regime, the German historian Christof Dipper, in his essay " _Der Deutsche
Widerstand und die Juden_ " (1983), argued that the majority of the anti-Nazi
national-conservatives were antisemitic. No one in the German resistance
supported the Holocaust, but Dipper wrote that the national conservatives did
not intend to restore civil rights to the Jews after the planned overthrow of
Hitler.[469]

### Uniqueness question

Further information: Bitburg controversy, Historikerstreit, and Prague
Declaration on European Conscience and Communism

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ab/An_elderly_couple_walking_in_the_Memorial_to_the_Murdered_Jews_of_Europe%2C_Berlin.jpg/290px-

An_elderly_couple_walking_in_the_Memorial_to_the_Murdered_Jews_of_Europe%2C_Berlin.jpg)

_Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe_ , Berlin, 2008

In the first few decades after the Holocaust, scholars argued that it was
unique as a genocide in its reach and specificity.[471] This began to change
in the 1980s during the West German _Historikerstreit_ ("historians'
dispute"), an attempt to re-position the Holocaust within German
historiography. Ernst Nolte triggered the dispute in June 1986 with an article
in the _Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung_ : " _Vergangenheit, die nicht vergehen
will: Eine Rede, die geschrieben, aber nicht mehr gehalten werden konnte_ "
("The past that will not pass: A speech that could be written but not
delivered"), in which he compared Auschwitz to the Gulag and suggested that
the Holocaust was a response to Hitler's fear of the Soviet Union: "Was the
Bolshevik murder of an entire class not the logical and factual _prius_ of the
'racial murder' of National Socialism? ... Was the source of Auschwitz a past
that would not go away?"[v]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Yad_Vashem_Hall_of_Names_by_David_Shankbone.jpg/220px-

Yad_Vashem_Hall_of_Names_by_David_Shankbone.jpg)

Yad Vashem in Israel, 2007

Nolte's views were widely denounced. The debate between the "specifists" and
"universalists" was acrimonious; the former feared debasement of the Holocaust
and the latter considered it immoral to hold the Holocaust as beyond
compare.[473] In her book _Denying the Holocaust_ (1993), Deborah Lipstadt
viewed Nolte's position as a form of Holocaust denial, or at least "the same
triumph of ideology over truth".[474] Addressing Nolte's argument, Eberhard
Jäckel wrote in _Die Zeit_ in September 1986 that "never before had a state,
with the authority of its leader, decided and announced that a specific group
of humans, including the elderly, women, children and infants, would be killed
as quickly as possible, then carried out this resolution using every possible
means of state power".[h] Despite the criticism of Nolte, Dan Stone wrote in
2010 that the _Historikerstreit_ put "the question of comparison" on the
agenda.[475] He argued that the idea of the Holocaust as unique has been
overtaken by attempts to place it within the context of early-20th-century
Stalinism, ethnic cleansing, and the Nazis' intentions for post-war
"demographic reordering", particularly the _Generalplan Ost_ , the plan to
kill tens of millions of Slavs to create living space for Germans.[476] The
specifist position continued nevertheless to inform the views of many
specialists. Richard J. Evans argued in 2015:

> Thus although the Nazi 'Final Solution' was one genocide among many, it had
features that made it stand out from all the rest as well. Unlike all the
others it was bounded neither by space nor by time. It was launched not
against a local or regional obstacle, but at a world-enemy seen as operating
on a global scale. It was bound to an even larger plan of racial reordering
and reconstruction involving further genocidal killing on an almost
unimaginable scale, aimed, however, at clearing the way in a particular region
– Eastern Europe – for a further struggle against the Jews and those the Nazis
regarded as their puppets. It was set in motion by ideologues who saw world
history in racial terms. It was, in part, carried out by industrial methods.
These things all make it unique.

>

> — Richard Evans, "Was the 'Final Solution' Unique?", _The Third Reich in
History and Memory_.[477]

### Awareness

In September 2018, an online CNN–ComRes poll of 7,092 adults in seven European
countries—Austria, France, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Poland, and
Sweden—found that one in 20 had never heard of the Holocaust. The figure
included one in five people in France between the ages of 18 and 34. Four in
10 Austrians said they knew "just a little" about it; 12 percent of young
people there said they had never heard of it.[478] A survey organized in the
United States, also in 2018, by the Claims Conference, United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum, and others found that 22 percent of 1,350 adults said they
had never heard of the Holocaust, while 41 percent and 66 percent of
millennials did not know what Auschwitz was.[479] In 2019, a survey of 1,100
Canadians found that 49 percent could not name any of the concentration
camps.[480] In an online poll of 2,006 people in the UK in 2019 for the
Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, 45 percent did not know how many were murdered
in the Holocaust; 19 percent believed that the number of Jews murdered was
fewer than two million; and 5.4 percent said they did not believe the
Holocaust had happened at all.[481]

## See also

See also: Category:The Holocaust by country

    
        * Holocaust victims
    * Holocaust denial
    * Holocaust studies
    * Individuals and groups assisting Jews during the Holocaust
    * International Holocaust Remembrance Day
    * International response to the Holocaust
    * List of Holocaust memorials and museums
    * List of Holocaust survivors
    * Rescue of Jews by Poles during the Holocaust
    * Righteous Among the Nations
    * Timeline of the Holocaust
    

## Sources

### Notes

    
        1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Matt Brosnan (Imperial War Museum, 2018): "The Holocaust was the systematic murder of Europe's Jews by the Nazis and their collaborators during the Second World War."[21]
    

Jack R. Fischel ( _Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust_ , 2010): "The
Holocaust refers to the Nazi objective of annihilating every Jewish man,
woman, and child who fell under their control."[14]

Peter Hayes ( _How Was It Possible? A Holocaust Reader_ , 2015): "The
Holocaust, the Nazi attempt to eradicate the Jews of Europe, has come to be
regarded as the emblematic event of Twentieth Century ... Hitler's ideology
depicted the Jews as uniquely dangerous to Germany and therefore uniquely
destined to disappear completely from the Reich and all territories
subordinate to it. The threat posted by supposedly corrupting but generally
powerless Sinti and Roma was far less, and therefore addressed inconsistently
in the Nazi realm. Gay men were defined as a problem only if they were German
or having sex with Germans or having sex with Germans and considered 'curable'
in most cases. ... Germany's murderous intent toward the handicapped
inhabitants of European mental institutions ... was more comprehensive ... but
here, too, implementation was uneven and life-saving exceptions permitted,
especially in Western Europe. Not only were some Slavs—Slovaks, Croats,
Bulgarians, some Ukrainians—allotted a favored place in Hitler's New Order,
but the fate of most of the other Slavs the Nazis derided as sub-humans ...
consisted of enslavement and gradual attrition, not the prompt massacre meted
out to the Jews after 1941."[22]

Raul Hilberg ( _The Destruction of the European Jews_ , 2003): "Little by
little, some documents were gathered and books were written, and after about
two decades the annihilation of the Jews was given a name: Holocaust."[18]

Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, UK (2019): "The Holocaust (The Shoah in Hebrew)
was the attempt by the Nazis and their collaborators to murder all the Jews in
Europe."[23]

Ronnie S. Landau ( _The Nazi Holocaust: Its History and Meaning_ , 1992): "The
Holocaust involved the deliberate, systematic murder of approximately 6
million Jews in Nazi-dominated Europe between 1941 and 1945."[2]

Michael Marrus ( _Perspectives on the Holocaust_ , 2015): "The Holocaust, the
murder of close to six million Jews by the Nazis during the Second World War
...".[24]

Timothy D. Snyder ( _Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin_ , 2010):
"In this book the term _Holocaust_ signifies the final version of the Final
Solution, the German policy to eliminate the Jews of Europe by murdering them.
Although Hitler certainly wished to remove the Jews from Europe in a Final
Solution earlier, the Holocaust on this definition begins in summer 1941, with
the shooting of Jewish women and children in the occupied Soviet Union. The
term _Holocaust_ is sometimes used in two other ways: to mean all German
killing policies during the war, or to mean all oppression of Jews by the Nazi
regime. In this book, _Holocaust_ means the murder of the Jews in Europe, as
carried out by the Germans by guns and gas between 1941 and 1945."[25]

Dan Stone ( _Histories of the Holocaust_ , 2010): "'Holocaust' ... refers to
the genocide of the Jews, which by no means excludes an understanding that
other groups—notably Romanies and Slavs—were victims of genocide."[26]

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum ( _Holocaust Encyclopedia_ , 2017):
"The Holocaust was the systematic, bureaucratic, state-sponsored persecution
and murder of six million Jews by the Nazi regime and its collaborators."[27]

Yad Vashem (2019): "The Holocaust was the murder by Nazi Germany of six
million Jews."[28]

    
        2. **^** Hebrew:  השואה, _HaShoah_ , "the catastrophe"
    3. **^** United States Holocaust Memorial Museum: "Six million Jews died in the Holocaust. ... According to the _American Jewish Yearbook_ , the Jewish population of Europe was about 9.5 million in 1933. ... By 1945, most European Jews—two out of every three—had been killed."[4]
    4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dan Stone ( _Histories of the Holocaust_ , 2010): "Europe's Romany (Gypsy) population was also the victim of genocide under the Nazis. Many other population groups, notably Poles, Ukrainians, and Soviet prisoners of war were killed in huge numbers, and smaller groups such as Jehovah's Witnesses, Black Germans, and homosexuals suffered terribly under Nazi rule. The evidence suggests that the Slav nations of Europe were also destined, had Germany won the war, to become victims of systematic mass murder; and even the terrible brutality of the occupation in eastern Europe, especially in Poland, can be understood as genocidal according to the definition put forward by Raphael Lemkin in his major study, _Axis Rule in Occupied Europe_ (1944), the book that introduced the term 'genocide' to our vocabulary. Part of the reason for today's understanding, though, is a correct assessment of the fact that for the Nazis the Jews were regarded in a kind of 'metaphysical' way; they were not just considered as racially inferior (like Romanies), deviants (like homosexuals) or enemy nationals standing in the way of German colonial expression (like Slavs). ... [T]he Jews were to some extent outside of the racial scheme as defined by racial philosophers and anthropologists. They were not mere _Untermenschen_ (sub-humans) ... but were regarded as a _Gegenrasse_ : "a 'counter-race', that is to say, not really human at all. ... 'Holocaust', then, refers to the genocide of the Jews, which by no means excludes an understanding that other groups—notably Romanies and Slavs—were victims of genocide. Indeed ... the murder of the Jews, although a project in its own right, cannot be properly historically situated without understanding the 'Nazi empire' with its grandiose demographic plans."[33]
    5. **^** _Oxford Dictionaries_ (2017): "from Old French holocauste, via late Latin from Greek holokauston, from holos 'whole' + kaustos 'burnt' (from kaiein 'burn')".[11]
    6. **^** The definition continued: "Figuratively, a great slaughter or sacrifice of life, as by fire or other accident, or in battle".[12]
    7. **^** The Hebrew word _churban_ is used by many Orthodox Jews to refer to the Holocaust.[19]
    8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Eberhard Jäckel ( _Die Zeit_ , 1986): "Ich behaupte ... daß der nationalsozialistische Mord an den Juden deswegen einzigartig war, weil noch nie zuvor ein Staat mit der Autorität seines verantwortlichen Führers beschlossen und angekündigt hatte, eine bestimmte Menschengruppe einschließlich der Alten, der Frauen, der Kinder und der Säuglinge möglichst restlos zu töten, und diesen Beschluß mit allen nur möglichen staatlichen Machtmitteln in die Tat umsetzte." ("I maintain ... that the National Socialist killing of the Jews was unique in that never before had a state with the authority of its leader decided and announced that a specific group of humans, including the elderly, the women, the children and the infants, would be killed as quickly as possible, and then carried out this resolution using every possible means of state power.")[36]
    9. **^** The full extent of Mengele's work is unknown because records he sent to Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer are assumed to have been destroyed.[57][58]
    10. **^** The party was originally formed after World War I as the _Deutsche Arbeiterpartei_ or DAP (German Workers' Party) and changed its name in April 1920 to the _Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei_ or NDAP (National Socialist German Workers' Party, or Nazi Party).[67]
    11. **^** The French had planned to try Grynszpan for murder, but the German invasion in 1940 interrupted the proceedings. Grynszpan was handed over to the Germans and his fate is unknown.[119]
    12. **^** After the invasion of Poland, the Germans planned to set up a Jewish reservation in southeast Poland around the transit camp in Nisko, but the "Nisko Plan" failed, in part because it was opposed by Hans Frank, the new Governor-General of the General Government territory.[151][152][153] Adolf Eichmann was assigned to remove Jews from Germany, Austria, and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia to the reservation.[154] Although the idea was to remove 80,000 Jews, Eichmann had managed to send only 4,700 by March 1940, and the plan was abandoned in April.[155] By mid-October the idea of a Jewish reservation had been revived by Heinrich Himmler, because of the influx of Germanic settlers into the Warthegau.[156] Resettlement continued until January 1941 under Odilo Globocnik,[157] and included both Jews and Poles.[158] By that time 95,000 Jews were already concentrated in the area,[159] but the plan to deport up to 600,000 additional Jews to the Lublin reservation failed for logistical and political reasons.[160]
    13. **^** The Germans continued to use the ravine for mass killings throughout the war, and the total killed there could have been as high as 100,000.[187]
    14. **^** Goebbels noted: "Regarding the Jewish question, the Fuhrer is determined to clear the table. He warned the Jews that if they were to cause another world war, it would lead to their own destruction. Those were not empty words. Now the world war has come. The destruction of the Jews must be its necessary consequence. We cannot be sentimental about it. It is not for us to feel sympathy for the Jews. We should have sympathy rather with our own German people. If the German people have to sacrifice 160,000 victims in yet another campaign in the east, then those responsible for this bloody conflict will have to pay for it with their lives."[265]
    15. **^** Wannsee-Protokoll: "Diese Aktionen sind jedoch lediglich als Ausweichmöglichkeiten anzusprechen, doch werden hier bereits jene praktischen Erfahrungen gesammelt, die im Hinblick auf die kommende Endlösung der Judenfrage von wichtiger Bedeutung sind."[270]
    

Translation, Avalon Project: "These actions are, however, only to be
considered provisional, but practical experience is already being collected
which is of the greatest importance in relation to the future final solution
of the Jewish question."[259]

    
        16. **^** According to Polish and Jewish accounts, hundreds or thousands of Germans were killed,[315] while the Germans reported 16 dead.[316] The Germans reported 14,000 Jews killed—7000 during the fighting and 7000 sent to Treblinka.[317]—and between 53,000[318] and 56,000 deported.[316]
    17. **^** French Jews were active in the French Resistance.[331] Zionist Jews formed the _Armee Juive_ (Jewish Army), which participated in armed resistance under a Zionist flag, smuggled Jews out of the country,[332] and participated in the liberation of Paris and other cities.[333] As many as 1.5 million Jewish soldiers fought in the Allied armies, including 500,000 in the Red Army, 550,000 in the U.S. Army, 100,000 in the Polish army, and 30,000 in the British army. About 200,000 Jewish soldiers serving in the Red Army died in the war, either in combat or after capture.[334] The Jewish Brigade, a unit of 5,000 Jewish volunteers from the British Mandate of Palestine, fought in the British Army.[335]
    18. **^** One exception was the area around Bialystok, where over 100,000 Jews were deported to extermination camps, most to Treblinka but a few to Auschwitz.[355]
    19. **^** Braham (2011) and the USHMM give the figure as 440,000, Longerich (2010) as 437,000.[363][364][365]
    20. **^** Figures in Peter Hayes (2015), based on Wolfgang Benz, Jean Ancel and Yitzak Arad[391]
    21. **^** Two of the indictments were dropped before the end of the trial. Robert Ley committed suicide in prison, and Gustav Krupp was judged unfit for trial.[451]
    22. **^** "War nicht der 'Archipel Gulag' ursprünglicher als 'Auschwitz'? War nicht der 'Klassenmord' der Bolschewiki das logische und faktische Prius des 'Rassenmords' der Nationalsozialisten? Sind Hitlers geheimste Handlungen nicht gerade auch dadurch zu erklären, daß er den 'Rattenkäfig' nicht vergessen hatte? Rührte Auschwitz vielleicht in seinen Ursprüngen aus einer Vergangenheit her, die nicht vergehen wollte?"[472]
    

### Citations

    
        1. **^** "Deportation of Hungarian Jews". _Timeline of Events_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 25 November 2017. Retrieved  6 October 2017.
    2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Landau 2016, p. 3.
    3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "Documenting Numbers of Victims of the Holocaust and Nazi Persecution". United States Holocaust Memorial and Museum. 4 February 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019.
    4. **^** "Remaining Jewish Population of Europe in 1945". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018.
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Killing Centers: An Overview". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved  30 September 2017.
    6. **^** For the date, see Marcuse 2001, p. 21.
    7. **^** Stackelberg & Winkle 2002, pp. 141–143.
    8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gray 2015, p. 5.
    9. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 1.
    10. **^** Dawidowicz 1986, p. xxxvii.
    11. **^** "Holocaust". _Oxford Dictionaries_. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved  4 October 2017.
    12. **^** Whitney, William Dwight, ed. (1904). "Holocaust". _The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia_. **4**. Century. p. 2859. OCLC 222373761.
    13. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 1; "Holocaust" (PDF). Holocaust Resource Center, Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2018.
    

"The Holocaust: Definition and Preliminary Discussion". Holocaust Resource
Center, Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015.

    
        14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Fischel 2010, p. 115.
    15. **^** Meltzer, Julian (23 May 1943). "Palestine Zionists Find Outlook Dark". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018.
    16. **^** Lustigman & Lustigman 1994, p. 111.
    17. **^** Black 2016, p. 201.
    18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hilberg 2003, p. 1133.
    19. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 46.
    20. **^** Berenbaum 2006, p. xix.
    21. **^** Brosnan, Matt (12 June 2018). "What Was The Holocaust?". Imperial War Museum. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 2 March 2019.
    22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hayes 2015, pp. xiii–xiv.
    23. **^** "The Holocaust". Holocaust Memorial Day Trust. Archived from the original on 10 February 2019.
    24. **^** Marrus 2015, p. vii.
    25. **^** Snyder 2010, p. 412.
    26. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 1–3.
    27. **^** "Introduction to the Holocaust". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved  4 October 2017.
    28. **^** "What was the Holocaust?". Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019.
    29. **^** "Senior Management Team: Dr. Michael Gray, Academic and Universities Director". Harrow School. Archived from the original on 27 March 2018.
    30. **^** Gray 2015, p. 8.
    31. **^** Gray 2015, p. 4; "What Was the Holocaust?". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019.
    32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gray 2015, p. 4.
    33. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 2–3.
    34. **^** Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, p. 52.
    35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berenbaum 2006, p. 103.
    36. **^** Jäckel, Eberhard (12 September 1986). "Die elende Praxis der Untersteller". _Die Zeit_. p. 3/8. Archived from the original on 18 July 2009.
    37. **^** Bauer 2002, p. 49.
    38. **^** Friedländer 2007, pp. 51–52.
    39. **^** Arad 1987, pp. 154–159.
    40. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 167.
    41. **^** Evans 2015a, p. 385.
    42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Gassing Operations". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015. Retrieved  25 January 2015.
    43. **^** Gilbert 2001, p. 289.
    44. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 14–18.
    45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Dark Continent: Hitler's European Holocaust Helpers". _Der Spiegel_. 20 May 2009. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015.
    46. **^** United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 1996, p. 7.
    47. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 447.
    48. **^** Snyder 2015, p. 208.
    49. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 130.
    50. **^** Friedländer 2007, p. xxi.
    51. **^** Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, pp. 229–230.
    52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fisher 2001, pp. 410–414.
    53. **^** Hanauske-Abel 1996, p. 1453.
    54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Müller-Hill 1999, p. 338.
    55. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Friedländer 2007, p. 505.
    56. **^** Müller-Hill 1999, pp. 340–342.
    57. **^** Müller-Hill 1999, p. 348.
    58. **^** Lifton 2000, p. 358.
    59. **^** Harran 2000, p. 384.
    60. **^** Jones 2006, p. 148.
    61. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 14–17.
    62. **^** Fischer 2002, pp. 47–49.
    63. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Evans 1989, pp. 69–70.
    64. **^** Friedlander 1994, pp. 495–496.
    65. **^** "Antisemitism in History: World War I". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. Retrieved  1 September 2015.
    66. **^** Evans 2004, pp. 377–378.
    67. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Snyder 1976, p. 63.
    68. **^** Peukert 1994, p. 289.
    69. **^** Fischer 2002, p. 47.
    70. **^** Yahil 1990, pp. 41–43.
    71. **^** Kershaw 1998, p. 60.
    72. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 52–54.
    73. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 56.
    74. **^** "Boycotts". _Educational Resources_. Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies, University of Minnesota. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007.
    75. **^** Fritzsche 2009, pp. 38–39.
    76. **^** Noakes & Pridham 1983, p. 499.
    77. **^** Wachsmann 2015, pp. 28–30.
    78. **^** Wachsmann 2015, pp. 32–38.
    79. **^** Gilbert 1985, p. 32.
    80. **^** Longerich 2012, p. 155.
    81. **^** Wachsmann 2015, pp. 84–86.
    82. **^** Peukert 1987, p. 214.
    83. **^** Friedländer 1997, p. 33.
    84. **^** Friedländer 1997, pp. 19–20.
    85. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Burleigh & Wippermann 1991, p. 78.
    86. **^** Friedländer 1997, pp. 32–33.
    87. **^** Friedländer 1997, p. 29.
    88. **^** Friedländer 1997, p. 134.
    89. **^** Evans 2005, pp. 158–159, 169.
    90. **^** Hanauske-Abel 1996, p. 1459.
    91. **^** "Poster promoting the Nazi monthly publication _Neues Volk_ ". _Artifact Gallery_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved  5 October 2017.
    92. **^** Lifton 2000, p. 21.
    93. **^** Hanauske-Abel 1996, p. 1457.
    94. **^** Proctor 1988, pp. 101–103.
    95. **^** Tolischus, Otto D. (21 December 1933). "400,000 Germans to be sterilized". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  3 June 2019.
    96. **^** Hanauske-Abel 1996, p. 1458.
    97. **^** Proctor 1988, pp. 106–108.
    98. **^** Burleigh & Wippermann 1991, pp. 142–149.
    99. **^** Kershaw 2000, pp. 252–261.
    100. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 171.
    101. **^** Lifton 2000, p. 142.
    102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, p. 48.
    103. **^** Strous 2007.
    104. **^** Lifton 2000, pp. 90–95.
    105. **^** Hanauske-Abel 1996, pp. 1458–1459.
    106. **^** London 2000, p. 161.
    107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Nuremberg Laws Archived 8 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, _Holocaust Encyclopedia_ , United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Retrieved 7 October 2017.
    108. **^** Arad, Gutman & Margaliot 2014, p. 78.
    109. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 20.
    110. **^** Gilbert 2001, p. 285.
    111. **^** Friedländer 1997, p. 1.
    112. **^** Friedländer 1997, p. 12.
    113. **^** Evans 2005, p. 16.
    114. **^** Cesarani 2016, pp. 147–150.
    115. **^** Cesarani 2016, pp. 153–155.
    116. **^** Evans 2005, pp. 659–661.
    117. **^** Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, p. 200.
    118. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 181.
    119. **^** Friedländer 1997, pp. 301–302.
    120. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 183; Evans 2005, pp. 581–582.
    121. **^** Evans 2005, pp. 583–584.
    122. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 168.
    123. **^** Cesarani 2016, pp. 184–185.
    124. **^** Cesarani 2016, pp. 184, 187.
    125. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 183.
    126. **^** Evans 2005, p. 591.
    127. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 200.
    128. **^** Evans 2005, pp. 595–596.
    129. **^** Ben-Rafael, Glöckner & Sternberg 2011, pp. 25–26.
    130. **^** Friedländer 1997, pp. 224–225.
    131. **^** Friedländer 1997, pp. 62–63.
    132. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Browning 2001.
    133. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 382.
    134. **^** Cesarani, David (17 February 2011). "From Persecution to Genocide". _History: World Wars_. BBC. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved  25 September 2012.
    135. **^** Fischel 2010, p. 264.
    136. **^** Chase 1999, p. xiii.
    137. **^** Naimark 2001, p. 73.
    138. **^** Browning 2004, pp. 81–85.
    139. **^** Browning 2004, p. 88.
    140. **^** Hildebrand 1984, p. 70.
    141. **^** Pohl 2019, p. 32.
    142. **^** Wielgosz, Przemysław (6 March 2018). "Poland's nationalists are burying their antisemitic past – this is dangerous". _The Guardian_.
    143. **^** Pohl 2019, p. 31.
    144. **^** "Anti-Jewish riots occur in Poland". _The York Daily Record_. Associated Press. 15 May 1937. p. 1.
    

"Anti-Semitic rioting spreads in Poland". _The New York Times_. 16 May 1937.
p. 30.

    
        145. **^** Crowe 2008, pp. 158–159.
    146. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 136–137.
    147. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Black 2016, p. 29.
    148. **^** Browning 2004, pp. 111–113.
    149. **^** Black 2016, pp. 29–30.
    150. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 146.
    151. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black 2016, p. 31.
    152. **^** "Nisko and Lublin Plan" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2018.
    153. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 264.
    154. **^** Cesarani 2004, pp. 77–79.
    155. **^** Cesarani 2004, pp. 259–260, 280, 288.
    156. **^** Cesarani 2016, pp. 261–263.
    157. **^** Cesarani 2004, p. 266.
    158. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 156–159.
    159. **^** Edelheit 1994, p. 52.
    160. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 262.
    161. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 194.
    162. **^** Gross 2002, pp. 60–63.
    163. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 196.
    164. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 196; Polonsky & Michlic 2004, p. xiii.
    

Friedman, Saul (Summer 2003). "Review: _Neighbors: The Destruction of the
Jewish Community in Jedwabne, Poland_ , by Jan T. Gross". _Shofar_. **21**
(4): 147–149. JSTOR 2943611.

Gewertz, Ken (5 May 2005). "Massacre in Jedwabne re-examined at CES". _The
Harvard Gazette_.

    
        165. **^** McKale 2002, p. 161.
    166. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 169.
    167. **^** McKale 2002, p. 162.
    168. **^** Stone 2010, p. 14, citing Arne Johan Vetlesen (2005). _Evil and Human Agency: Understanding Collective Evildoing_. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521856942
    169. **^** McKale 2002, p. 164.
    170. **^** McKale 2002, pp. 162–163.
    171. **^** Schelvis 2014, pp. xv, 198.
    172. **^** McKale 2002, pp. 165–166.
    173. **^** Zuccotti 1993, p. 52.
    174. **^** Bauer 2001, pp. 256–257.
    175. **^** "Tunisia" (PDF). _Shoah Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2017.
    176. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McKale 2002, pp. 192–193.
    177. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black 2016, p. 134.
    178. **^** Snyder 2010, p. 155.
    179. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Matthäus 2007, p. 219.
    180. **^** Burleigh 2001, pp. 512, 526–527.
    181. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Matthäus 2004, p. 268.
    182. **^** Matthäus 2004, p. 275.
    183. **^** Browning 2004, pp. 224–225.
    184. **^** Hilberg 2003, p. 291.
    185. **^** Fischel 2010, p. 67.
    186. **^** Matthäus 2007, p. 219; Evans 2008, pp. 226–227; Bergen 2016, pp. 199–200.
    187. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 199.
    188. **^** McKale 2002, p. 203.
    189. **^** Fritz 2011, pp. 102–104.
    190. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 200.
    191. **^** Stone 2010, p. 35.
    192. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black 2016, pp. 131–133.
    193. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, pp. 267–272.
    194. **^** Friling, Ioanid & Ionescu 2004, p. 126.
    195. **^** Friling, Ioanid & Ionescu 2004, p. 150.
    196. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, p. 272.
    197. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, p. 269.
    198. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rozett & Spector 2013, p. 161.
    199. **^** Black 2016, pp. 136–137.
    200. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 33–34.
    201. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 34–35.
    202. **^** Black 2016, p. 135.
    203. **^** Braham 2011, p. 45; Berenbaum 2002, p. 9.
    204. **^** Rozett & Spector 2013, p. 274.
    205. **^** Black 2016, pp. 137–139.
    206. **^** Ochayon, Sheryl. "The Jews of Libya". _The International School for Holocaust Studies_. Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved  1 September 2013.
    207. **^** Black 2016, p. 140.
    208. **^** Black 2016, p. 141.
    209. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 42–43.
    210. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 160.
    211. **^** Gerlach 2016, p. 74.
    212. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 513.
    213. **^** Arad 2009, p. 138.
    214. **^** "Gas vans" (PDF). Yad Vashem. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2003.
    215. **^** Browning 1986, pp. 345–348.
    216. **^** Hilberg 2003, pp. 216–7.
    217. **^** Yahil 1990, p. 166.
    218. **^** Yahil 1990, p. 169.
    219. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 161.
    220. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 167.
    221. **^** Yahil 1990, p. 165.
    222. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 148.
    223. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 166.
    224. **^** Trunk 1996, pp. 1–6.
    225. **^** Hilberg 1993, p. 106.
    226. **^** Hilberg 1993, p. 170.
    227. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 150–152.
    228. **^** Hilberg 1980, p. 104.
    229. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 150–151.
    230. **^** Berenbaum 2006, pp. 81–83.
    231. **^** Hilberg 1993, p. 109.
    232. **^** Berenbaum 2006, pp. 79–81.
    233. **^** Hilberg 2003, p. 1111.
    234. **^** Snyder 2010, p. 285.
    235. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berenbaum 2006, p. 114.
    236. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, p. 239.
    237. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, pp. 242–243.
    238. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Deportations to and from the Warsaw Ghetto". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 21 September 2012. Retrieved  27 September 2012.
    239. **^** Yahil 1990, p. 378.
    240. **^** Yahil 1990, pp. 378–380.
    241. **^** Yahil 1990, pp. 382–385.
    242. **^** Yahil 1990, pp. 474–478.
    243. **^** Berenbaum 2006, pp. 175–177.
    244. **^** Orth 2009, p. 181.
    245. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Baumel 2001, p. 135.
    246. **^** Fischel 2010, pp. 50–52.
    247. **^** "Nazi Camps". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved  5 July 2018.
    248. **^** "Concentration Camp System: In Depth". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved  5 July 2018.
    249. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wachsmann 2015, pp. 287–288.
    250. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 314–320.
    251. **^** Black 2016, p. 76.
    252. **^** Black 2016, p. 104.
    253. **^** Rozett 1990, p. 1222.
    254. **^** Wachsmann 2015, p. 347.
    255. **^** Wachsmann 2015, pp. 125–127, 623.
    256. **^** Yahil 1990, p. 134.
    257. **^** Wachsmann 2015, p. 119.
    258. **^** Harran 2000, p. 461.
    259. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Original: "Besprechungsprotokoll" (PDF). Haus der Wannsee-Konferenz. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 February 2019.
    

English: "Wannsee Protocol, January 20, 1942". _The Avalon Project_. Yale Law
School. Archived from the original on 16 August 2018.

German: "Wannsee-Protokoll". _EuroDocs_. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young
University. Archived from the original on 22 June 2006.

    
        260. **^** Gerlach 1998, p. 759; "Wannsee Conference and the 'Final Solution '". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 28 September 2017.
    261. **^** Gerlach 1998, p. 764.
    262. **^** Gerlach 2016, p. 80; for "Gauleiters", see Dwork & van Pelt 2003, p. 279.
    263. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gerlach 2016, p. 80.
    264. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, p. 279.
    265. **^** Gerlach 1998, p. 122.
    266. **^** Roseman 2003.
    267. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 306.
    268. **^** Gerlach 2016, pp. 84–85.
    269. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Longerich 2010, p. 307.
    270. **^** "Wannsee-Protokoll". _EuroDocs_. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University. Archived from the original on 22 June 2006.
    271. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 308.
    272. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Auschwitz-Birkenau Extermination Camp". _About the Holocaust_. Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved  2 October 2017.
    273. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Belzec" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2017.
    274. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Chelmno" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 29 May 2017.
    275. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Majdanek" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2017.
    276. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Sobibor" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 January 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2017.
    277. **^** "Treblinka" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    278. **^** Jones 2006, p. 153.
    279. **^** "Aktion Reinhard" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 March 2017. Retrieved 29 May 2017.
    280. **^** Gerlach 2016, p. 99.
    281. **^** Gerlach 2016, p. 99, note 165.
    282. **^** Montague 2012, pp. 14–16, 64–65.
    283. **^** Black 2016, pp. 70–71.
    284. **^** "Maly Trostinets" (PDF). _Holocaust Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 29 May 2017.; Heberer 2008, p. 131; Lehnstaedt 2016, p. 30.
    285. **^** Fischel 2010, pp. 57–58.
    286. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 81.
    287. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 81–85.
    288. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black 2016, pp. 69–70.
    289. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 243; Arad 1987, p. 98.
    290. **^** Bauer 1994, p. 156.
    291. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 81–82.
    292. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, pp. 287–288.
    293. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 173.
    294. **^** Montague 2012, pp. 76–85.
    295. **^** Didi-Huberman 2008, pp. 16–17.
    296. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 162.
    297. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 157.
    298. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 170.
    299. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 163.
    300. **^** Piper 1998b, pp. 170–171.
    301. **^** Piper 1998b, p. 172.
    302. **^** Piper 1998b, pp. 163–164.
    303. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 83–84.
    304. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 84–85.
    305. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 330.
    306. **^** Arad 1987, pp. 170–171.
    307. **^** "Jews captured by Waffen SS soldiers during the suppression of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising". Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014.
    308. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 340–341.
    309. **^** Hilberg 2003, pp. 1112–1128.
    310. **^** Bauer 1997, p. 117.
    311. **^** Hilberg 1996, pp. 126–137.
    312. **^** Snyder 2010, p. 283; Longerich 2010, p. 341.
    313. **^** Black 2016, pp. 82–85.
    314. **^** Black 2016, pp. 83–84.
    315. **^** Gutman 1994, p. 243.
    316. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bergen 2016, p. 269.
    317. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 616.
    318. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 636.
    319. **^** Arad 1987, pp. 286, 293–294.
    320. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 99.
    321. **^** Fischel 1998, pp. 95–96.
    322. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 98.
    323. **^** Arad 1987, p. 337.
    324. **^** Arad 1987, p. 341; Fischel 1998, p. 98.
    325. **^** Langbein 1998, pp. 500–501.
    326. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 780.
    327. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fischel 1998, pp. 100–101.
    328. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 648.
    329. **^** Tec 2001, p. 546.
    330. **^** Snyder 2010, p. 302.
    331. **^** Bergen 2016, p. 273.
    332. **^** Zuccotti 1993, p. 274.
    333. **^** Zuccotti 1993, p. 275.
    334. **^** "Jewish Soldiers in the Allied Armies". _About the Holocaust_. Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    335. **^** Laqueur 2001, p. 351.
    336. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fleming 2014a, p. 35.
    337. **^** Bartrop 2016, p. 210; Fleming 2014b, p. 131.
    338. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Spector 1990, p. 158.
    339. **^** "Grojanowski Report" (PDF). _Shoah Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 1 September 2012.
    340. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 354; Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, p. 183.
    341. **^** Fleming 2014a, p. 35; Fleming 2014b, p. 144.
    342. **^** Fleming 2014a, pp. 35–36.
    343. **^** Zimmerman 2015, p. 181.
    344. **^** Zimmerman 2015, pp. 181–182.
    345. **^** Zimmerman 2015, p. 182.
    346. **^** "11 Allies Condemn Nazi War on Jews". _The New York Times_. 18 December 1942.
    

Frankel, Max (14 November 2001). "150th Anniversary: 1851–2001; Turning Away
From the Holocaust". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on 23
December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017.

    
        347. **^** Thomson, Mike (13 November 2012). "Could the BBC have done more to help Hungarian Jews?". _BBC News_. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018.
    

Also see Fleming 2014b, p. 368, note 4, who cites Thomson.

    
        348. **^** Novick 2000, pp. 27–28.
    349. **^** Friedländer 2010, p. 23.
    350. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, pp. 256–257; Longerich 2010, pp. 330–339, 375–379.
    351. **^** Dwork & van Pelt 2003, pp. 256–257.
    352. **^** "Aktion 'Erntefest' (Operation 'Harvest Festival')". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    353. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 360–373, 386–389, 390–396.
    354. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 345–353.
    355. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 352–353.
    356. **^** Yahil 1990, pp. 376–378.
    357. **^** Kwiet 2004, pp. 61, 69–71, 76–77.
    358. **^** Kwiet 2004, pp. 77–78.
    359. **^** Fischer 1998, pp. 536–538.
    360. **^** Black 2016, p. 108.
    361. **^** "Killing Centers". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    362. **^** Evans 2002, p. 95.
    363. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Braham 2011, p. 45.
    364. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 408.
    365. **^** "Deportation of Hungarian Jews" Archived 25 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Retrieved 5 October 2017.
    366. **^** Fischel 2010, pp. 31, 76–77.
    367. **^** Löb 2009, p. 69, citing "A Monstrous 'Offer '", _The Times_ , 20 July 1944.
    368. **^** Black 2016, pp. 107–109.
    369. **^** Weinberg 2001, p. 219.
    370. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Polonsky 2001, p. 488.
    371. **^** Longerich 2012, p. 695.
    372. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 290–292.
    373. **^** Longerich 2010, pp. 410–412.
    374. **^** "Map of the Death Marches". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 16 August 2012. Retrieved  1 September 2012.
    375. **^** Friedländer 2007, pp. 648–650.
    376. **^** Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, p. 165.
    377. **^** Longerich 2010, p. 411.
    378. **^** Hitchcock 2008, p. 283.
    379. **^** Hitchcock 2008, p. 297.
    380. **^** Hitchcock 2008, p. 340.
    381. **^** Gilbert 1985, p. 798.
    382. **^** Wachsmann 2015, p. 577.
    383. **^** Gilbert 1985, pp. 808–809.
    384. **^** Gilbert 1985, p. 810.
    385. **^** Cesarani 2016, p. 762.
    386. **^** Hitchcock 2008, p. 289.
    387. **^** "The 11th Armoured Division (Great Britain)". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 16 August 2012. Retrieved  1 September 2012.
    388. **^** "Bergen-Belsen". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. Retrieved  1 September 2012.
    389. **^** Bell 2017, p. 100.
    390. **^** Dimbleby, Richard (15 April 1945). "Liberation of Belsen" Archived 13 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Retrieved September 2012.
    

"Richard Dimbleby reporting from Bergen-Belsen", part 1/2 Archived 1 February
2018 at the Wayback Machine, part 2/2 Archived 9 October 2014 at the Wayback
Machine, BBC News, courtesy of YouTube.

    
        391. **^** Hayes 2015, p. xii.
    392. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Benz 1996 [ _page needed_]
    393. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michman 2012, p. 197.
    394. **^** Bauer & Rozett 1990, p. 1797.
    395. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dawidowicz 1986, p. 403.
    396. **^** Bauer & Rozett 1990, p. 1799.
    397. **^** Gilbert 2001, p. 245.
    398. **^** "Children during the Holocaust". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 9 October 2017.
    399. **^** Gilbert 2001, p. 291.
    400. **^** Fischel 1998, p. 87; Bauer & Rozett 1990, p. 1799.
    401. **^** Bauer & Rozett 1990, pp. 1799–1802.
    402. **^** Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, pp. 221–222; Rhodes 2002, p. 274.
    403. **^** Black 2016, pp. 29–31.
    404. **^** Piper 2000, pp. 230–231; Piper 1998a, p. 62.
    405. **^** "Treblinka". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved  11 June 2017.
    406. **^** "Belzec". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved  11 June 2017.
    407. **^** "Chelmno". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved  11 June 2017.
    408. **^** "Sobibor". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 29 May 2017. Retrieved  11 June 2017.
    409. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berenbaum 2006, p. 125.
    410. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Polish Victims". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved  1 June 2016.
    411. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Jehovah's Witnesses". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 11 April 2017. Retrieved  29 June 2017.
    412. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Milton 2001, p. 350.
    413. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Persecution of Homosexuals in the Third Reich". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018.
    414. **^** Huttenbach 2016, p. 31; Hancock 2004, p. 385 (Hancock writes _Porrajmos_ ).
    415. **^** "Genocide of European Roma (Gypsies)". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Retrieved  1 September 2012.
    416. **^** Bauer 1998, p. 444; also see Longerich 2010, p. 50.
    417. **^** Bauer 1998, p. 445.
    418. **^** Bauer 1998, p. 446.
    419. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Longerich 2010, pp. 418–421.
    420. **^** Evans 2015a, pp. 378–379.
    421. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 114.
    422. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 119.
    423. **^** Evans 2008, pp. 174–175; Snyder 1976, p. 359.
    424. **^** Gellately 2001, p. 153.
    425. **^** Berghahn 1999, pp. 32–33.
    426. **^** Longerich 2012, pp. 450–452; Fritz 2011, p. 23.
    427. **^** Bloxham 2009, p. 112.
    428. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Piotrowski 1998, p. 295.
    429. **^** Szafranski 1960, p. 43.
    430. **^** Szafranski 1960, p. 49.
    431. **^** Kochanski 2012, p. 532.
    432. **^** Stargardt 2010, pp. 226–227.
    433. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 186–192.
    434. **^** Fritz 2011, pp. 333–334.
    435. **^** Bergen 2016, pp. 214–215.
    436. **^** Snyder 2010, pp. 250–251.
    437. **^** "Nazi Persecution of Soviet Prisoners of War". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 22 August 2012. Retrieved  1 September 2012.
    438. **^** "Non-Jewish Resistance". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 20 November 2011. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    439. **^** Wachsmann 2015, p. 125.
    440. **^** "Commissar Order". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    441. **^** Fischel 2010, p. 184.
    442. **^** Milton 2001, pp. 346–349.
    443. **^** Garbe 2001, p. 251.
    444. **^** Harran 2000, p. 108.
    445. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Steakley 1974.
    446. **^** Longerich 2012, p. 237.
    447. **^** "Lesbians and the Third Reich". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018.
    448. **^** Giles 1992, pp. 45–7.
    449. **^** Lusane 2003, pp. 97–8.
    450. **^** "Blacks during the Holocaust". _Holocaust Encyclopedia_. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
    451. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Biddiss 2001, p. 643.
    452. **^** Snyder 1976, p. 255.
    453. **^** Biddiss 2001, pp. 643–644.
    454. **^** Conot 1984, p. 495.
    455. **^** Biddiss 2001, p. 646.
    456. **^** Crowe 2008, p. 412.
    457. **^** Crowe 2008, pp. 430–433.
    458. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Reparations and Restitutions" (PDF). _Shoah Resource Center_. Yad Vashem. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2018.
    459. **^** Zweig 2001, pp. 531–532.
    460. **^** "Payment Programme of the Foundation EVZ". Bundesarchiv. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved  5 July 2018.
    461. **^** Staff (29 May 2013). "Holocaust Reparations: Germany to Pay 772 Million Euros to Survivors". _Spiegel Online International_. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014.
    462. **^** Bazyler 2005, p. 173;  Staff (5 December 2014). "Pour le rôle de la SNCF dans la Shoah, Paris va verser 100 000 euros à chaque déporté américain". _Le Monde/Agence France-Presse_. Archived from the original on 5 December 2014.
    

Davies, Lizzie (17 February 2009). "France responsible for sending Jews to
concentration camps, says court". _The Guardian_. Archived from the original
on 10 October 2017.

    
        463. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Buchheim 1968, pp. 372–373.
    464. **^** Buchheim 1968, p. 381.
    465. **^** Buchheim 1968, pp. 386–387.
    466. **^** Browning 1998, p. 57.
    467. **^** Kershaw 2002, pp. 275–277.
    468. **^** Kershaw 2002, p. 277; also in Kershaw 2008, p. 186.
    469. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Marrus 1987, p. 92.
    470. **^** Marrus 1987, p. 93.
    471. **^** Stone 2010, p. 206.
    472. **^** Nolte, Ernst (6 June 1986). "Vergangenheit, die nicht vergehen will. Eine Rede, die geschrieben, aber nicht gehalten werden konnte" (PDF). _Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung_.
    

"The Past That Will Not Pass" (translation) in Knowlton & Cates 1993, pp.
18–23.

    
        473. **^** Samuels 2009, p. 259.
    474. **^** Lipstadt 1994, p. 241; Stone 2010, p. 207.
    475. **^** Stone 2010, p. 207.
    476. **^** Stone 2010, pp. 211–212.
    477. **^** Evans 2015b, p. 385.
    478. **^** Greene, Richard Allen (November 2018). "A Shadow Over Europe". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 November 2018.
    479. **^** "New Survey by Claims Conference Finds Significant Lack of Holocaust Knowledge in the United States". Claims Conference. 2018. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018.
    

Astor, Maggie (12 April 2018). "Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey
Finds". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on 18 April 2018.

    
        480. **^** Stober, Eric (26 January 2019). "Nearly half of Canadians can't name a single concentration camp: survey". Global News. Archived from the original on 27 January 2019.
    481. **^** "About our research to mark Holocaust Memorial Day". Holocaust Memorial Day Trust. 1 February 2019. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019.
    

Sherwood, Harriet (27 January 2019). "One in 20 Britons does not believe
Holocaust took place, poll finds". _The Observer_. Archived from the original
on 27 January 2019.

### Works cited

    
        Arad, Yitzhak (1987). _Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka: The Operation Reinhard Death Camps_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-21305-1.
    ------ (2009). _The Holocaust in the Soviet Union_. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-4519-8.
    Arad, Yitzhak; Gutman, Yisrael; Margaliot, Abraham, eds. (2014) [1981]. _Documents on the Holocaust: Selected Sources on the Destruction of the Jews of Germany and Austria, Poland, and the Soviet Union_. Pergamon Press/Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-803-25937-9.
    Bajohr, Frank; Pohl, Dieter (2008). _Massenmord und schlechtes Gewissen: Die deutsche Bevölkerung die NS-Führung und der Holocaust_. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag.
    Bartrop, Paul R. (2016). _Resisting the Holocaust: Upstanders, Partisans, and Survivors_. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-61069-878-8.
    Bauer, Yehuda (1997) [1979]. "Forms of Jewish Resistance". In Niewyk, Donald L. (ed.). _The Holocaust: Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 116–132. ISBN 0-669-41700-9.
    ------ (1998) [1994]. "Gypsies". In Gutman, Yisrael; Berenbaum, Michael (eds.). _Anatomy of the Auschwitz Death Camp_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. pp. 441–455. ISBN 0-253-20884-X.
    ------ (2001) [1982]. _A History of the Holocaust_ (Revised ed.). New York: Franklin Watts. ISBN 0-531-15576-5.
    ------ (1994). _Jews for Sale?: Nazi-Jewish Negotiations, 1933–1945_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300059137.
    ------ (2002). _Rethinking the Holocaust_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-09300-4.
    Bauer, Yehuda; Rozett, Robert (1990). "Appendix". In Gutman, Israel (ed.). _Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_. New York: Macmillan Library Reference. pp. 1797–1802. ISBN 0-02-896090-4.
    Baumel, Judith Tydor (2001). "Concentration Camps". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 133–135. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Bazyler, Michael J. (2005) [2003]. _Holocaust Justice: The Battle for Restitution in America's Courts_. New York and London: New York University Press. ISBN 978-0814729380.
    Bell, Martin (2017). _War and the Death of News_. London: Oneworld Publications. ISBN 978-1-7860-7109-5.
    Ben-Rafael, Eliezer; Glöckner, Olaf; Sternberg, Yitzhak (2011). _Jews and Jewish Education in Germany Today_. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-25329-2.
    Benz, Wolfgang (1996). _Dimension des Völkermords. Die Zahl der jüdischen Opfer des Nationalsozialismus_ (in German). Dtv. ISBN 3-423-04690-2.
    Berenbaum, Michael (2002). "Foreword". In Braham, Randolph L.; Miller, Scott (eds.). _The Nazis' Last Victims: The Holocaust in Hungary_. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. p. 9.
    ------ (2006). _The World Must Know: The History of the Holocaust as Told in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum_ (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. ISBN 978-0-8018-8358-3.
    Bergen, Doris (2016). _War & Genocide: A Concise History of the Holocaust_ (Third ed.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-4228-9.
    Berghahn, Volker R. (1999). "Germans and Poles, 1871–1945". In Bullivant, Keith; Giles, Geoffrey J.; Pape, Walter (eds.). _Yearbook of European Studies. Germany and Eastern Europe: Cultural Identities and Cultural Differences_. **13**. Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Rodopi. pp. 15–36. ISBN 978-9042006881.
    Biddiss, Michael (2001). "Nuremberg trials". In Dear, Ian; Foot, Richard D. (eds.). _The Oxford Companion to World War II_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 643–646. ISBN 0-19-280670-X.
    Black, Jeremy (2016). _The Holocaust: History and Memory_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-02214-1.
    Bloxham, Donald (2009). _The Final Solution: A Genocide_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-955034-0.
    Braham, Randolph L. (2011). "Hungary: The Controversial Chapter of the Holocaust". In Braham, Randolph L.; vanden Heuvel, William Jacobus (eds.). _The Auschwitz Reports and the Holocaust in Hungary_. Boulder, CO: Social Science Monographs. pp. 29–49.
    Browning, Christopher (2001). "Madagascar Plan". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 407–409. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    ------ (1986). "Nazi Ghettoization Policy in Poland: 1939–41". _Central European History_. **19** (4): 343–368. doi:10.1017/s0008938900011158. JSTOR 4546081.
     ------ (1998) [1992]. _Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland_. New York: HarperPerennial. ISBN 0-06-099506-8.
    ------ (2004). _The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939 – March 1942_. Jerusalem: Yad Vashem.
    Buchheim, Hans (1968). "Command and Compliance". In Helmut Krausnick; Hans Buchheim; Broszat, Martin; Jacobsen, Hans-Adolf (eds.). _The Anatomy of the SS State_. New York: Walker and Company. pp. 303–396.
    Burleigh, Michael (2001). _The Third Reich: A New History_. New York: Hill and Wang. ISBN 0-8090-9326-X.
    Burleigh, Michael; Wippermann, Wolfgang (1991). _The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-39802-9.
    Cesarani, David (2004). _Becoming Eichmann: Rethinking the Life, Crimes, and Trial of a 'Desk Murderer'_. [New York]: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81476-1.
    ------ (2016). _Final Solution: The Fate of the Jews 1933–1949_. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1-250-00083-5.
    Chase, Edward T. (1999) [1984]. "Preface". _The Transfer Agreement: The Dramatic Story of the Pact Between the Third Reich and Jewish Palestine_. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. ISBN 978-0914153139.
    Conot, Robert (1984). _Justice at Nuremberg_. New York: Carroll  & Graf. ISBN 978-0-88184-032-2.
    Crowe, David M. (2008). _The Holocaust: Roots, History, and Aftermath_. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-4325-9.
    Dawidowicz, Lucy (1986) [1975]. _The War Against the Jews: 1933–1945_ (Tenth Anniversary ed.). New York: Bantam. ISBN 0-553-34532-X.
    Didi-Huberman, Georges (2008). _Images in Spite of All: Four Photographs from Auschwitz_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-14816-8.
    Dwork, Deborah; van Pelt, Robert Jan (2003). _Holocaust: A History_. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-05188-9.
    Edelheit, Abraham J. (1994). _History of the Holocaust: A Handbook and Dictionary_. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 0813322405.
    Evans, Richard J. (1989). _In Hitler's Shadow: West German Historians and the Attempt to Escape from the Nazi Past_. New York: Pantheon. ISBN 0-679-72348-X.
    ------ (2002). _Lying About Hitler: The Holocaust, History and the David Irving Trial_. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-02153-0.
    ------ (2004) [2003]. _The Coming of the Third Reich_. New York: Penguin. ISBN 1-59420-004-1.
    ------ (2005). _The Third Reich in Power_. New York: Penguin. ISBN 1-59420-074-2.
    ------ (2008). _The Third Reich at War_. New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-1-59420-206-3.
    ------ (2015). _The Third Reich in History and Memory_. London: Abacus. ISBN 978-0-349-14075-9.
    ------ (2015). "Is the "Final Solution" Unique?". _The Third Reich in History and Memory_. London: Abacus. ISBN 978-0-349-14075-9. Revised and extended from Richard Evans (2011). "Wie einzigartig war die Ermordung der Juden durch die Nationalsocialisten?" in Günter Morsch and Bertrand Perz (eds). _Neue Studien zu nationalsozialistischen Massentötungen durch Giftgas: Historische Bedeutung, technische Entwicklung, revisionistische Leugnung_. Berlin: Metropol Verlag, pp. 1–10. ISBN 9783940938992
    Fritzsche, Peter (2009). _Life and Death in the Third Reich_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674033744.
    Fischel, Jack R. (1998). _The Holocaust_. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-29879-3.
    ------ (2010). _Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust_ (Second ed.). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6774-1.
    Fischer, Conan (2002). _The Rise of the Nazis_. New Frontiers in History (Second ed.). Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-6067-2.
    Fischer, Klaus (1998) [1995]. _Nazi Germany: A New History_. New York: Barnes  & Noble. ISBN 0-7607-0736-7.
    Fisher, Ronit (2001). "Medical Experimentation". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 410–414. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Fleming, Michael (Spring 2014a). "Allied Knowledge of Auschwitz: A (Further) Challenge to the 'Elusiveness' Narrative". _Holocaust and Genocide Studies_. **28** (1): 31–57. doi:10.1093/hgs/dcu014.
     ------ (2014b). _Auschwitz, the Allies and Censorship of the Holocaust_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-1070-6279-5.
    Friedlander, Henry (1994). "Step by Step: The Expansion of Murder, 1939–1941". _German Studies Review_. **17** (3): 495–507. doi:10.2307/1431896. JSTOR 1431896.
    Friedländer, Saul (1997). _Nazi Germany and the Jews: The Years of Persecution 1933–1939_. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 0-06-019042-6.
    ------ (2007). _The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews 1939–1945_. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-093048-6.
    ------ (2010). "An Integrated History of the Holocaust: Possibilities and Challenges". In Weise, Christian; Betts, Paul (eds.). _Years of Persecution, Years of Extermination: Saul Friedländer and the Future of Holocaust Studies_. New York and London: Continuum. pp. 21–29. ISBN 9781441129871.
    Friling, Tuvia; Ioanid, Radu; Ionescu, Mihail E., eds. (2004). _International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania: Final Report_ (PDF). Iași: Polirom. ISBN 973-681-989-2.
    Fritz, Stephen (2011). _Ostkrieg: Hitler's War of Extermination in the East_. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-3416-1.
    _Forever in the Shadow of Hitler?: Original Documents of the Historikerstreit, the Controversy Concerning the Singularity of the Holocaust_. Translated by Knowlton, James; Cates, Truett. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press. 1993. ISBN 978-0391038110.
    Garbe, Detlef (2001). "Social Disinterest, Governmental Disinformation, Renewed Persecution, and Now Manipulation of History?". In Hans Hesse (ed.). _Persecution and Resistance of Jehovah's Witnesses During the Nazi-Regime 1933–1945_. Bremen: Edition Temmen. pp. 251–265.
    Gellately, Robert (2001). _Backing Hitler: Consent and Coercion in Nazi Germany_. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-820560-0.
    Gerlach, Christian (December 1998). "The Wannsee Conference, the Fate of German Jews, and Hitler's Decision in Principle to Exterminate All European Jews". _The Journal of Modern History_. **70** (4): 759–812. doi:10.1086/235167.
     ------ (2016). _The Extermination of the European Jews_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-70689-0.
    Gilbert, Martin (2001). "Final Solution". In Dear, Ian; Foot, Richard D. (eds.). _The Oxford Companion to World War II_. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp. 285–292. ISBN 0-19-280670-X.
    ------ (1985). _The Holocaust: A History of the Jews of Europe During the Second World War_. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-0348-7.
    Giles, Geoffrey J. (1992). "The Most Unkindest Cut of All: Castration, Homosexuality and Nazi Justice". _Journal of Contemporary History_. **27** (1): 41–61. doi:10.1177/002200949202700103. JSTOR 260778.
     Gray, Michael (2015). _Teaching the Holocaust: Practical Approaches for Ages 11–18_. Abingdon and New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-65082-9.
    Gutman, Israel (1994). _Resistance: The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising_. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-60199-1.
    Hanauske-Abel, Hartmut M. (7 December 1996). "Not a slippery slope or sudden subversion: German medicine and National Socialism in 1933". _BMJ_. **313** (7070): 1453–1463. doi:10.1136/bmj.313.7070.1453. JSTOR 29733730. PMC 2352969.
    Gross, Jan T. (2002) [2001]. _Neighbors: The Destruction of the Jewish Community in Jedwabne, Poland_. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-20-0240-2.
    Hancock, Ian (2004). "Romanies and the Holocaust: A Reevaluation and Overview". In Dan Stone (ed.). _The Historiography of the Holocaust_. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp. 383–396.
    Harran, Marilyn J. (2000). _The Holocaust Chronicle_. Lincolnwood, IL: Publications International. ISBN 0-7853-2963-3.
    Hayes, Peter, ed. (2015). _How Was It Possible?: A Holocaust Reader_. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
     Heberer, Patricia (2008). "Justice in Austrian Courts? The Case of Josef W. and Austria's Difficult Relationship with Its Past". In Heberer, Patricia; Matthäus, Jürgen (eds.). _Atrocities on Trial: Historical Perspectives on the Politics of Prosecuting War Crimes_. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press.
    Hilberg, Raul (2003). _The Destruction of the European Jews_ (3rd ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
    ------ (1980). "The Ghetto as a Form of Government". _Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science_. **450** : 98–112. doi:10.1177/000271628045000109. JSTOR 1042561.
    ------ (1993) [1992]. _Perpetrators Victims Bystanders: The Jewish Catastrophe 1933–1945_. New York: HarperPerennial. ISBN 0-06-099507-6.
    ------ (1996). _The Politics of Memory: The Journey of a Holocaust Historian_. Chicago, IL: Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 1566631165.
    Hildebrand, Klaus (1984). _The Third Reich_. Translated by Falla, P. S. London: George Allen  & Unwin. ISBN 0-04-943033-5.
    Hitchcock, William I. (2008). _The Bitter Road to Freedom: A New History of the Liberation of Europe_. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-7381-7.
    Huttenbach, Henry R. (2016) [1991]. "The Romani Pořajmos: The Nazi Genocide of Gypsies in Germany and Eastern Europe". In Crowe, David; Kolsti, John (eds.). _The Gypsies of Eastern Europe_. Abingdon and New York: Routledge. pp. 31–50. ISBN 978-1-315-49024-3.
    Jones, Adam (2006). _Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction_. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-35384-X.
    Kennedy, David M., ed. (2007). _The Library of Congress World War II Companion_. New York: Simon  & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-5219-5.
    Kershaw, Ian (2002) [1983]. _Popular Opinion and Political Dissent in the Third Reich_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925111-8.
    ------ (1998). _Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris_. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-32035-0.
    ------ (2000). _Hitler 1936–1945: Nemesis_. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-32252-1.
    ------ (2008). _Hitler, the Germans, and the Final Solution_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12427-9.
    Kochanski, Halik (2012). _The Eagle Unbowed: Poland and the Poles in the Second World War_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-06814-8.
    Kwiet, Konrad (2004). "Forced Labour of German Jews in Nazi Germany". In Cesarani, David (ed.). _Holocaust: Concepts in Historical Studies: Volume II: From the Persecution of the Jews to Mass Murder_. London: Routledge. pp. 59–81. ISBN 0-415-27511-3.
    Langbein, Hermann (1998) [1994]. "The Auschwitz Underground". In Gutman, Yisrael; Berenbaum, Michael (eds.). _Anatomy of the Auschwitz Death Camp_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. pp. 485–502. ISBN 0-253-20884-X.
    Landau, Ronnie S. (2016) [1992]. _The Nazi Holocaust: Its History and Meaning_. London: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-78076-971-4.
    Laqueur, Walter (2001). "Jewish Brigade". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 351. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Lehnstaedt, Stephan (2016) [2010]. _Occupation in the East: The Daily Lives of German Occupiers in Warsaw and Minsk, 1939–1944_. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-78533-323-1.
    Lifton, Robert J. (2000) [1986]. _The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psychology of Genocide_ (2000 ed.). New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04905-9.
    Lipstadt, Deborah (1994) [1993]. _Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory_. New York: Penguin Books.
    Löb, Ladislaus (2009). _Rezso Kasztner. The Daring Rescue of Hungarian Jews: A Survivor's Account_. London: Random House/Pimlico.
     London, Louise (2000). _Whitehall and the Jews, 1933–1948: British Immigration Policy, Jewish Refugees and the Holocaust_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521631877.
    Longerich, Peter (2010). _Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews_. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280436-5.
    ------ (2012). _Heinrich Himmler_. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-959232-6.
    Lusane, Clarence (2003). _Hitler's Black Victims: The Historical Experience of Afro-Germans, European Blacks, Africans and African Americans in the Nazi Era_. London; New York: Routledge.
     Lustigman, Marsha; Lustigman, Michael M. (16 October 1994). "Bibliographic Classification of Documents Dealing with the Subject 'Holocaust'". Alexandria, VA: 5th ASIS SIG/CR Classification Research Workshop: 111–120.
    Marcuse, Harold (2001). _Legacies of Dachau: The Uses and Abuses of a Concentration Camp, 1933–2001_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-55204-4.
    Marrus, Michael R. (1987). _The Holocaust in History_. New York: Meridian. ISBN 0-452-00953-7.
    ------ (2015). "Series Preface". In Marrus, Michael R. (ed.). _The Nazi Holocaust. Part 1: Perspectives on the Holocaust_. Westport and London: Meckler.
    Matthäus, Jürgen (2004). "Operation Barbarossa and the Onset of the Holocaust, June–December 1941". In Browning, Christopher (ed.). _The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939 – March 1942_. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. pp. 244–308. ISBN 0-8032-1327-1.
    Matthäus, Jürgen (Fall 2007). "Controlled Escalation: Himmler's Men in the Summer of 1941 and the Holocaust in the Occupied Soviet Territories". _Holocaust and Genocide Studies_. **21** (2): 218–242. doi:10.1093/hgs/dcm037.
     McKale, Donald M. (2002). _Hitler's Shadow War: The Holocaust and World War II_. New York: Cooper Square Press. ISBN 0-8154-1211-8.
    Michman, Dan (2012) [2010]. "Jews". In Hayse, Peter; Roth, John K. (eds.). _The Oxford Handbook of Holocaust Studies_. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp. 185–202. ISBN 978-0-19-966882-3.
    Milton, Sybil (2001). "Jehovah's Witnesses". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 346–350. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Montague, Patrick (2012). _Chelmno and the Holocaust: A History of Hitler's First Death Camp_. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3527-2.
    Müller-Hill, Benno (1999). "The Blood from Auschwitz and the Silence of the Scholars". _History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences_. **21** (3): 331–365. JSTOR 23332180.
    Naimark, Norman M. (2001). _Fires of Hatred: Ethnic Cleansing in Twentieth-Century Europe_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00313-6.
    Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis R. (2000). _The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust_. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-11200-9.
    Noakes, Jeremy; Pridham, Geoffrey (1983). _Nazism: A History in Documents and Eyewitness Accounts, 1919–1945_. New York: Schocken Books. OCLC 809750541.
     Novick, Peter (2000) [1999]. _The Holocaust in American Life_. New York: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-08232-8.
    Orth, Karin (2009). "Camps and Subcamps under the SS-Inspectorate of Concentration Camps/Business Administration Main Office". In Megargee, Geoffrey P. (ed.). _Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos, 1933–1945_. **1A**. Bloomington and Indianapolis: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Indiana University Press. pp. 181–196. ISBN 978-0-253-35328-3.
    Peukert, Detlev (1987) [1982]. _Inside Nazi Germany: Conformity, Opposition and Racism In Everyday Life_. Translated by Deveson, Richard. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-04480-1.
    ------ (1994). "The Genesis of the 'Final Solution' from the Spirit of Science". In Crew, David F. (ed.). _Nazism and German Society, 1933–1945_. London: Routledge. pp. 274–299. ISBN 0-415-08240-4.
    Piotrowski, Tadeusz (1998). _Poland's Holocaust: Ethnic Strife, Collaboration With Occupying Forces and Genocide in the Second Republic, 1918–1947_. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company.
    Piper, Franciszek (1998a) [1994]. "The Number of Victims". In Gutman, Yisrael; Berenbaum, Michael (eds.). _Anatomy of the Auschwitz Death Camp_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. pp. 61–80. ISBN 0-253-20884-X.
    ------ (1998b) [1994]. "Gas chambers and Crematoria". In Gutman, Yisrael; Berenbaum, Michael (eds.). _Anatomy of the Auschwitz Death Camp_. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. pp. 157–182. ISBN 0-253-20884-X.
    * ------ (2000). Długoborski, Wacław; Piper, Franciszek (eds.). _Auschwitz, 1940–1945. Central Issues in the History of the Camp. Volume III: Mass Murder_. Oświęcim: Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum. ISBN 978-8385047872.
    * Pohl, Dieter (2019). "Right-wing Politics and Antisemitism in Europe, 1935–1940: A Survey". In Bajohr, Frank; Pohl, Dieter (eds.). _Right-Wing Politics and the Rise of Antisemitism in Europe 1935–1941_. Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag. pp. 19–38. ISBN 9783835333475.
    
    Polonsky, Antony (2001). "Polish Jewry". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 486–493. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Polonsky, Anthony; Michlic, Joanna B. (2004). "Preface". In Polonsky, Anthony; Michlic, Joanna B. (eds.). _The Neighbors Respond: The Controversy over the Jedwabne Massacre in Poland_. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press. pp. xiii–xiv. ISBN 0-691-11643-1.
    Proctor, Robert (1988). _Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-74578-7.
    Rhodes, Richard (2002). _Masters of Death: The SS-Einsatzgruppen and the Invention of the Holocaust_. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0375409004.
    Roseman, Mark (2003). _The Villa, The Lake, The Meeting: Wannsee and the Final Solution_. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 9-780-1419-2831-9.
    Rozett, Robert (1990). "Railways, German". In Gutman, Israel (ed.). _Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_. New York: Macmillan Library Reference. pp. 1221–1223. ISBN 0-02-896090-4.
    Rozett, Robert; Spector, Shmuel, eds. (2013). _Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_. Abingdon and New York: Routledge. ISBN 1135969574.
    Samuels, Simon (2009). "Applying the Lessons of the Holocaust". In Alan S. Rosenbaum (ed.). _Is the Holocaust Unique? Perspectives on Comparative Genocide_. Boulder, CO Philadelphia, PA: Westview Press Perseus Books Group distributor. pp. 259–270. ISBN 978-0-8133-4406-5.
    Schelvis, Jules (2014) [2008]. _Sobibor: A History of a Nazi Death Camp_. London and New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84520-418-1.
    Snyder, Louis (1976). _Encyclopedia of the Third Reich_. New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-059525-9.
    Snyder, Timothy (2010). _Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin_. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00239-9.
    ------ (2015). _Black Earth: The Holocaust as History and Warning_. New York: Tim Duggan Books. ISBN 978-1-101-90347-6.
    Spector, Shmuel (1 January 1990). "Aktion 1005—Effacing the murder of millions". _Holocaust and Genocide Studies_. **5** (2): 157–173. doi:10.1093/hgs/5.2.157.
     Stackelberg, Roderick; Winkle, Sally A. (2002). _The Nazi Germany Sourcebook: An Anthology of Texts_. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-22213-3.
    Stargardt, Nicholas (2010). "Children". In Hayes, Peter; Roth, John K. (eds.). _The Oxford Handbook of Holocaust Studies_. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 218–232. ISBN 978-0-19-921186-9.
    Steakley, James (January – February 1974). "Homosexuals and the Third Reich". _The Body Politic_ (11).
    Stone, Dan (2010). _Histories of the Holocaust_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-956679-2.
    Strous, Rael D. (2007). "Psychiatry during the Nazi Era: Ethical Lessons for the Modern Professional". _Annals of General Psychiatry_. **6** (8): 8. doi:10.1186/1744-859X-6-8. PMC 1828151. PMID 17326822.
     Szafranski, Jan (1960). "Poland's Losses in World War II". _1939-1945 War Losses in Poland_. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Zachodnie. pp. 39–72.
    Tec, Nechama (2001). "Resistance in Eastern Europe". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 543–550. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Trunk, Isaiah (1996) [1972]. _Judenrat: The Jewish Councils in Eastern Europe under Nazi Occupation_. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 0-8032-9428-X.
    United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (1996). _Historical Atlas of the Holocaust_. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 0-02-897451-4.
    Wachsmann, Nikolaus (2015). _KL: A History of the Nazi Concentration Camps_. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-11825-9.
    Weinberg, David (2001). "France". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 213–222. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    Yahil, Leni (1990). _The Holocaust: The Fate of European Jewry, 1932–1945_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504523-9.
    Zimmerman, Joshua D. (2015). _The Polish Underground and the Jews, 1939–1945_. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-1070-1426-8.
    Zuccotti, Susan (1993). _The Holocaust, the French, and the Jews_. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-03034-3.
    Zweig, Ronald (2001). "Reparations, German". In Laqueur, Walter (ed.). _The Holocaust Encyclopedia_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 530–532. ISBN 0-300-08432-3.
    

## External links

Main article: Bibliography of The Holocaust

    
        * Global Directory of Holocaust Museums.
    * H-Holocaust, H-Net discussion list for librarians, scholars and advanced students.
    * "World War II: Holocaust, The Extermination of European Jews". Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library.
    * "Common Questions about the Holocaust", United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
    * "Auschwitz: Drone video of Nazi concentration camp. BBC News, 27 January 2015.
    * "Human laboratory animals". _Life_ magazine, 22(8), 24 February 1947, pp. 81–84.
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

The Holocaust

* * *

| By territory|

    
        * Albania
    * Austria
    * Belarus
    * Belgium
    * Croatia
    * Czech Republic
    * Estonia
    * France
    * Germany
    * Greece
    * Hungary
    * Italy
    * Latvia
    * Lithuania
    * Luxembourg
    * The Netherlands
    * Norway
    * Poland
    * Romania
    * Russia
    * Serbia
    * Slovakia
    * Ukraine
    

---|--- 

Lists and  
timelines

|

    
        * Victims of Nazism
    * Holocaust survivors
      * Sobibór
    * Victims and survivors of Auschwitz
    * Books and other resources
      * Films
    * Depopulated shtetls
    * Nazi concentration camps
    * Nazi ideologues
    * Nazi ghettos
    * Rescuers of Jews
    * Timeline
      * France
      * Norway
      * Treblinka
    

|

Camps and ghettos

* * *

| Concentration|

    
        * Bergen-Belsen
    * Bogdanovka
    * Buchenwald
    * Dachau
    * Danica
    * Đakovo
    * Flossenbürg
    * Gonars
    * Gospić
    * Gross-Rosen
    * Herzogenbusch
    * Jadovno
    * Janowska
    * Kaiserwald
    * Kaufering
    * Kraków-Płaszów
    * Kruščica
    * Lobor
    * Mauthausen-Gusen
    * Mittelbau-Dora
    * Neuengamme
    * Ravensbrück
    * Sachsenhausen
    * Salaspils
    * Sereď
    * Sisak
    * Stutthof
    * Tenja
    * Topovske Šupe
    * Warsaw
    

---|---  
Extermination|

    
        * Auschwitz-Birkenau
    * Bełżec
    * Chełmno
    * Jasenovac
    * Majdanek
    * Maly Trostenets
    * Sajmište
    * Slana
    * Sobibor
    * Treblinka
    

Transit|

    
        * ** be**
    * Breendonk
    * Mechelen
    * **fr**
    * Gurs
    * Drancy
    * **it**
    * Bolzano
    * Borgo San Dalmazzo
    * Risiera di San Sabba
    * **nl**
    * Amersfoort
    * Schoorl
    * Westerbork
    

Methods|

    
        * Einsatzgruppen
    * Gas van
    * Gas chamber
    * Extermination through labour
    * Human experimentation
    

Nazi units|

    
        * SS- _Totenkopfverbände_
    * Concentration Camps Inspectorate
    * _Politische Abteilung_
    * _Sanitätswesen_
    

Ghettos|

| Poland|

    
        * Białystok
    * Kraków
    * Łódź
    * Lublin
    * Lwów
    * Radom
    * Warsaw
    

---|---  
Elsewhere|

    
        * Budapest
    * Kovno
    * Minsk
    * Riga
    * Theresienstadt
    * Vilna
    

_Judenrat_ |

    
        * Jewish Ghetto Police
    * Reich Association of Jews in Germany
    * Ústredňa Židov
    

|

Victims

* * *

| Jews|

| Roundups|

    
        * **fr**
    * Izieu
    * Marseille
    * Vel' d'Hiv
    

---|---  
Pogroms|

    
        * _Kristallnacht_
    * Bucharest
    * Dorohoi
    * Iaşi
    * Jedwabne
    * Kaunas
    * Lviv
    * Odessa
    * Tykocin
    * Wąsosz
    

"Final Solution"|

    
        * Wannsee Conference
    * Operation Reinhard
    * Holocaust trains
    * Erntefest
    * Extermination camps
    

_Einsatzgruppen_ |

    
        * Babi Yar
    * Kamianets-Podilskyi
    * Ninth Fort
    * Piaśnica
    * Ponary
    * Rumbula
    

Resistance|

    
        * Jewish partisans
    * Ghetto uprisings
      * Warsaw
      * Białystok
      * Częstochowa
    * "Like sheep to the slaughter"
    

Rescue|

    
        * Aid and Rescue Committee
    * Bielski partisans
    * Le Chambon-sur-Lignon
    * Danish underground
    * Working Group
    * Żegota
    

End of World War II|

    
        * Death marches
    * Wola massacre
    

Others|

    
        * Romani people (gypsies)
    * Poles
    * Soviet POWs
    * Slavs in Eastern Europe
    * Homosexuals
    * People with disabilities
    * Serbs
    * Freemasons
    * Jehovah's Witnesses
    * Black people
    

|

Responsibility

* * *

| Organizations|

    
        * Nazi Party
    * _Schutzstaffel_ (SS)
    * Reich Security Main Office (RSHA)
    * Sicherheitsdienst (SD)
    * Waffen-SS
    * Wehrmacht
    

---|---  
Units|

    
        * _Einsatzgruppen_
    * Police Regiments
    * Orpo Police Battalions
    

Collaborators|

    
        * Arajs Kommando
    * Lithuanian Security Police
    * Nederlandsche SS
    * Rollkommando Hamann
    * Special Brigades
    * Topf and Sons
    * Trawnikis
    * Ukrainian Auxiliary Police
    * Ypatingasis būrys
    

Individuals|

    
        * Major perpetrators
    * Nazi ideologues
    

|

    
        * Early elements
    * Aftermath
    * Remembrance
    

* * *

| Early elements|

    
        * Nazi racial policy
    * Nazi eugenics
    * Nuremberg Laws
    * Haavara Agreement
    * Madagascar Plan
    * Nisko Plan
    * Forced euthanasia (Action T4)
    

---|---  
Aftermath|

    
        * Holocaust survivors
      * Bricha
      * Survivor guilt
    * Secondary antisemitism
    * Postwar violence
    * Nuremberg trials
    * Denazification
    * Reparations
    * Holocaust denial
      * trivialization
    

Remembrance|

    
        * Days of remembrance
    * Memorials and museums
    * Academia
    * Righteous Among the Nations
    * Yizkor books
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Antisemitism

* * *

Core topics|

    
        * Xenophobia
    * History
    * Timeline
      * 19th C.
      * 20th
      * 21st
    * Geography
    * Religious antisemitism
    * Canards
    * Persecution of Jews
    * New antisemitism
      * 3D Test
      * Working Definition
    * Racial antisemitism
    * Secondary antisemitism
    

Antisemitism and|

    
        * Christianity
    * Islam
    * the Nation of Islam
    * Universities
    

Related topics|

    
        * Anti-Zionism
    * _The International Jew_
    * Jewish Bolshevism
    * Ku Klux Klan
    * Nazi propaganda
    * Philo-Semitism
    * _The Protocols of the Elders of Zion_
    * Self-hating Jew
    

Religious antisemitism|

    
        * Anti-Judaism
    * Martin Luther
    * Spanish Inquisition
    * Portuguese Inquisition
    * Blood curse
    * Blood libel
    * Host desecration
    * _Judensau_
    * Pogrom
    

Antisemitic laws, policies  
and government actions

|

    
        * Ghetto benches
    * Hep-Hep riots
    * Pogroms in the Russian Empire
    * May Laws
    * 1968 Polish political crisis
    * Leo Frank trial (USA)
    * Dreyfus Affair (France)
    * Farhud (Iraq)
    * General Order No. 11 (USA, 1862)
    * Historical revisionism (negationism)
    * Nazi Germany and the Holocaust
    * Racial policy of Nazi Germany
    * Holocaust denial
    * The Zionist Occupation Government conspiracy theory
    

Antisemitic websites|

    
        * Bible Believers
    * The Daily Stormer
    * Institute for Historical Review
    * Jew Watch
    * Metapedia
    * Podblanc
    * Radio Islam
    * Redwatch
    * The Right Stuff
    * Stormfront
    

Organizations working  
against antisemitism

|

    
        * Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
    * Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP)
    * Community Security Trust
    * Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI)
    * Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC)
    * Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)
    * Stephen Roth Institute
    * Yad Vashem
    

Locations|

    
        * Arab world
    * Europe
    * Austria
    * Canada
    * France
    * Greece
    * Hungary
    * Italy
    * Japan
    * Norway
    * Pakistan
    * Russia
      * Imperial
      * Soviet
    * Spain
    * Sweden
    * Turkey
    * Ukraine
    * United Kingdom
    * United States
    * Venezuela
    

More articles related to the Holocaust

* * *

|

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Adolf Hitler

* * *

Politics|

    
        * Führer
    * Political views
    * Political directives
    * Speeches
    * _Mein Kampf_
    * _Zweites Buch_
    * Last will and testament
    * Books
    * Nazism
    

Events|

    
        * Military career
    * Rise to power
    * Hitler Cabinet
    * Nazi Germany
    * World War II
    * The Holocaust
    * Assassination attempts
    * Death
    

Places of residence|

| Führer Headquarters|

    
        * Berghof (Kehlsteinhaus)
    * Reich Chancellery
    * Wolf's Lair
    * Werwolf
    * Adlerhorst
    * Special train ( _Führersonderzug_ )
    * Führerbunker
    * Wolfsschlucht I
    * Wolfsschlucht II
    * Anlage Süd
    * Felsennest
    

---|---  
Civilian residences|

    
        * Braunau am Inn
    * Linz
    * Vienna (Meldemannstraße dormitory)
    * Munich (16 Prinzregentenplatz)
    

Personal life|

    
        * Health
    * Wealth and income
    * Religious views
    * Sexuality
    * Vegetarianism
    * Staff
    * Bodyguard
    * August Kubizek
    * Stefanie Rabatsch
    * Psychopathography
    * Hitler's Table Talk
    * Paintings
    * 50th birthday
    

Personal belongings|

    
        * Hitler's Globe
    * Private library
    

Perceptions|

    
        * Books
    * In popular culture
    * _The Victory of Faith_
    * _Triumph of the Will_
    * _Hitler: The Last Ten Days_
    * _The Meaning of Hitler_
    * Hitler "Diaries"
    * _Moloch_
    * _Hitler: The Rise of Evil_
    * _Downfall_
    

Family|

    
        * Eva Braun (wife)
    * Alois Hitler (father)
    * Klara Hitler (mother)
    * Johann Georg Hiedler (grandfather)
    * Maria Schicklgruber (grandmother)
    * Angela Hitler (half-sister)
    * Paula Hitler (sister)
    * Leo Rudolf Raubal Jr. (half-nephew)
    * Geli Raubal (half-niece)
    * William Stuart-Houston (half-nephew)
    * Heinz Hitler (half-nephew)
    * Jean-Marie Loret (son?)
    * **Pets:** Blondi (dog)
    

Other|

    
        * Hitler's possible monorchism
    * Conspiracy theories about Hitler's death
    * Streets named after Hitler
    * Mannerheim recording
    
    * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

_Einsatzgruppen_ and _Einsatzkommandos_

* * *

People|

| Director|

    
        * Reinhard Heydrich
    * Ernst Kaltenbrunner
    

---|---  
Commanders of  
_Einsatzgruppen_ |

    
        * Humbert Achamer-Pifrader
    * Walther Bierkamp
    * Horst Böhme
    * Erich Ehrlinger
    * Wilhelm Fuchs
    * Heinz Jost
    * Erich Naumann
    * Arthur Nebe
    * Otto Ohlendorf
    * Friedrich Panzinger
    * Otto Rasch
    * Heinrich Seetzen
    * Franz Walter Stahlecker
    * Bruno Streckenbach
    

Commanders of  
_Einsatzkommandos_ ,  
_Sonderkommandos_ |

    
        * Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski
    * Rudolf Batz
    * Ernst Biberstein
    * Wolfgang Birkner
    * Helmut Bischoff
    * Paul Blobel
    * Walter Blume
    * Friedrich-Wilhelm Bock
    * Otto Bradfisch
    * Werner Braune
    * Friedrich Buchardt
    * Fritz Dietrich
    * Karl Jäger
    * Friedrich Jeckeln
    * Waldemar Klingelhöfer
    * Wolfgang Kügler
    * Walter Kutschmann
    * Rudolf Lange
    * Gustav Adolf Nosske
    * Hans-Adolf Prützmann
    * Walter Rauff
    * Martin Sandberger
    * Hermann Schaper
    * Karl Eberhard Schöngarth
    * Erwin Schulz
    * Franz Six
    * Eugen Steimle
    * Eduard Strauch
    * Martin Weiss
    * Udo von Woyrsch
    

Other members|

    
        * August Becker
    * Lothar Fendler
    * Joachim Hamann
    * Emil Haussmann
    * Felix Landau
    * Albert Widmann
    

Collaborators|

    
        * Viktors Arājs
    * Herberts Cukurs
    * Antanas Impulevičius
    * Konrāds Kalējs
    * Algirdas Klimaitis
    

Groups|

| German|

    
        * SS
    * RSHA
    * SD
    * Orpo
    * 8th SS Cavalry Division Florian Geyer
    * _Volksdeutscher Selbstschutz_
    * Sonderdienst
    

---|---  
Non-German|

    
        * _Schutzmannschaft_ (Belarusian, Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Ukrainian)
    * Arajs _Kommando_
    * Lithuanian Security Police
    * _Rollkommando_ Hamann
    * TDA
    * _Ypatingasis būrys_
    

Crimes|

| Belarus|

    
        * Łachwa Ghetto
    * Minsk Ghetto
    * Slutsk Affair
    

---|---  
Estonia|

    
        * Kalevi-Liiva
    

Latvia|

    
        * Burning of the Riga synagogues
    * Dünamünde Action
    * Jelgava
    * Pogulianski
    * Rumbula
    * Liepāja (Šķēde)
    

Lithuania|

    
        * Ninth Fort
    * Kaunas June 1941
    * Kaunas 29 October 1941
    * Ninth Fort November 1941
    * Ponary
    

Poland|

    
        * Operation Tannenberg
    * _Intelligenzaktion_
    * _AB-Aktion_
    * Operation Reinhard
    

Russia|

    
        * Gully of Petrushino
    * Zmievskaya Balka
    * Lokot Autonomy
    

Slovakia|

    
        * Kremnička and Nemecká
    

Ukraine|

    
        * Babi Yar
    * Drobytsky Yar
    * Drohobycz
    * Kamianets-Podilskyi
    * Lviv pogroms
    * Mizocz Ghetto
    * Odessa
    

Records|

    
        * The Black Book
    * Commissar Order
    * _Einsatzgruppen_ trial
    * _Generalplan Ost_
    * Jäger Report
    * Korherr Report
    * Special Prosecution Book-Poland ( _Sonderfahndungsbuch Polen_ )
    * _Einsatzgruppen_ reports
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Genocide topics

* * *

Genocides  
(list by death toll)|

    
        * Dzungar Mongols (1750s)
    * Circassian genocide (1860s)
    * Selk'nam genocide (1890s–1900s)
    * Herero and Namaqua (1904–1907)
    * Greek (1914–1923)
    * Assyrian (1914–1925)
    * Armenian (1915–1923)
    * Holodomor (1932–1933)
    * The Holocaust (1941–1945)
    * Porajmos (1941–1944)
    * Bangladesh (1971)
    * East Timor (1974–1999)
    * Cambodian (1975–1979)
    * Guatemalan Maya (1981–1983)
    * Anfal genocide (1986–1989)
    * Burundian genocides (1972 & 1993)
    * Rwandan genocide (1994)
    * Bosnian genocide (1992–1995)
    * Rohingya (2017–)
    

Terms|

    
        * Democide
      * Autogenocide
    * Politicide
      * Classicide
      * Eliticide
    * Ethnocide
    * Cultural genocide
    * Eugenics
    * Gendercide
    * Genocidal massacre
    * Genocide of indigenous peoples
    * Policide
    * Utilitarian genocide
    

Methods|

    
        * Genocidal rape
    * Extermination camp
    * Killing Fields
    * Death marches
    * Death squads
    

Genocide denial|

    
        * The Holocaust
      * trivialization
    * Armenian
    * Bosnian
    * Rwandan
    * Holodomor
    * Cambodian
    

Issues|

    
        * Definitions
    * Genocide law
    * Prevention
    * Effects on young survivors
    

Legal proceedings|

    
        * International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
      * Trial of Radovan Karadžić
      * Trial of Ratko Mladić
      * Trial of Slobodan Milošević
    * International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
    * Khmer Rouge Tribunal
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Heinrich Himmler

* * *
    
        * _Reichsführer-SS_
    * Chief of German Police
    * Minister of the Interior
    

_Reichsführer-SS_ |

    
        * Ideology of the SS
    * Personal Staff Reichsführer-SS
    * Freundeskreis Reichsführer-SS ("Circle of Friends of the Reichsführer-SS")
    * Adolf Hitler
    * Reinhard Heydrich (Chief of the RSHA)
    * Ernst Kaltenbrunner (successor as Chief of the RSHA)
    * Karl Wolff (Chief of Personal Staff)
    * Hedwig Potthast (secretary)
    * Rudolf Brandt (Personal Administrative Officer to RFSS)
    * Hermann Gauch (adjutant)
    * Werner Grothmann (aide-de-camp)
    * Heinz Macher (second personal assistant)
    * Walter Schellenberg (personal aide)
    * Karl Maria Wiligut (occultist)
    

Organizations|

    
        * Schutzstaffel
    * Gestapo
    * Ahnenerbe
    * Lebensborn
    * Reich Central Office for the Combating of Homosexuality and Abortion
    

Responsibility for  
the Holocaust|

    
        * The Holocaust
    * Porajmos
    * Crimes against Poles
    * Crimes against Soviet POWs
    * Persecution of Slavs in Eastern Europe
    * Persecution of homosexuals
    * Persecution of Serbs
    * Suppression of Freemasonry
    * Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses
    * Persecution of black people
    * Kommandostab Reichsführer-SS
    * Volksliste
    * Operation Reinhard
    * Hegewald
    * Posen speeches
    * Himmler-Kersten Agreement
    

Family|

    
        * Margarete Himmler (wife)
    * Gudrun Burwitz (daughter)
    * Hedwig Potthast (mistress)
    * Gebhard Ludwig (older brother)
    * Ernst (younger brother)
    * Katrin Himmler (great-niece)
    * Heinz Kokott (brother-in-law)
    * Richard Wendler (brother-in-law)
    

Military|

    
        * Operation Himmler
    * Army Group Oberrhein
    * Army Group Vistula
    * Operation Nordwind
    

Failed assassins|

    
        * Václav Morávek
    * Thomas Sneum
    * Claus von Stauffenberg
    * Henning von Tresckow
    

People|

    
        * Erhard Heiden (predecessor as Reichsführer-SS)
    * Karl Hanke (successor as Reichsführer-SS)
    * Falk Zipperer (closest friend)
    * Karl Gebhardt (personal physician)
    * Felix Kersten (personal masseur)
    * Hugo Blaschke (dentist)
    * Sidney Excell (man who arrested Himmler)
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Jews and Judaism

* * *
    
        * Outline of Judaism
    * Index of Jewish history-related articles
    

History|

    
        * Timeline
    * Israelites
    * Origins of Judaism
    * Ancient Israel and Judah
    * Second Temple period
    * Rabbinic Judaism
    * Middle Ages
    * Haskalah
    * Zionism
    

Population|

    
        * Assimilation
    * Diaspora
      * Ashkenazi
      * Sephardi
      * Mizrahi
    * Languages
      * Hebrew
      * Judeo-Arabic
      * Judaeo-Spanish
      * Yiddish
    * Lists of Jews
    * Persecution
      * Antisemitism
    

Philosophy|

    
        * Beliefs
      * Mitzvah
    * Chosen people
    * Conversion
    * Eschatology
      * Messiah
    * Ethics
    * God
    * Halakha
    * Kabbalah
    * Land of Israel
    * Who is a Jew?
    

Schisms|

    
        * Religious movements
      * Orthodox
        * Haredi
        * Hasidic
        * Modern
      * Conservative
      * Reform
      * Reconstructionist
      * Humanistic
      * Karaite
      * relations
    * Secularism
    

Literature|

    
        * Tanakh
      * Torah
      * Nevi'im
      * Ketuvim
    * Rabbinic
      * Mishnah
      * Talmud
      * Midrash
    * Kabbalah texts
      * Zohar
    * Shulchan Aruch
    * Siddur
    * Hebrew literature
    

Culture|

    
        * Calendar
      * Holidays
    * Cuisine
      * Kashrut
    * Education
    * Leadership
      * Rabbi
    * Marriage
    * Music
    * Names
    * Politics
    * Prayer
      * Synagogue
      * Hazzan
    * Symbolism
    

Studies|

    
        * Ashkenazi intelligence
    * Genetics
    * Jew (word)
    * Jewish Virtual Library
    * Relations with other Abrahamic religions
      * Christianity
        * Catholic Church
      * Islam
    
    * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category: Jews and Judaism
    * ![Star of David.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Star_of_David.svg/14px-Star_of_David.svg.png) Judaism portal
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Open_book_nae_02.svg/16px-Open_book_nae_02.svg.png) _Judaism_ – Wikipedia book
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Nazism

* * *

Organisation|

    
        * National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP)
    * Sturmabteilung (SA)
    * Schutzstaffel (SS)
    * Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo)
    * Hitler Youth (HJ)
    * National Socialist Flyers Corps (NSFK)
    * National Socialist Motor Corps (NSKK)
    * League of German Girls (BDM)
    * National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise (NSRL)
    * National Socialist Women's League (NSF)
    * Reich Labour Service (RAD)
    * Werwolf
    

|

![Nazi

swastika](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/National_Socialist_swastika.svg/50px-

National_Socialist_swastika.svg.png)

History|

    
        * Early timeline
    * Adolf Hitler's rise to power
    * Machtergreifung
    * Re-armament
    * Nazi Germany
    * Night of the Long Knives
    * Nuremberg Rally
    * Anti-Comintern Pact
    * Kristallnacht
    * World War II
    * Tripartite Pact
    * The Holocaust
    * Nuremberg trials
    * Denazification
    * Consequences
    

Ideology|

    
        * Architecture
    * Gleichschaltung
    * Anti-democratic thought
    * Strasserism
    * Hitler's political views
    * _Mein Kampf_ (Hitler)
    * _The Myth of the Twentieth Century_ (Rosenberg)
    * National Socialist Program
    * New Order
    * _Preussentum und Sozialismus_
    * Propaganda
    * Religious aspects
    * Women in Nazi Germany
    

Race|

    
        * Blood and soil
    * Eugenics
    * Greater Germanic Reich
    * Heim ins Reich
    * Lebensborn
    * Master race
    * Racial policy
    * Religion
    

Atrocites|

    
        * Action T4
    * Final Solution
    * Human experimentation
    * Porajmos
    

Outside  
Germany|

    
        * Arrow Cross Party (Hungary)
    * Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party
    * Czechoslovakia 
      * German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia)
      * Sudeten German Party
    * Greek National Socialist Party
    * Hungarian National Socialist Party
    * Liechtenstein 
      * German National Movement in Liechtenstein
      * Liechtenstein Homeland Service
    * Nasjonal Samling (Norway)
    * National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands
    * National Socialist Bloc (Sweden)
    * National Socialist League (UK)
    * National Socialist Movement of Chile
    * National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark
    * National Unity Party (Canada)
    * Nationalist Liberation Alliance (Argentina)
    * Nazism in Brazil
    * South Africa 
      * Ossewabrandwag (South Africa)
      * South African Gentile National Socialist Movement
    * Switzerland 
      * Eidgenössische Sammlung
      * National Front (Switzerland)
      * National Movement of Switzerland
      * National Union (Switzerland)
    * United States 
      * American Nazi Party
      * German American Bund
      * National Socialist Movement
    * World Union of National Socialists
    

Lists|

    
        * Books by or about Hitler
    * Ideologues
    * Leaders and officials
    * Nazi Party members
    * Speeches given by Hitler
    * SS personnel
    

People|

    
        * Adolf Hitler
    * Joseph Goebbels
    * Heinrich Himmler
    * Hermann Göring
    * Erich Ludendorff
    * Martin Bormann
    * Reinhard Heydrich
    * Gregor Strasser
    * Otto Strasser
    * Albert Speer
    * Rudolf Hess
    * Ernst Kaltenbrunner
    * Adolf Eichmann
    * Joachim von Ribbentrop
    * Houston Stewart Chamberlain
    * Alfred Rosenberg
    * Wilhelm Frick
    * Hans Frank
    * Rudolf Höss
    * Josef Mengele
    * Richard Walther Darré
    * Baldur von Schirach
    * Artur Axmann
    * Ernst Röhm
    * Dietrich Eckart
    * Gottfried Feder
    * Ernst Hanfstaengl
    * Julius Streicher
    * Hermann Esser
    * Walther Funk
    * Robert Ley
    * Karl Brandt
    * Wolfram Sievers
    * Roland Freisler
    * Otto Skorzeny
    * Karl Donitz
    * Leonardo Conti
    * Wernher von Braun
    * Fritz Julius Kuhn
    * George Lincoln Rockwell
    

Related  
topics|

    
        * Esoteric Nazism
    * Far-right politics
    * German resistance
    * Glossary of Nazi Germany
    * Nazi salute
    * Neo-Nazism
    * Social Darwinism
    * Stormfront
    * Swastika
    * Völkisch movement
    * _Zweites Buch_
    
    * Category
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Racism

* * *

Types of racism|

    
        * Against Jews
    * Aversive
    * Among White people
    * Among LGBT people
    * Among US minorities
      * Colorism
    * Among hipsters
    * Consumer
    * Covert
    * Cultural
    * Environmental
    * Gendered
    * Institutional
    * Internalized
    * Islamophobia
    * Nationalist
    * New racism
      * Neo-racism
    * Reverse
    * Romantic
    * Sexual
    * Scientific
    * Societal
    * Symbolic
    

Manifestations  
of racism|

    
        * Anti-miscegenation laws
    * Expression
      * in the media
      * in Charles Dickens' works
      * in music
      * in early US films
        * Censored Eleven
      * in horror films
      * in porn
      * online
        * on Wikipedia
      * in sport
        * baseball
        * martial arts
        * soccer
      * in school curricula
      * in US politics
      * Jokes
      * Slurs
    * Racial antagonism
    * Racial determinism
    * Racial hatred
    * Racial hierarchy
      * Casta
    * Racial polarization
    * Racial quota
    * Racial vilification
    * Racial violence
      * Race war
    

Racism by region|

    
        * Africa
    * Arab world
    * Asia
    * Australia
    * Europe
    * Middle East
    * North America
    * South America
    

Related topics|

    
        * Anti-racism
    * Psychological impact
      * Psychoanalysis
    * Racial transformation
    * Passing
    * Racial democracy
    * Racial fetishism
    * Race traitor
    * List of racism-related articles
    * List of anti-ethnic terms
    

![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-

Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Religious persecution and discrimination

* * *

By group|

    
        * Ahmadiyya
    * Atheism
    * Bahá'í
    * Buddhism
    * Catholic
    * Christianity
      * modern era
    * Hinduism
      * persecution
    * Falun Gong
    * Islam
      * persecution
    * Judaism
      * antisemitism
      * religious antisemitism
      * persecution
    * Jehovah's Witness
    * Mormonism
    * Neopaganism
    * Eastern Orthodoxy
    * Oriental Orthodoxy
    * Rastafari
    * Protestantism
    * Shi'a Islam
    * Sufis
    * Zoroastrianism
    

Methods|

    
        * Arson
    * Censorship
    * Deprogramming
    * Desecration
    * Discrimination
    * Forced conversion
    * Genocide
    * Rape
    * Intolerance
    * Pogrom
    * Political abuse of psychiatry
    * Segregation
    * State atheism
    * State religion
    * Terrorism
    * Violence
    * War
    

Events|

    
        * Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain
    * Expulsion of the Moriscos
    * Decline of Buddhism in India
    * French Revolutionary dechristianisation
    * European wars of religion
    * French Wars of Religion
    * Inquisition
    * 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war
    * The Holocaust
    * Armenian Genocide
    * Pontic Greek Genocide
    * Palestinian exodus
    * Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries
    * Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent
    * Violence against Muslims in India
    * Religious violence in Bangladesh
    * Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan
    * Direct Action Day
    * Noakhali riots
    * 1971 Bangladesh genocide
    * Rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War
    * 1984 anti-Sikh riots
    * Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire
    * Soviet persecution
      * 1917-1921
      * 1921-1928
      * 1928-1941
      * 1958-1964
      * 1970-1987
      * legislation
    * Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc
    * South Thailand insurgency
    * Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus
    * 2002 Gujarat riots
    * Test Act
    * Persecution of Christians by ISIL
    

Portals: ![P religion

world.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/P_religion_world.svg/16px-

P_religion_world.svg.png) Religion

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

World War II

* * *
    
        * Outline
      * Topic lists
    * Military engagements
      * Battles
      * Operations
    * Commanders
    * Casualties
    * Conferences
    

Theaters|

    
        * Asia and Pacific
      * China
      * South-East Asia
      * North and Central Pacific
      * South-West Pacific
    * Europe
      * Western Front
      * Eastern Front
    * Mediterranean and Middle East
      * North Africa
      * East Africa
      * Italy
    * West Africa
    * Atlantic
    * North America
    * South America
    

General  
aspects|

    
        * Air warfare of World War II
      * In Europe
    * Blitzkrieg
    * Comparative military ranks
    * Cryptography
    * Declarations of war
    * Diplomacy
    * Home front
      * United States
      * Australian
      * United Kingdom
    * Lend-Lease
    * Manhattan Project
    * Military awards
    * Military equipment
    * Military production
    * Naval history
    * Nazi plunder
    * Opposition
    * Technology
      * Allied cooperation
    * Total war
    * Strategic bombing
    * Puppet states
    * Women
    * Art and World War II
    

Participants|

|

Allies  
(leaders)

|

    
        * Australia
    * Belgium
    * Brazil
    * Canada
    * China
    * Cuba
    * Czechoslovakia
    * Denmark
    * Ethiopia
    * France
    * Free France (from June 1940)
    * Greece
    * India
    * Italy (from September 1943)
    * Luxembourg
    * Mexico
    * Netherlands
    * New Zealand
    * Norway
    * Philippines (Commonwealth)
    * Poland
    * South Africa
    * Southern Rhodesia
    * Soviet Union
    * Tuva
    * United Kingdom
    * United States
      * Puerto Rico
    * Yugoslavia
    

---|--- 

Axis and  
Axis-aligned  
(leaders)

|

    
        * Albania
    * Bulgaria
    * Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China
    * Independent State of Croatia
    * Finland
    * Germany
    * Hungary
    * Free India
    * Iraq
    * Italy (until September 1943)
    * Italian Social Republic
    * Japan
    * Manchukuo
    * Philippines (Second Republic)
    * Romania
    * Slovakia
    * Thailand
    * Vichy France
      * Armed neutrality
    

Resistance|

    
        * Albania
    * Austria
    * Belgium
    * Bulgaria
    * Czech lands
    * Denmark
    * Estonia
    * Ethiopia
    * France
    * Germany
    * Greece
    * Hong Kong
    * Italy
    * Japan
    * Jewish
    * Korea
    * Latvia
    * Lithuania
    * Luxembourg
    * Malaya
    * Netherlands
    * Northeast China
    * Norway
    * Philippines
    * Poland
      * Anti-communist
    * Romania
    * Thailand
    * Soviet Union
    * Slovakia
    * Western Ukraine
    * Vietnam
    * Yugoslavia
      * Monarchists
    

Timeline|

| Prelude|

    
        * Africa
    * Asia
    * Europe
    

---|---  
1939|

    
        * Poland
    * Phoney War
    * Winter War
    * Atlantic
    * Changsha
    * China
    

1940|

    
        * _Weserübung_
    * Netherlands
    * Belgium
    * France
      * Armistice of 22 June 1940
    * Britain
    * North Africa
    * West Africa
    * British Somaliland
    * North China
    * Baltic States
    * Moldova
    * Indochina
    * Greece
    * _Compass_
    

1941|

    
        * East Africa
    * Yugoslavia
    * Shanggao
    * Greece
    * Crete
    * Iraq
    * Soviet Union ( _Barbarossa_ )
    * Finland
    * Lithuania
    * Syria and Lebanon
    * Kiev
    * Iran
    * Leningrad
    * Gorky
    * Moscow
    * Sevastopol
    * Pearl Harbor
      * The outbreak of the Pacific War
    * Hong Kong
    * Philippines
    * Changsha
    * Malaya
    * Borneo (1941–42)
    

1942|

    
        * Burma
    * Changsha
    * Java Sea
    * Coral Sea
    * Gazala
    * Dutch Harbor
    * Attu (occupation)
    * Kiska
    * Zhejiang-Jiangxi
    * Midway
    * Rzhev
    * _Blue_
    * Stalingrad
    * Singapore
    * Dieppe
    * El Alamein
    * Guadalcanal
    * _Torch_
    

1943|

    
        * Tunisia
    * Kursk
    * Smolensk
    * Gorky
    * Solomon Islands
    * Attu
    * Sicily
    * _Cottage_
    * Lower Dnieper
    * Italy
      * Armistice of Cassibile
    * Gilbert and Marshall Islands
    * Burma
    * Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
    * Changde
    

1944|

    
        * Monte Cassino / _Shingle_
    * Narva
    * Korsun–Cherkassy
    * _Tempest_
    * _Ichi-Go_
    * _Overlord_ (Battle of Normandy – D-Day)
    * _Neptune_
    * Normandy
    * Mariana and Palau
    * _Bagration_
    * Western Ukraine
    * Tannenberg Line
    * Warsaw
    * Eastern Romania
    * Belgrade
    * Paris
    * _Dragoon_
    * Gothic Line
    * _Market Garden_
    * Estonia
    * _Crossbow_
    * _Pointblank_
    * Lapland
    * Hungary
    * Leyte
    * Ardennes
      * _Bodenplatte_
    * Philippines (1944–1945)
    * Burma (1944–45)
    

1945|

    
        * Vistula–Oder
    * Iwo Jima
    * Western invasion of Germany
    * Okinawa
    * Italy (Spring 1945)
    * Borneo
    * Syrmian Front
    * Berlin
    * Czechoslovakia
    * Budapest
    * West Hunan
    * Guangxi
    * Surrender of Germany
    * Project Hula
    * Manchuria
    * Manila
    * Borneo
    * Taipei
    * Atomic bombings
      * Debate
    * Kuril Islands
      * Shumshu
    * Surrender of Japan
      * End of World War II in Asia
    

Other  
aspects|

| Aftermath|

    
        * Expulsion of Germans
    * Operation _Paperclip_
    * Operation _Osoaviakhim_
    * Operation _Keelhaul_
    * Occupation of Germany
    * Territorial changes of Germany
    * Soviet occupations
      * Romania
      * Poland
      * Hungary
      * Baltic States
    * Occupation of Japan
    * First Indochina War
    * Indonesian National Revolution
    * Chinese Civil War
    * Division of Korea
    * Cold War
    * Decolonization
    * Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
    * Popular culture
    

---|---  
War crimes|

    
        * Allied war crimes
      * Soviet war crimes
      * British war crimes
      * United States war crimes
    * German (Forced labour) / _Wehrmacht_ war crimes
      * Holocaust
      * Aftermath
      * Response
      * Prosecution
    * Italian war crimes
    * Japanese war crimes
      * Unit 731
      * Prosecution
    * Croatian war crimes 
      * against the Serbs
      * against the Jews
    * Romanian war crimes
    

Wartime  
sexual violence|

    
        * German military brothels
    * Camp brothels
    * Rape during the occupation of Japan
    * Sook Ching
    * Comfort women
    * Rape of Nanking
    * Rape of Manila
    * Rape during the occupation of Germany
    * Rape during the liberation of France
    * Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland
    

Prisoners|

    
        * Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    * German prisoners in the Soviet Union
    * German prisoners in the United States
    * Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    * Japanese prisoners
      * In the Soviet Union
    * Soviet prisoner mistreatment by Germans
    * Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    * Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    * Soviet prisoners in Finland
    

Famines|

    
        * Bengal famine of 1943
    * Chinese famine of 1942–43
    * Greek Famine of 1941-1944
    * Dutch famine of 1944–45
    * Ruzagayura famine
    * Vietnamese Famine of 1945
    
    * Bibliography
    * Category
    * Article index
    * Portal
    

**Portals**  
Access related topics|

    
        * ![GenocidePortalLogo\(ESR\)2.JPG](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/08/GenocidePortalLogo%28ESR%292.JPG/23px-GenocidePortalLogo%28ESR%292.JPG) _ **Genocide portal**_
    * ![Star of David.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Star_of_David.svg/26px-Star_of_David.svg.png) _ **Judaism portal**_
    * ![Flag of Germany \(1935–1945\).svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Flag_of_Germany_%281935%E2%80%931945%29.svg/30px-Flag_of_Germany_%281935%E2%80%931945%29.svg.png) _ **Nazi Germany portal**_
    * ![HumanRightsLogo.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/HumanRightsLogo.svg/29px-HumanRightsLogo.svg.png) _ **Human Rights portal**_
    * ![Scale of justice 2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/29px-Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png) _ **Criminal justice portal**_
    * ![A coloured voting box.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/01/A_coloured_voting_box.svg/30px-A_coloured_voting_box.svg.png) _ **Politics portal**_
    * ![P history.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/P_history.svg/30px-P_history.svg.png) _ **History portal**_
    

---|--- 

* * *

Find out more on Wikipedia's  
**Sister projects** |

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/22px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media
    

from Commons

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/30px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News stories
    

from Wikinews

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/30px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png)Definitions
    

from Wiktionary

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/30px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png)Textbooks
    

from Wikibooks

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/25px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations
    

from Wikiquote

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/29px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Source texts
    

from Wikisource

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Wikiversity-logo.svg/30px-Wikiversity-logo.svg.png)Learning resources
    

from Wikiversity

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

    
        * GND: 4073091-8
    * LCCN: sh85061515
    * NDL: 01111326
    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Holocaust&oldid=900679942"

Categories:

    
        * The Holocaust
    * 1940s in Europe
    * Anti-black racism in Europe
    * Anti-communism
    * Anti-Masonry
    * Antisemitism in Europe
    * Anti-Slavic sentiment
    * Anti-Russian sentiment
    * Anti-Polish sentiment in Europe
    * Ethnic cleansing in Europe
    * Genocides
    * Genocides and ethnic violence perpetrated by fascist regimes
    * History of the Jews in Europe
    * History of the Romani people during World War II
    * Homophobia
    * Human rights abuses
    * Nazi war crimes
    * Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses
    * Persecution of Jews
    * Vichy France
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Articles containing Hebrew-language text
    * Webarchive template wayback links
    * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2018
    * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    * Articles with short description
    * Use dmy dates from March 2019
    * Articles containing Greek-language text
    * Articles containing German-language text
    * CS1 German-language sources (de)
    * Portal templates with all redlinked portals
    * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * View source
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    * Wikinews
    * Wikiquote
    * Wikivoyage
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Afrikaans
    * Alemannisch
    * አማርኛ
    * Ænglisc
    * العربية
    * Aragonés
    * ܐܪܡܝܐ
    * Asturianu
    * Azərbaycanca
    * تۆرکجه
    * বাংলা
    * Bân-lâm-gú
    * Башҡортса
    * Беларуская
    * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    * Български
    * Boarisch
    * Bosanski
    * Brezhoneg
    * Буряад
    * Català
    * Чӑвашла
    * Čeština
    * ChiShona
    * Cymraeg
    * Dansk
    * Deutsch
    * Eesti
    * Ελληνικά
    * Español
    * Esperanto
    * Euskara
    * فارسی
    * Fiji Hindi
    * Føroyskt
    * Français
    * Frysk
    * Gaeilge
    * Gaelg
    * Gàidhlig
    * Galego
    * 한국어
    * Հայերեն
    * Արեւմտահայերէն
    * हिन्दी
    * Hornjoserbsce
    * Hrvatski
    * Ido
    * Ilokano
    * Bahasa Indonesia
    * Interlingua
    * Íslenska
    * Italiano
    * עברית
    * Jawa
    * Kabɩyɛ
    * ಕನ್ನಡ
    * Kapampangan
    * ქართული
    * Қазақша
    * Kernowek
    * Kinyarwanda
    * Kiswahili
    * Kurdî
    * Кыргызча
    * Ladino
    * Latina
    * Latviešu
    * Lëtzebuergesch
    * Лезги
    * Lietuvių
    * Magyar
    * Македонски
    * മലയാളം
    * Malti
    * मराठी
    * მარგალური
    * مصرى
    * مازِرونی
    * Bahasa Melayu
    * Mirandés
    * Монгол
    * မြန်မာဘာသာ
    * Nederlands
    * नेपाल भाषा
    * 日本語
    * Norsk
    * Norsk nynorsk
    * Novial
    * Occitan
    * Олык марий
    * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    * پنجابی
    * Patois
    * Piemontèis
    * Plattdüütsch
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Română
    * Romani čhib
    * Rumantsch
    * Runa Simi
    * Русиньскый
    * Русский
    * Саха тыла
    * Sardu
    * Scots
    * Seeltersk
    * Shqip
    * Sicilianu
    * Simple English
    * Slovenčina
    * Slovenščina
    * Soomaaliga
    * کوردی
    * Српски / srpski
    * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * Tagalog
    * தமிழ்
    * Татарча/tatarça
    * ไทย
    * Türkçe
    * Українська
    * اردو
    * Tiếng Việt
    * Võro
    * Winaray
    * 吴语
    * ייִדיש
    * 粵語
    * Zazaki
    * Žemaitėška
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 7 June 2019, at 01:20 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

