

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# human

adjective

hu·​man | \ ˈhyü-mən ![How to pronounce human \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) ,
ˈyü-\

## Definition of _human_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 **:** of, relating to, or characteristic of humans (see human entry 2) the
human brain human voices problems that have occurred throughout human history

2 **:** consisting of humans everyone held hands and made a human chain

3a **:** having human form or attributes the statue is more human than the
beings at his feet-- Clifton Fadiman

b **:** representative of or susceptible to the sympathies and frailties of
human nature human kindness a human weakness such an inconsistency is very
human-- P. E. More

human

noun

Definition of _human_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** a bipedal primate mammal ( _Homo sapiens_ ) **:** a person **:** man
sense 1c --usually plural a disease that affects both humans and
animalsincomprehensible to us humans-- William James broadly **:** hominid the
least developed of all ancestral humans -- A. L. Kroeber

Other Words from _human_ Synonyms  & Antonyms More Example Sentences Learn
More about _human_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _human_

Adjective

humanness \ ˈhyü-​mən-​nəs ![How to pronounce humanness

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , ˈyü-​ \ noun

Noun

humanlike \ ˈhyü-​mən-​ˌlīk ![How to pronounce humanlike

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , ˈyü-​ \ adjective

## Synonyms & Antonyms for _human_

Synonyms: Adjective

earthborn, mortal, natural

Synonyms: Noun

baby, being, bird, bod [British], body, character, cookie (or cooky),
creature, customer, devil, duck, egg, face, fish, guy, head, human being,
individual, life, man, mortal, party, person, personage, scout, slob, sort,
soul, specimen, stiff, thing, wight

Antonyms: Adjective

nonhuman

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Examples of _human_ in a Sentence

Adjective

problems that have occurred throughout _human_ history She is a very kind and
_human_ person. The dog's expression was almost _human_. The assembly line was
a _human_ machine. Everyone held hands and formed a _human_ chain.

Noun

_humans_ are the only mammals not endowed with a natural defense against the
elements, such as fur or a thick hide

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web: Adjective

The Moon Village must be able to sustain _human_ life in an otherwise
uninhabitable setting. -- Hadley Keller, _House Beautiful_ , "Is This
Inflatable City What Life Would Look Like on the Moon?," 11 Apr. 2019 What if
others are experimenting with CRISPR in ways that threaten _human_ life? --
Julia Belluz, _Vox_ , "Is the CRISPR baby controversy the start of a
terrifying new chapter in gene editing?," 22 Jan. 2019 And if the cost of
_human_ lives isn't enough to convince you, the 2015 study also found that
firearm injuries result in $48 billion worth of hospital costs and work lost
every year, the vast majority of which is attributed to fatal injuries. --
Korin Miller, _SELF_ , "6 Reasons These Doctors Are So Outspoken About Gun
Violence," 14 Nov. 2018 Is the danger worth bringing us closer to realizing
the value of _human_ life? -- Verge Staff, _The Verge_ , "Smart scares for
smart people," 31 Oct. 2018 While _human_ error and irresponsibility are to be
expected, Tesla explicitly states on its website that Autopilot should only be
operated when the driver is fully attentive and ready to take over control at
any time. -- Eric Stafford, _Car and Driver_ , "Elon Musk Tweets Tacit
Approval of Porn Video Shot in Tesla Model X on Autopilot," 10 May 2019
Chlorine is added to pools to kill bacteria, viruses and other things which
may be harmful to the _human_ body. -- Steven Macari, _Harper's BAZAAR_ ,
"Could a Shower Filter Be the Missing Component to Your Wellness Routine?," 1
May 2019 Protein structure prediction, which tries to project the three-
dimensional shape of proteins in the _human_ body, is one of the most
important problems in drug design. -- Irving Wladawsky-berger, _WSJ_ , "AI for
Molecular Design," 30 Apr. 2019 Those cannabinoids interact with the _human_
body, specifically with what medical professionals call the endocannabinoid
system — numerous receptors that bind with chemicals present in marijuana and
affect the body and mind in different ways. -- Mary Emily O'hara, _Allure_ ,
"Why People With Asthma Can Benefit From Edibles," 20 Apr. 2019

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Multiple cases of Canine Brucellosis, a bacterial disease that can be
transmitted from dogs to _humans_ and other animals, have been confirmed in
Iowa by state veterinarian Dr. Jeff Kaisand. -- Elizabeth Gulino, _House
Beautiful_ , "Multiple Cases of a Disease That Can Be Transmitted From Dogs to
Humans Are Confirmed in Iowa," 13 May 2019 May 2 is World Password Day, a
chance for security companies to plead with lazy, careless _humans_ to improve
their password habits. -- Melissa Riofrio, _PCWorld_ , "5 alarming facts in
honor of World Password Day," 2 May 2019 Some canines are even more naturally
empathetic to _humans_. -- Alexandra Gekas, _Woman's Day_ , "9 Things Your Dog
Is Trying to Tell You, According to Experts," 25 Feb. 2019 But these problems
are, as seems to be true in 2018, about _human_ error and incompetence, not
any apparent incidents of voter fraud. -- German Lopez, _Vox_ , "The Florida
voter fraud allegations, explained," 12 Nov. 2018 But many people were buried
there: Nearly 200 _human_ remains have been recovered, some beneath buildings.
-- Mark Barna, _Discover Magazine_ , "When Farmers and Foragers First Met," 24
Oct. 2018 In the 2011 trial, experts testified that air samples indicated that
decaying _human_ remains had been present in Casey’s trunk. -- _Fox News_ ,
"Casey Anthony's parents question what went wrong, who was to blame in new A
&E; special," 2 Oct. 2018 Three brothers read a story about building a kite
that could lift a _human_ being off the ground. -- Eric Johnson, _Recode_ ,
"Making things is now a global movement. But is the U.S. making enough?," 27
Aug. 2018 The study suggested that increased methane emissions — added to the
atmosphere by _humans_ extracting and burning fossil fuels — have increased
water vapor concentrations in the mesosphere by about 40 percent since the
late 1800s. -- Katie Camero, _BostonGlobe.com_ , "Once-rare cloud is now more
common, and new study says climate change is to blame," 13 July 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'human.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _human_

Adjective

15th century, in the meaning defined at sense 2

Noun

1509, in the meaning defined above

## History and Etymology for _human_

Adjective and Noun

Middle English _humain_ , from Anglo-French, from Latin _humanus_ ; akin to
Latin _homo_ human being — more at homage

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _human_

Share _human_

Post the Definition of human to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of human on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _human_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

From the Editors at Merriam-Webster

![americanisms](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

6 Filthy Americanisms that Aren't...

### 6 Filthy Americanisms that Aren't Actually American

And one that is

## Dictionary Entries near _human_

Huma

Humacao

Humala (Tasso)

human

human being

human chorionic gonadotropin

human contact

## Statistics for _human_

Last Updated

30 May 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _human_

## The first known use of _human_ was in the 15th century

See more words from the same century

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _human_

human

_adjective_

![How to pronounce human \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _human_

(Entry 1 of 2)

**:** of, relating to, or affecting people

**:** typical of people

**:** having good or bad qualities that people usually have

human

_noun_

English Language Learners Definition of _human_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** a person

See the full definition for _human_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

human

adjective

hu·​man | \ ˈhyü-mən ![How to pronounce human \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) ,
ˈyü-\

## Kids Definition of _human_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 **:** of, being, or characteristic of people as distinct from animals the
_human_ body

2 **:** having the form or characteristics of people The expression on the
dog's face was almost _human_.

human

noun

Kids Definition of _human_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** human being

Other Words from _human_

humanlike \ ˈhyü-​mən-​ˌlīk , ˈyü-​ \ adjective

human

adjective

hu·​man | \ ˈhyü-mən ![How to pronounce human \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) ,
ˈyü- ![How to pronounce human \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Medical Definition of _human_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1a **:** of, relating to, or characteristic of humans the human body human
biochemistry

b **:** primarily or usually harbored by, affecting, or attacking humans human
diseases human parasites

2 **:** being or consisting of humans the human race

3 **:** consisting of members of the family Hominidae **:** hominid

Other Words from _human_

humanness \ -​mən-​nəs ![How to pronounce humanness

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun

human

noun

Medical Definition of _human_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** a bipedal primate mammal of the genus _Homo_ ( _H. sapiens_ ) **:** man
broadly **:** hominid

Other Words from _human_

humanlike \ -​ˌlīk ![How to pronounce humanlike \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)
\ adjective

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _human_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _human_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _human_

Spanish Central: Translation of _human_

Nglish: Translation of _human_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _human_ for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about _human_

Comments on _human_

What made you want to look up _human_? Please tell us where you read or heard
it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * orange nectarine
                      * tangerine clementine
                

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

                
                                      1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
                
                      2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
                
                      3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
                

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
                

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
                

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

