

Skip to content

Visit Allstate.com

                
                                      * Good Hands
                      * Get A Quote
                      * Tools & Resources
                      * Search
                

Search

![Everyday Peace of Mind from Allstate](https://www.allstate.com/blog/wp-

content/themes/allstateblog/assets/web/media/images/logo.png)

                
                                      * Auto
                      * Home
                      * Money
                      * Small Business
                      * Pets
                      * Renters
                      * Motorcycle
                      * Español
                
                      * #### Get Started Today
                
                      * Select Quote Type Type of InsuranceHomeAutoRentersLifeCondoMotorcycleBoatATV/Rec. VehicleBusiness Insurance
                
                      * Get a quote
                

Retrieve a saved quote

##### Follow Us

RSS Feed

Connect with us on Facebook

Connect with us on Twitter

Connect with us on Instagram

Connect with us on Pinterest

Connect with us on YouTube

Connect with us on LinkedIn

## You May Also Like

                
                                      * ![Parents watching teenage boy behind the wheel.](https://i0.wp.com/www.allstate.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/teenage-boy-in-drivers-seat-with-parents-watching_T3.jpg?resize=335%2C270&ssl=1)
                

Tips for Teaching Your Teen Driver

                
                                      * ![A teen driver is sitting in the driver's seat of a car and holding a car key, while putting on his seatbelt.](https://i0.wp.com/www.allstate.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Teen-Sitting-In-Car-Holding-Keys_MediaBin.jpg?resize=335%2C270&ssl=1)
                

4 Tips to Prepare Your Teen to Drive Solo

                
                                      * ![Teens riding in backseat of friends car.](https://i0.wp.com/www.allstate.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Teens-riding-in-car_Getty-e1553094263129.jpg?resize=335%2C270&ssl=1)
                

Avoid the Distractions: Tips for Being a Better Passenger

### Ad Widgets

Main Content

Teens and Graduated Driver Licenses | The Allstate Blog The Allstate Blog Team

New

# Keeping Teens Safe With Graduated Driver Licensing

                
                                      * May 29, 2019
                      * By  The Allstate Blog Team
                

https://www.allstate.com/blog/graduated-driver-licensing/ Getting a driver's
license is a rite of passage for many teenagers. While teen drivers may enjoy
the newfound freedom, they are at an increased risk on the road. The Insurance
Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) states that 16- and 17-year-old drivers
are three times more likely to get into a car accident than drivers… Allstate
https://i2.wp.com/www.allstate.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Father-
handing-daughter-car-keys_Getty_resized.jpg?fit=1050%2C700&ssl=1

![Father handing car keys to daughter in driver's

seat.](https://i2.wp.com/www.allstate.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Father-handing-daughter-car-

keys_Getty_resized.jpg?resize=684%2C340&ssl=1)

Getting a driver's license is a rite of passage for many teenagers. While teen
drivers may enjoy the newfound freedom, they are at an increased risk on the
road. The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) states that 16- and
17-year-old drivers are three times more likely to get into a car accident
than drivers over the age of 20. The explanation for this is simply that
younger drivers lack experience and may overestimate their abilities on the
road, says the IIHS.

To help reduce the number of teen driving accidents, every state and the
District of Columbia now have graduated driver licensing laws to help teens
get more experience behind the wheel before they're fully licensed, says the
Insurance Information Institute (III).

## **What Is a Graduated Driver Licensing Program?**

A graduated driver licensing (GDL) program limits high-risk driving situations
for teens, says the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA).
These programs been shown to reduce teen accidents by up to 50 percent, says
the NHTSA.

### Get a quick, personalized insurance quote today.

Select coverage Type

Type of InsuranceHomeAutoRentersLifeCondoMotorcycleBoatATV/Rec.
VehicleBusiness Insurance

Get a quote

While the restrictions may vary from state to state, all GDL programs have
three phases, according to the III:

                
                                      *  **Stage 1, Learner’s Permit:** This is a supervised learning period during which the student must complete road knowledge and vision tests. This phase lasts six to 12 months, depending on the driver 's state, and the teen can only drive with a licensed adult in the vehicle during this time. Typically, 30-50 hours of driving experience is required before the next phase, says the Governors Highway Safety Association (GHSA).
                      *  **Stage 2, Intermediate License:** After completing stage 1, taking driver education training and passing a required road test, a new driver earns their intermediate license. During this stage, certain driving situations may still be restricted unless accompanied by a licensed adult. Typically, there are restrictions on nighttime driving as well as how many passengers can be in the car. The driver must also go without an accident or traffic violation for a set period of time to graduate from this stage. This stage typically lasts until the driver turns 18, says the GHSA.
                      *  **Stage 3, Full License:** Once the driver completes the first two stages and passes the required licensing tests, they will earn a license with full driving privileges.
                

No cellphone or electronic devices can be used during the first two phases of
a GDL program, according to the GHSA.

## **How Can Parents Help?**

Parents and guardians can play an important role in helping a young driver
establish good habits and get plenty of practice behind the wheel. The NHTSA
recommends:

                
                                      * Know your state's GDL laws so that you can enforce them. Consider setting up your own rules as well.
                      * Set a good example and practice safe driving yourself.
                      * Take them out on practice drives and make sure they get the required time behind the wheel.
                

Setting teen drivers up for success behind the wheel is key in helping them
stay safe on the road. With graduated driving license programs and plenty of
practice, teens can gain the experience that will help make them better
drivers.

Share

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share on Pinterest

Share on LinkedIn

Share via email

Quote

get a quote

Agent

find an agent

## Agents Are Nearby, Ready To Help

Your location is set for:

43082

Edit Change Zip Code

Search

See more agents

                
                                      * Phil Dietz  385 County Line Rd W Ste 140  Westerville, OH 43082
                

![Phil

Dietz](https://allstateagencies.com/AgentAndStaffPhotos/photo.aspx?ID=083302&T=A)

614-899-2886 Phone 614-899-2886

                
                                      * Keith Zabrocki  925 N State St Ste I  Westerville, OH 43082
                

![Keith

Zabrocki](https://allstateagencies.com/AgentAndStaffPhotos/photo.aspx?ID=0A5337&T=A)

614-682-6030 Phone 614-682-6030

                
                                      * Andrew Smarra  104 E College Ave  Westerville, OH 43081
                

![Andrew

Smarra](https://allstateagencies.com/AgentAndStaffPhotos/photo.aspx?ID=057459&T=A)

614-890-7788 Phone 614-890-7788

![The Allstate Blog](https://www.allstate.com/blog/wp-

content/themes/allstateblog/assets/web/media/images/logo.png)

#### Popular Categories

                
                                      * Auto
                      * Home
                      * Money
                      * Small Business
                      * Pets
                      * Renters
                      * Motorcycle
                      * Español
                

Welcome to The Allstate Blog! Life can surprise you with unexpected
challenges. In an effort to help you manage the unpredictability of life, The
Allstate Blog provides you with entertaining, educational information in the
areas of preparation, prevention and protection to give you the peace of mind
that comes with confidence.

Our pages are filled with helpful tips and information about the topics that
most of us face in our everyday lives. We focus on safety and maintenance
issues with regard to your home, auto, apartment, motorcycle, boat, small
business, finances and more. Please recognize that a particular tip may not be
effective in every circumstance and that taking preventive measures cannot
guarantee any outcome. We encourage you to use your own good judgment about
what’s appropriate for you and your property and always consider safety. This
site is developed in conjunction with Allstate.com and The Allstate Insurance
Company.

#### Follow Us

RSS Feed

Connect with us on Facebook

Connect with us on Twitter

Connect with us on Instagram

Connect with us on Pinterest

Connect with us on YouTube

Connect with us on LinkedIn

Search

Search

                
                                      * Content Disclaimer
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Website Accessibility
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Find a Local Agent
                      * Quote Now
                      * Visit Tools & Resources
                

Back to Top

![Twitter analytics

pixel](https://analytics.twitter.com/i/adsct?txn_id=l4mmi&p_id=Twitter)
![Twitter analytics pixel](//t.co/i/adsct?txn_id=l4mmi&p_id=Twitter)
![Facebook tagging

pixel](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=981923531887021&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

