

Please enable JavaScript in order to get the best experience when using this
site.

                
                                      * Site Navigation
                      * Page Content
                

Menu

![State Government

Victoria](https://prodstaticdhhs.azureedge.net/assets/img/bhc/logo/vicgov.jpg)
![Better Health Channel

Logo](https://prodstaticdhhs.azureedge.net/assets/img/bhc/logo/header_logo.png)

Caret

                
                                      * ![](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg)
                

## Health.vic

Victoria's hub for health services and business

                
                                      * ![](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg)
                

## DHHS

A gateway to the strategies, policies, programs and services delivered by the
Department of Health & Human Services.

                
                                      * ![](/-/media/bhc/images/configurations/websitelinks/so-icon.png)
                

## Seniors Online

Victorian government portal for older people, with information about
government and community services and programs.

Show search toolbar

Contrast Sign Up Login

Search

Type a minimum of three characters then press UP or DOWN on the keyboard to
navigate the autocompleted search results

## Navigation

Home Close Menu

                
                                      * Conditions and treatments
                

Conditions and treatments

                
                                        * Allergies
                

Allergies

                
                                          * Allergic reaction to packaged food
                
                        * Anxiety
                
                        * Arthritis
                
                        * Asthma
                
                        * Behavioural conditions
                
                        * Birth defects
                
                        * Blood and blood vessels
                
                        * Bones muscles and joints
                

Bones muscles and joints

                
                                          * Foot care - podiatrists
                
                        * Brain and nerves
                
                        * Cancer
                
                        * Complementary and alternative care
                
                        * Dementia
                
                      * Healthy living
                

Healthy living

                
                                        * Alcohol
                
                        * Babies and toddlers (0-3)
                
                        * Children (4-12)
                
                        * Drugs and addictive behaviours
                
                        * Environmental health
                
                        * Family Violence
                
                        * Older people in hospital â€“ Get well soon
                
                        * Health checks
                
                        * Healthy Eating
                

Healthy Eating

                
                                          * Nutrition for life
                
                        * Healthy mind
                
                        * Healthy pregnancy
                
                        * Immunisation
                
                      * Services and support
                

Services and support

                
                                        * Aged care services
                
                        * Alcohol and drug services
                
                        * LGBTI support
                
                        * Carers, caring and respite care services
                
                        * Child, family and relationship services
                
                        * Disability services
                
                        * Emergency, crisis and support services
                
                        * End of life and palliative care services
                
                        * Hospitals, surgery and procedures
                
                        * Mental health services
                
                        * Planning and coordinating healthcare
                
                        * Pregnancy and birth services
                
                      * A-Z
                

A-Z

                
                                        * Conditions and treatments
                
                        * Healthy living
                
                        * Services and support
                
                        * Videos
                
                        * Service profiles
                
                      * Blog
                

Blog

                
                                        * Blog authors
                
                        * Topics
                
                      * Podcast
                

Podcast

                
                                        * Influenza - Dr Brett Sutton & Prof Kanta Subbarao
                
                        * Trauma - Anne Leadbeater OAM & Dr Rob Gordon
                
                        * template
                
                      * Other sites
                
                        * ![Victorian government logo](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=79CE01A630E1AA53311E4E5CC5EF63A14A2238AF) Health.vic ![Victorian government logo](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=79CE01A630E1AA53311E4E5CC5EF63A14A2238AF) DHHS ![SO-Icon](/-/media/bhc/images/configurations/websitelinks/so-icon.png?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=18D3EE73AEF43B451A2DC1ED4543A346A19BD4DF) Seniors Online
                
                      * Sitemap
                      *           *           * My Health Life
                      * Facebook
                      * Googleplus
                      * Twitter
                      * Youtube
                      * Rss
                
                      * Conditions and treatments
                      * Healthy living
                      * Services and support
                      * A-Z
                      * Blog
                      * Podcast
                

![](/-/media/bhc/images/placeholder/print-bhc.jpg)

Back to Healthy pregnancy

                
                                      * Home
                      * Healthy living
                      * Healthy pregnancy
                      * Baby due date
                

# Baby due date

                
                                      * Share (show more)
                
                      * Download PDF
                      * Listen (show more)
                

Listen

                
                                      * More (show more)
                
                        * Email
                
                        * Print
                

Tags:

                
                                      * Healthy pregnancy
                      * Healthy pregnancy - Stages of pregnancy
                

### Also called

                
                                      * Pregnancy due date
                

### Summary

                
                                      * The unborn baby spends around 38 weeks in the uterus, but the average length of pregnancy, or gestation, is counted at 40 weeks.
                      * Pregnancy is counted from the first day of the woman's last period, not the date of conception which generally occurs two weeks later.
                      * Since some women are unsure of the date of their last menstruation (perhaps due to period irregularities), a baby is considered full term if its birth falls between 37 to 42 weeks of its estimated due date.
                

The unborn baby spends around 37 weeks in the uterus (womb), but the average
length of pregnancy, or gestation, is calculated as 40 weeks. This is because
pregnancy is counted from the first day of the woman's last period, not the
date of conception which generally occurs two weeks later, followed by five to
seven days before it settles in the uterus. Since some women are unsure of the
date of their last menstruation (perhaps due to period irregularities), a
pregnancy is considered full term if birth falls between 37 to 42 weeks of the
estimated due date.

A baby born prior to week 37 is considered premature, while a baby that still
hasn't been born by week 42 is said to be overdue. In many cases, labour will
be induced in the case of an overdue baby.

## Length of gestation

The average length of human gestation is 280 days, or 40 weeks, from the first
day of the woman's last menstrual period. The medical term for the due date is
estimated date of confinement (EDC). However, only about four per cent of
women actually give birth on their EDC. There are many online pregnancy
calculators (see Baby due date calculator that can tell you when your baby is
due, if you type in the date of the first day of your last period.

A simple method to calculate the due date is to add seven days to the date of
the first day of your last period, then add nine months. For example, if the
first day of your last period was 1 February, add seven days (8 February) then
add nine months, for a due date of 8 November.

## Determining baby due date

Irregular menstrual cycles can mean that some women aren't sure of when they
conceived. Some clues to the length of gestation include:

                
                                      * Ultrasound examination (especially when performed between six and 12 weeks)
                      * Size of uterus on vaginal or abdominal examination
                      * The time fetal movements are first felt (an approximate guide only).
                

## Pregnancy ultrasound

A pregnancy ultrasound is a non-invasive test that scans the unborn baby and
the mother's reproductive organs using high frequency sound waves. The general
procedure for a pregnancy ultrasound includes:

                
                                      * The woman lies on a table.
                      * A small amount of a clear, conductive jelly is smeared on the woman's abdomen.
                      * The operator places the small hand-held instrument called a transducer onto the woman's abdomen.
                      * The transducer is moved across the abdomen. The sound waves bounce off internal structures (including the baby) and are transmitted back to the transducer. The sound waves are then translated into a two-dimensional picture on a monitor. The mother doesn't feel or hear the transmission of the sound waves.
                      * By measuring the baby's body parts, such as head circumference and the length of long bones, the operator can estimate its gestational age.
                

### The diagnostic uses of pregnancy ultrasound

Apart from helping to pinpoint the unborn baby's due date, pregnancy
ultrasounds are used to diagnose a number of conditions including:

                
                                      * Multiple fetuses
                      * Health problems with the baby
                      * Ectopic pregnancy (the embryo lodges in the fallopian tube instead of the uterus)
                      * Abnormalities of the placenta such as placenta praevia, where the placenta is positioned over the neck of the womb (cervix)
                      * The health of the mother's reproductive organs.
                

## Premature babies

A baby born prior to week 37 is considered premature. The odds of survival
depend on the baby's degree of prematurity. The closer to term (estimated date
of confinement, or EDC) the baby is born, the higher its chances of survival -
after 34 weeks gestation with good paediatric care almost all babies will
survive.

Premature babies are often afflicted by various health problems, caused by
immature internal organs. Respiratory difficulties and an increased
susceptibility to infection are common.

Often there is no known cause for a premature labour; however, some of the
maternal risk factors may include:

                
                                      * Drinking alcohol or smoking during pregnancy
                      * Low body weight prior to pregnancy
                      * Inadequate weight gain during pregnancy
                      * No prenatal care
                      * Emotional stress
                      * Placenta problems such as placenta praevia 
                      * Various diseases such as diabetes and congestive heart failure
                      * Infections such as syphilis.
                

## Overdue babies

Around five out of every 100 babies will be overdue, or more than 42 weeks
gestation. If you have gone one week past your due date without any signs of
impending labour, your doctor will want to closely monitor your condition.
Tests include:

                
                                      * Monitoring the fetal heart rate 
                      * Using a cardiotocograph machine
                      * Performing ultrasound scans.
                

The placenta starts to deteriorate after 38 weeks or so, which means an
overdue baby may not get enough oxygen. An overdue baby could also grow too
large for vaginal delivery. Generally, an overdue baby will be induced once it
is two weeks past its expected date. Some of the methods of induction include:

                
                                      * **Vaginal prostaglandin gel** - to help dilate the cervix
                      * **Amniotomy** - breaking the waters, sometimes called an artificial rupture of membranes (ARM)
                      * **Oxytocin** - a synthetic form of this hormone is given intravenously to stimulate uterine contractions.
                

## Where to get help

                
                                      * Your doctor
                      * Your obstetrician
                      * Midwife or childbirth educator
                

## Things to remember

                
                                      * The unborn baby spends around 38 weeks in the uterus, but the average length of pregnancy, or gestation, is counted at 40 weeks.
                      * Pregnancy is counted from the first day of the woman's last period, not the date of conception which generally occurs two weeks later.
                      * Since some women are unsure of the date of their last menstruation (perhaps due to period irregularities), a baby is considered full term if its birth falls between 37 to 42 weeks of its estimated due date.
                

References

                
                                      * _Common concerns and discomforts: overdue baby_ , Mother's Bliss, UK. More information here.
                      * _Going Overdue_ , 2001, Centre for Reproduction and Minimally Invasive Surgery. More information here.
                      * _Premmie-L FAQ and advice sheets_ , Parents of Premature Babies Inc.(Preemie-L). More information here.
                      * _Pregnancy: what to expect when it 's past your due date_, Family Doctor, USA. More information here.
                      * _Ultrasound_ , Women Health Information, Royal Women's Hospital, Melbourne. More information here.
                

## Send us your feedback

                
                                      * Rate this website
                      * Your comments
                      * Questions
                      * Your details
                

### 1/4 How would you rate this website?

                
                                      * Excellent
                      * Good
                      * Average
                      * Fair
                      * Poor
                

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

                
                                      * Rate this website
                      * Your comments
                      * Questions
                      * Your details
                

Please note that we cannot answer personal medical queries.  
If you are looking for health or medical advice we recommend that you:

                
                                      * talk to your doctor or pharmacist
                      * dial triple zero (000) in an emergency
                      * ring NURSE-ON-CALL Tel. 1300 60 60 24.
                

### 2/4 Your Comments

Tell us who you are Select an option Health consumer Health professional
Others

Enter your comments below (optional)

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

                
                                      * Rate this website
                      * Your comments
                      * Questions
                      * Your details
                

### 3/4 Questions

What are you here to do? Looking for information on Improving general health
and wellbeing Better relationships A specific health condition and its
treatment Childrenâ€™s health Food, nutrition and healthy recipes Medication
Exercise or fitness Others

Did you find what you were looking for?

                
                                      * Yes
                      * No
                

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

                
                                      * Rate this website
                      * Your comments
                      * Questions
                      * Your details
                

### 4/4 Your details

Postcode

Email Address

Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

### Thank you. Your feedback has been successfully sent.

## More information

### Healthy pregnancy

The following content is displayed as Tabs. Once you have activated a link
navigate to the end of the list to view its associated content. The activated
link is defined as Active Tab

                
                                      * Pregnancy and birth basics
                      * Stages of pregnancy
                      * Fertility issues and options
                      * Keeping healthy during pregnancy
                      * Health concerns during pregnancy
                      * Preparing for birth
                      * Preparing for a newborn
                

#### Pregnancy and birth basics

                
                                      * Childbirth - pain relief options
                

Understanding your pain relief options can help you cope better with the pain
of childbirth...

                
                                      * Pregnancy â€“ labour
                

Labour is divided into three stages. The first stage is dilation of the cervix
from 0 to10 cm, the second stage is birth of the baby, and the third stage is
delivery of the placenta. Labour typically...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - premature labour
                

Sometimes, babies arrive early. Itâ€™s important to recognise premature labour,
in case you and your baby need medical care...

                
                                      * If you want to get pregnant, timing is everything
                

If you are trying for a baby, to increase your chances of conceiving, it helps
to know when you are at your most fertile, and when is the best time to have
sex...

                
                                      * Contraception after giving birth
                

After having a baby, you need to choose an effective method of contraception
if you don't want to have another baby straight away...

                
                                      * Folate for pregnant women
                

Even women who aren't planning to have a baby should increase their folate
intake in case of unplanned pregnancy...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - unplanned
                

When a woman does not want to become a parent, her pregnancy options may
include abortion or adoption...

                
                                      * Contraception - emergency contraception
                

It is best to take emergency contraception as soon as possible, ideally within
24 hours of having unprotected sex, but it still works well within 96 hours
(four days)...

#### Stages of pregnancy

                
                                      * Baby due date
                

Pregnancy is calculated from the first day of your last period, not from the
date of conception...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - week by week
                

Pregnancy is counted as 40 weeks, starting from the first day of the mother's
last menstrual period...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - signs and symptoms
                

All women experience pregnancy differently, and you will experience different
symptoms at different stages of your pregnancy...

                
                                      * Planning for labour and birth
                

Some of the signs and symptoms of going into labour may include period-like
cramps, backache, diarrhoea and contractions...

                
                                      * Conceiving a baby
                

The odds of a young fertile couple conceiving by having sexual intercourse
around the time of ovulation (the release of the egg from the ovary) are
approximately one in five every month. Around nine...

                
                                      * Pregnancy stages and changes
                

Itâ€™s helpful to have an idea of how your body may react to the different
stages of pregnancy. It also helps to know how pregnancy may affect your
emotions and feelings...

#### Fertility issues and options

                
                                      * Adoption
                

Adoption can give a secure family life to children who can?t live with their
birth family...

                
                                      * Surrogacy
                

Surrogacy is a form of assisted reproductive treatment (ART) in which a woman
carries a child within her uterus on behalf of another person or couple...

                
                                      * If you want to get pregnant, timing is everything
                

If you are trying for a baby, to increase your chances of conceiving, it helps
to know when you are at your most fertile, and when is the best time to have
sex...

                
                                      * Age and fertility
                

Age affects the fertility of both men and women, and is the single biggest
factor affecting a woman?s chance to conceive and have a healthy baby...

                
                                      * Infertility in men
                

A couple isn't suspected of fertility problems until they have tried and
failed to conceive for one year...

                
                                      * Infertility in women
                

The odds of a young fertile couple conceiving by having sexual intercourse
around the time of ovulation are approximately one in five every month...

                
                                      * Abortion
                

All women should have access to accurate information about abortion so they
can make their own informed decisions...

                
                                      * Weight, fertility and pregnancy health
                

Compared with women in the healthy weight range, women who are carrying extra
weight are less likely to conceive...

#### Keeping healthy during pregnancy

                
                                      * Pregnancy - morning sickness
                

Morning sickness is typically at its worst early in the day but it can strike
at any point during the day or night...

                
                                      * Postnatal exercise - sample workout
                

Make sure your abdominal muscles have healed before you do any vigorous tummy
exercises, such as crunches...

                
                                      * Healthy eating during pregnancy - tucker talk tips
                

Some foods should be avoided during pregnancy as they carry bacteria that
could harm your unborn baby...

                
                                      * Postnatal exercise
                

Always consult with your doctor or midwife before starting any postnatal
exercise program...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and your mental health
                

Finding out you are pregnant can be a very exciting time. But it can also make
you feel uncomfortable, unwell, worried and make you wonder how you are going
to cope. And it doesnâ€™t stop when the baby...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and teeth
                

It's important to look after your teeth and gums when you're pregnant, as gum
disease can affect your baby...

                
                                      * Tests, scans and checks - pregnancy and labour
                

Tests can confirm your pregnancy and also monitor your baby's development in
the womb...

                
                                      * Alcohol and pregnancy
                

Thereâ€™s no safe level of alcohol use during pregnancy. Itâ€™s safest to not
drink at all during pregnancy, when trying to conceive, and while
breastfeeding...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and smoking
                

Smoking while pregnant exposes a woman and her unborn child to an increased
risk of health problems...

                
                                      * Immunisation and pregnancy
                

Immunisation can protect a woman and her unborn baby against many infectious
diseases...

                
                                      * Folate for pregnant women
                

Even women who aren't planning to have a baby should increase their folate
intake in case of unplanned pregnancy...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and exercise
                

Unless you have complications, you should be able to exercise throughout your
pregnancy...

                
                                      * Pelvic floor
                

Pelvic floor exercises are designed to improve muscle tone and prevent the
need for corrective surgery...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and diet
                

Good nutrition during pregnancy can help to keep you and your developing baby
healthy...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and travel
                

Travelling to developing nations is not encouraged during pregnancy, due to
the risk of disease and the standard of medical facilities...

#### Health concerns during pregnancy

                
                                      * Miscarriage and Stillbirth - Coming to terms (video)
                
                      * Newborn bloodspot screening (video)
                

Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a newborn bloodspot screening test
to identify those at risk for rare, but serious, medical conditions including
PKU, hypothyroidism and cystic fibrosis...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - bleeding problems
                

Bleeding from the vagina in early pregnancy happens in almost one in four
pregnancies...

                
                                      * Placenta previa
                

Placenta previa means the placenta has implanted at the bottom of the uterus,
over the cervix or close by...

                
                                      * Placental abruption
                

Placental abruption means the placenta has detached from the wall of the
uterus, starving the baby of oxygen and nutrients...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - pre-eclampsia
                

There is no evidence that pre-eclampsia is caused by emotional stress, working
too hard or not getting enough rest...

                
                                      * Lupus and pregnancy
                

Lupus can be controlled with medications, so the majority of affected women
are able to have children...

                
                                      * HIV and women â€“ having children
                

Women living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or women whose partner
is HIV-positive, may wish to have children but feel concerned about the risk
of transmission of the virus to themselves (if...

                
                                      * Alcohol and pregnancy
                

Thereâ€™s no safe level of alcohol use during pregnancy. Itâ€™s safest to not
drink at all during pregnancy, when trying to conceive, and while
breastfeeding...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and smoking
                

Smoking while pregnant exposes a woman and her unborn child to an increased
risk of health problems...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - obstetric emergencies
                

An obstetric emergency may arise when a woman is pregnant, or during her
delivery.In this case, extra care is needed. A woman may need a lot of tests
and treatments, and extended hospital stays. She...

                
                                      * Molar pregnancy
                

Most molar pregnancies are diagnosed when bleeding early in pregnancy prompts
an ultrasound scan...

                
                                      * Miscarriage
                

A range of feelings is normal after a miscarriage, and they often linger for
some time...

                
                                      * Asthma - pregnancy and breastfeeding
                

Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as
it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma
is well managed...

                
                                      * Pregnancy and diet
                

Good nutrition during pregnancy can help to keep you and your developing baby
healthy...

                
                                      * Birth defects explained
                

The cause of birth defects is often unknown, speak to your GP if you are at
increased risk of having a baby with a congenital anomaly...

                
                                      * Ectopic pregnancy
                

Ectopic pregnancy is caused by a fertilised egg not being able to move through
the fallopian tube...

                
                                      * Diabetes - gestational
                

Gestational diabetes is diabetes that occurs during pregnancy and usually
disappears when the pregnancy is over...

                
                                      * Postnatal depression (PND)
                

Postnatal depression can happen either a few days or weeks after the birth,
with a slow or sudden onset...

                
                                      * Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD)
                

The World Health Organization recommends that pregnant women should avoid
alcohol...

#### Preparing for birth

                
                                      * Pregnancy - care choices
                

It's very important for you and your baby to be looked after from the start of
your pregnancy until after the birth of your baby...

                
                                      * Pregnancy â€“ labour
                

Labour is divided into three stages. The first stage is dilation of the cervix
from 0 to10 cm, the second stage is birth of the baby, and the third stage is
delivery of the placenta. Labour typically...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - premature labour
                

Sometimes, babies arrive early. Itâ€™s important to recognise premature labour,
in case you and your baby need medical care...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - packing for hospital
                

Packing for hospital is an exciting part of preparing for the birth of your
baby...

                
                                      * Planning for labour and birth
                

Some of the signs and symptoms of going into labour may include period-like
cramps, backache, diarrhoea and contractions...

                
                                      * Twins - identical and fraternal
                

Multiple births are more common due to the advancing average age of mothers
and the rise in assisted reproductive techniques...

#### Preparing for a newborn

                
                                      * Breastfeeding - the first days
                

Let your baby feed as much as they want in the first few days to help
establish good breastfeeding patterns...

                
                                      * Breastfeeding - when to start
                

Breastfeeding within the first hour after birth allows your baby to behave
instinctively and breastfeed with little intervention...

                
                                      * Alcohol and pregnancy
                

Thereâ€™s no safe level of alcohol use during pregnancy. Itâ€™s safest to not
drink at all during pregnancy, when trying to conceive, and while
breastfeeding...

                
                                      * Vitamin K and newborn babies
                

With low levels of vitamin K, some babies can have severe bleeding into the
brain, causing significant brain damage...

                
                                      * Baby furniture - safety tips
                

Even if your baby furniture meets every safety standard and recommendation,
your child still needs close supervision...

                
                                      * Postnatal depression (PND)
                

Postnatal depression can happen either a few days or weeks after the birth,
with a slow or sudden onset...

                
                                      * Newborn bloodspot screening
                

Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a newborn bloodspot screening test
to identify those at risk of rare, but serious, medical conditions...

### Related Information

                
                                      * Pregnancy - week by week
                

Pregnancy is counted as 40 weeks, starting from the first day of the mother's
last menstrual period...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - signs and symptoms
                

All women experience pregnancy differently, and you will experience different
symptoms at different stages of your pregnancy...

                
                                      * Conceiving a baby
                

The odds of a young fertile couple conceiving by having sexual intercourse
around the time of ovulation (the release of the egg from the ovary) are
approximately one in five every month. Around nine...

                
                                      * Pregnancy stages and changes
                

Itâ€™s helpful to have an idea of how your body may react to the different
stages of pregnancy. It also helps to know how pregnancy may affect your
emotions and feelings...

                
                                      * Pregnancy - morning sickness
                

Morning sickness is typically at its worst early in the day but it can strike
at any point during the day or night...

Home

### Related information on other websites

                
                                      * BirthNet.
                

### Support Groups

                
                                      * Victorian Infant Collaborative Study
                

## Content Partner

This page has been produced in consultation with and approved by: Better
Health Channel - (need new cp)

![Better Health

Channel](/-/media/bhc/images/contentmodules/contentpartner/logo-bhc.jpg)

Last updated: August 2014

Page content currently being reviewed.

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information
about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or
support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to
replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The
information and materials contained on this website are not intended to
constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy,
product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always
seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and
answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular
therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in
their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health &
Human Services shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the
materials contained on this website.

![Nurse-on-call 1300 60 60

24](/-/media/bhc/images/contentmodules/contenttiles/nurse-on-

call.jpg?h=243&la=en&w=300&hash=8D0122F321B660968822162FD96442D744E8AC54)

### NURSE-ON-CALL

Provides immediate, expert health advice from a registered nurse. Call 1300 60
60 24

NURSE-ON-CALL

Service Search

### Service Search

Find services near you

Service: Select a service Aboriginal Health Clinic Aboriginal Health Worker
Acupuncture Adolescent Mental Health Services Adult Mental Health Services
Adult-community education Aged care assessment Aged Care information-referral
Aged Care Transport Aged Residential Care Air ambulance Alexander technique
therapy Anaesthesiology - Pain Medicine Aromatherapy Audiology Bereavement
counselling Biorhythm services Blood donation Blood transport Bowen therapy
Cancer Support Groups Cardiology Cardiothoracic surgery Carer support Case
management for older persons Cemeteries & Fees Cemetery operation Child
protection-child abuse report Childrens play programs Chinese herbal medicine
Chiropractic Chronic Disease Management Clinical Genetics Clinical
Pharmacology Community bus Community Cancer Services Community Hours Cranio-
Sacral Therapy Cremation Crisis counselling Crisis-emergency accommodation
Culturally tailored health promotion Culturally tailored support groups Death
service information Delivered meals Deputising Service Dermatology Diabetes
Educator Diagnostic Ultrasound Dietetics Disability advocacy Disability aids -
equipment Disability Care Transport Disability case management Disability
information-referral Disability support packages Disability supported
accommodation Drug and-or alcohol counselling Drug and-or alcohol support
groups Early childhood intervention Education information-referral Emergency
Department Emergency medical Employment placement and-or support Endocrinology
Endodontic Exercise Physiology Family day care Family planning Family Violence
Family violence counselling Feldenkrais Financial assistance Financial
counselling Financial information-advice Flying doctor service Food Relief-
food-meals Food safety Foster care Friendly visiting Funeral services
Gastroenterology Gastroenterology - Hepatology General dental General Mental
Health Services General Practice/GP (doctor) General Practice-GP Generalist
counselling Genetic counselling Geriatric medicine Gynaecological Oncology
Gynaecology Health advocacy-Liaison service Health counselling Health
information-referral Hearing aids - equipment Hepatology Higher education
Holiday programs Home care-housekeeping assistance Home maintenance and repair
Home Medicine Review Home Nursing Homelessness support Homoeopathy Hospital
Hospital Services Housing information-referral Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy
Immunisation Immunology - Allergy Infectious diseases Inpatients Integrated
Family Services Intensive care medicine Juvenile Justice Kindergarten-
preschool Kinesiology Kinship Care Legal advocacy Legal information-advice-
referral Library Long day child care Magnetic Resonance Imaging Magnetic
therapy Martial arts Massage therapy Material aid Maternal - child health
Maternity & Newborn Services Mediation Medical Oncology Medical Research
Meditation Mental health advocacy Mental health information-referral Mental
Health Services Migrant Health Clinic Music Therapy Myotherapy Naturopathy
Needle - Syringe exchange Neonatology - Perinatology Nephrology Neurology
Neurosurgery Nuclear Medicine Nurse lead Clinic Nurse Practitioner lead Clinic
Nursing Nutrition Obstetrics Obstetrics - Gynaecology Occasional child care
Occupational Medicine Occupational therapy Ophthalmology Optometry Oral
medicine Oral surgery Orthodontic Orthopaedic surgery Osteopathy Outpatients
Outreach Service Outside school hours care Paediatric Cardiology Paediatric
Clinical Genetics Paediatric Clinical Pharmacology Paediatric Dentistry
Paediatric Dermatology Paediatric Endocrinology Paediatric Haematology
Paediatric Immunology Allergy Paediatric Infectious diseases Paediatric
intensive care medicine Paediatric Medical Oncology Paediatric Medicine
Paediatric Nephrology Paediatric Neurology Paediatric Nuclear Medicine
Paediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Paediatric Rheumatology Paediatric Sleep
Medicine Paediatric Surgery Paediatric Thoracic Medicine Palliative Medicine
Pathology - Clinical Chemistry Pathology - General Pathology - Genetics
Pathology - Haematology Pathology - Immunology Pathology - Microbiology
Patient transport Periodontic Personal alarms-alerts Personal care for older
persons Personal fitness training Pharmacy Physical activity group Physical
activity programs Physical fitness testing Physiotherapy Pilates Placement
Protection Planned activity groups Plastic - Reconstructive Surgery Playgroup
Podiatry Primary education Problem gambling counselling Prosthetics -
Orthotics Prosthodontic Psychiatry Psychology Public Health Medicine Public
rental housing Quit program Radiation oncology Reflexology Refugee Health
Clinic Rehabilitation Medicine Reiki Relationship counselling Relaxation
therapy Respite care Rheumatology School nursing Secondary education Sexual
assault counselling Sexual health Shiatsu Sleep Medicine Social Support Social
Work Speech pathology-therapy Spiritual Counselling Sporting club Support
groups Surgery - General Telephone Counselling Thoracic medicine Toy library
Training - vocational education Translating Services Trauma counselling
Urogynaecology Urology Vascular surgery Veterans Services Victims of crime
counselling Victorian Cardiac Rehabilitation Directory Vocational
Rehabilitation Western herbal medicine Womens Health Clinic Yoga Youth drop
in-assistance-support

Location:

Type a minimum of three characters then press UP or DOWN on the keyboard to
navigate the autocompleted search results

_Use my location_

![BHC youtube playlist](/-/media/bhc/images/servicesandsupport/bhc-video-

tile.jpg?h=300&la=en&w=386&hash=F7596E688370851A25511597A0E65CC84E2F7067)

### Navigating the health system videos

Watch videos that guide you through a range of healthcare services from mental
health, disability to aged care as well as pregnancy, crisis and hospital
services.

Better Health Channel youtube channel

### Recent Activity

3 people have watched a video today

                
                                      * ## Health topics
                
                        * Conditions and treatments
                        * Healthy living
                        * Services and support
                        *           * ## Explore
                
                        * Recipes
                        * Healthy pantry
                        * Videos
                        * Consumer medicine information
                        * Multilingual health information - Health Translations Directory
                      * ## About
                
                        * About us
                        * Accessibility
                        * Content partners
                        * Privacy
                        * Terms of use
                        * Contact us
                      * ## Connect with us
                
                        * Facebook
                        * Twitter
                        * YouTube
                

Page last reviewed: 30 Aug 2014

https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/health/healthyliving/baby-due-date

                
                                      * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/privacy
                

Privacy Statement

                
                                      * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/terms-of-use
                

Copyright Notice

                
                                      * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/terms-of-use
                

Disclaimer Notice

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health & Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, Australia

Â© Copyright State of Victoria 2018.

Back to Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

