

Go to Content Go to Navigation Go to Navigation Go to Site Search Homepage

Planned Parenthood has a partner website about sexual health topics
specifically for Nigeria. Would you like to go to the Nigeria website?

Visit the Nigeria Site (DASUBJECTMATTER.ORG) STAY ON THE PLANNED PARENTHOOD
SITE

                
                                      * Español
                

![Planned Parenthood](/static/assets/img/planned-parenthood-horizontal.svg)

                
                                      * Learn
                

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

                
                                        * Abortion
                        * Birth Control
                        * Cancer
                        * Emergency Contraception
                        * Health and Wellness
                        * Pregnancy
                        * Sex and Relationships
                        * Sexual Orientation and Gender
                        * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
                        * Glossary A - Z
                        * For Teens
                        * For Parents
                        * For Educators
                

#### Related Health Topics

                
                                        * Depression
                        * Vaccinations
                        * Hypertension
                        * Diabetes
                        * Substance Use Disorder
                        * Anxiety
                
                      * Get Care
                

#### Get Care

                
                                        * Schedule an Appointment
                        * Our Services
                        * Health Insurance
                        * Get Care Online
                        * Spot On
                        * Blog
                
                      * Get Involved
                

#### Get Involved

                
                                        * Donate
                        * Ways to Give
                        * Jobs and Volunteering
                        * Take Action
                        * Shop
                
                      * Donate 
                      * Open Search Search
                

Search

Find

Español Open Search Search

Search

Find

                
                                      * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Learn
                

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

                
                                        * Overview
                        * Abortion
                        * Birth Control
                        * Cancer
                        * Emergency Contraception
                        * Health and Wellness
                        * Pregnancy
                        * Sex and Relationships
                        * Sexual Orientation and Gender
                        * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
                        * Glossary A - Z
                        * For Teens
                        * For Parents
                        * For Educators
                

#### Related Health Topics

                
                                        * Depression
                        * Vaccinations
                        * Hypertension
                        * Diabetes
                        * Substance Use Disorder
                        * Anxiety
                
                      * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Care
                

#### Get Care

                
                                        * Overview
                        * Schedule an Appointment
                        * Our Services
                        * Health Insurance
                        * Get Care Online
                        * Spot On
                        * Blog
                
                      * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Involved
                

#### Get Involved

                
                                        * Overview
                        * Donate
                        * Ways to Give
                        * Jobs and Volunteering
                        * Take Action
                        * Shop
                
                      * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Donate 
                      * Home
                      * Learn
                      * Birth Control
                      * Condom
                      * Current:  How effective are condoms?
                

# How effective are condoms?

In This Section

                
                                      * Condom 
                      * How effective are condoms? 
                      * How to put a condom on 
                      * How do I get condoms? 
                      * What are the benefits of condoms? 
                      * What are the disadvantages of condoms?
                

Condoms are great at preventing both pregnancy and STDs. If you follow the
instructions and use them every time you have vaginal, anal, or oral sex,
there’s very little chance of pregnancy, or getting or giving an STD.

## How effective are condoms against pregnancy?

If you use condoms perfectly every single time you have sex, they’re 98%
effective at preventing pregnancy. But people aren’t perfect, so in real life
condoms are about 85% effective — that means about 15 out of 100 people who
use condoms as their only birth control method will get pregnant each year.

The better you are about using condoms correctly every time you have sex, the
better they’ll work. But there’s a small chance that you will get pregnant
even if you always use them the right way.

Want even more protection from pregnancy? Check out IUDs and implants, or take
this quiz to find the birth control method that’s best for you.

## How can I make condoms more effective?

The best way to make condoms work as well as possible is to use them correctly
every single time you have vaginal, oral, and anal sex. That means wearing it
the whole time, from start to finish. Make sure the condom is rolled on your
penis the right way before there’s any skin-to-skin genital contact. Read more
about how to use condoms correctly.

Using condoms + another form of birth control (like the pill, IUD, or shot) is
a great way to get extra pregnancy prevention AND protection against STDs.
Using withdrawal (“pulling out”) while also wearing a condom can help keep
sperm out of the vagina and lower the risk for pregnancy.

You shouldn’t use a condom worn on the penis together with a internal condom.
Condoms are designed to be used on their own, and doubling up won’t
necessarily give you extra protection. One condom used correctly is all the
protection you need.

Previous Overview Next How to put a condom on

Was this page helpful?

                
                                      * Yes 
                      * No
                

Help us improve - how could this information be more helpful?

How did this information help you?

Please answer below.

Are you human? (Sorry, we have to ask!)

Please don't check this box if you are a human.

Send Now No Thanks

You’re the best! Thanks for your feedback.

Thanks for your feedback.

### Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

### Condom

                
                                      * 85% effective
                
                      * Costs around $2 per condom, but can be $0
                
                      * No prescription required
                
                      * Put it on before sex
                

Condoms help protect you from STDs. Use another birth control method with your
condom for even more pregnancy preventing power.

See All Methods

###### KNOW YOUR OPTIONS

Abstinence

Breastfeeding

Cervical Cap

Condom

Diaphragm

FAM

Implant

Internal Condom

IUD

The Patch

The Pill

The Ring

The Shot

Spermicide

Sponge

Sterilization

Vasectomy

Withdrawal

## Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

![Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.](/static/assets/img/planned-

parenthood-stacked-tag.6916ef62aa8e.svg)

Planned Parenthood delivers vital reproductive health care, sex education, and
information to millions of people worldwide. Planned Parenthood Federation of
America, Inc. is a registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit under EIN 13-1644147.
Donations are tax-deductible to the fullest extent allowable under the law.

Call Planned Parenthood Donate

Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on

                
                                      * About Us Toggle Navigation
                        * Who We Are
                        * Leadership
                        * Annual Reports
                        * Local Offices
                        * Planned Parenthood Global
                      * Get Involved Toggle Navigation
                        * Take Action
                        * Share Your Story
                        * Volunteer
                        * Shop
                      * Resources Toggle Navigation
                        * Jobs
                        * Facts & Figures
                        * Newsroom
                        * Press Releases
                        * Online Quizzes
                      * About This Site Toggle Navigation
                        * Terms of Use
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Sitemap
                        * Contact Us
                
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Contact Us
                

(C) 2019 Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

