
                
                                      * Dictionary.com
                      * Thesaurus.com
                      * Everything After Z
                        * Word of the Day
                        * Video
                        * Word Facts
                        * Grammar
                        * Crossword Solver
                        * Daily Crossword
                      * All The Words
                        * Slang
                        * Emoji
                        * Gender & Sexuality
                        * Acronyms
                
                      * Dictionary.com
                      * Thesaurus.com
                

Try Our Apps

![Dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/assets/dictionary_logo_white-90c1e2eaf84c6abcb80d08d6eb0b6c60.svg)

definitions

Search

                
                                      * synonyms
                

# human being

EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGIN

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR human being ON THESAURUS.COM

* * *

### noun

any individual of the genus Homo, especially a member of the species Homo
sapiens.

a person, especially as distinguished from other animals or as representing
the human species: living conditions not fit for human beings; a very generous
human being.

## RELATED CONTENT

Do Dogs Actually Understand Human Language?Anyone who has ever seen their dog
hop to attention when they used the word "treat" knows that dogs obviously
understand the same words as humans. But is it accurate to say that animals
use language? Man’s best friend is hardly the only animal capable of amazing
humans with communication skills. Extensive studies using gestural
communication (sign language) explore the cognitive potential in the great
apes. …

READ MORE

Foxy, Catty, Fishy: Are These Traits For Animals Or Humans?Catty It seems
horribly unfair to adorable cats that catty is a human descriptor meaning
“devious or spiteful” (and usually in reference to female behavior). What
gives? The word cat has been around since the year 700. But then, in the
Middle Ages, cat became one of the many offensive terms against women and was
slang for “prostitute.” The association might have been made because …

READ MORE

## RELATED WORDS

person, soul, human, mortal, earthling

## Nearby words

                
                                      1. hum tone, 
                      2. hum-drum, 
                      3. humacao, 
                      4. human, 
                      5. human antihemophilic factor, 
                      6. human body, 
                      7. human capital, 
                      8. human chorionic gonadotropin, 
                      9. human chorionic somatomammotropic hormone, 
                      10. human comedy, the
                

## Origin of human being

First recorded in 1855–60

Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, ©
Random House, Inc. 2019

## Examples from the Web for human being

                
                                      * There are about two or three Omahas who know this medicine, which is called Niacinga makan, Human-being medicine.
                

Omaha sociology (1884 N 03 / 1881-1882 (pages 205-370))|James Owen Dorsey

Explore Dictionary.com

                
                                      * ![Quotes For Success To Push You Across The Finish Line](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/1000x700-quotes-for-success-1-150x150.jpg)
                

Quotes For Success To Push You Across The Finish Line

                
                                      * ![15 Quotes From Women Writers Who Shake Things Up](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/default_logo_800x800-150x150.jpg)
                

15 Quotes From Women Writers Who Shake Things Up

                
                                      * ![These Songs Helped Us Learn How To Spell](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-songs-spelling-1-150x150.jpg)
                

These Songs Helped Us Learn How To Spell

                
                                      * ![Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1000x700-empathy-vs-sympathy-150x150.jpg)
                

Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When

                
                                      * ![Words To Help Explain Relationships In The 2010s](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/1000x700-relationships-1-150x150.jpg)
                

Words To Help Explain Relationships In The 2010s

                
                                      * ![Put A Pin In Your Persiflage And Play This Week’s Quiz](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/wotd_quiz-800x800-150x150.jpg)
                

Put A Pin In Your Persiflage And Play This Week’s Quiz

## British Dictionary definitions for human being

## human being

* * *

### noun

a member of any of the races of Homo sapiens; person; man, woman, or child

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition ©
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998,
2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012

Others Are Reading

                
                                      * ![Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-misunderstood-emoji-1-150x150.jpg)
                

Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?

                
                                      * ![What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ie-eg-video_v3-1000x700-150x150.jpg)
                

What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?

WORD OF THE DAY

bastion _noun_ | [bas-chuhn, -tee-uhn]SEE DEFINITION

                
                                      * ![Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-redefine-black-v2-150x150.jpg)
                

Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition

                
                                      * ![Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-bisexual-150x150.jpg)
                

Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?

                
                                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * #
                      * A
                      * B
                      * C
                      * D
                      * E
                      * F
                      * G
                      * H
                      * I
                      * J
                      * K
                      * L
                      * M
                      * N
                      * O
                      * P
                      * Q
                      * R
                      * S
                      * T
                      * U
                      * V
                      * W
                      * X
                      * Y
                      * Z
                      * Browse by Category:
                      * Slang
                      * Emoji
                      * Acronyms
                      * Pop Culture
                      * More
                
                      * About
                      * Careers
                      * Contact Us
                      * Cookies, Terms, & Privacy
                

© 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

