
                
                                      * USLegal Home 
                      * Definitions Home
                

Information

                
                                      * View All
                      * Definitions
                      * Questions & Answers
                      * Ask a Question
                      * Articles/Guides
                      * Legal Topics
                

Services

                
                                      * View All
                      * Ask a Question
                      * Document Preparation
                      * Document Review
                      * Business Formation
                      * Find Attorney
                

Products

                
                                      * Legal Forms
                      * Legal Guides
                      * Form Drafting
                

Find Attorney

                
                                      * Locate Lawyers
                      * Ask a Question
                

For Attorneys

                
                                      * Products
                      * Submit Article
                      * Domain / Blog Management
                      * Attorneys Wanted
                      * Attorney Directory
                      * Sponsorships
                
                      * Login 
                      * Help 
                      * About 
                      * Privacy Policy
                

__

__

**USLegal** ![USLegal](/themes/default/img/uslegal-logo.png)

                
                                      * Personal
                

### Personal and Family Life Legal Matters

                
                                        * ### Free Information
                
                          1. View All
                          2. Definitions
                          3. Questions & Answers
                          4. Articles/Guides
                          5. Legal Topics
                        * ### Services
                
                          1. Make your Will
                          2. Divorce
                          3. Ask a Question
                          4. Document Preparation
                          5. Document Review
                          6. Business Formation
                          7. Find Attorney
                          8. View All
                
                        * ### Products
                
                          1. Legal Forms
                          2. Legal Guides
                          3. Form Drafting
                        * ###
                

_We Care!_

_We Help!_

_No Hassles Guarantee._

                
                                      * Business
                

### Get Legal Help for Any Legal Need from People in Business

                
                                        * ### Information
                
                          1. View All
                          2. Definitions
                          3. Questions & Answers
                          4. Ask a Question
                          5. Articles/Guides
                          6. Legal Topics
                        * ### Services
                
                          1. Business Formation
                          2. Document Preparation
                          3. Document Review
                          4. Find Attorney
                          5. View All
                        * ### Products
                
                          1. Legal Forms
                          2. Legal Guides
                          3. Form Drafting
                        * ### Most Popular
                
                          1. Incorporation
                          2. LLC Formation
                          3. Ask a Question
                          4. Attoney Assistance
                
                      * Attorneys
                
                        * ### For Attorneys
                
                          * Products
                          *               * Submit Article
                          *               * Domain / Blog Management
                          *               * Attorneys Wanted
                          *               * Attorney Directory
                          *           * Help
                
                        * ### Customer Service
                
                          * Contact
                          *               * Do I have a Case?
                          *               * Last Will Checkup
                          *               * Contact an Attorney
                          *               * Feedback
                          *               * Your Privacy
                          *           * E-Providers 
                      * Login
                

Convenient, Affordable Legal Help - Because We Care!

Search: Search

                
                                      * USLegal __
                      * Legal Definitions __
                      * H __
                      * Human Beings
                

# Human Beings Law and Legal Definition

There are various definitions for a human being. Biologically, they are
classified as hominids of the species Homo sapiens, which are a primate
species of mammal with a highly developed brain. Humans have the highest brain
to body mass ratio of all large animals. They have a life expectancy
approaching 80 years old in wealthy nations, walk on two feet and have
opposable thumbs. Skin color ranges from almost back to pale pinkish-white.
Height and weight varies, depending on locality, historical factors,
environmental, and cultural factors such as diet.

Human beings are characterized by the ability to speak. They have a high
capacity for abstract thinking and are commonly thought to possess a spirit or
soul which transcends the physical body. The spiritual aspect of human beings
is often defined in terms of rituals and religion. Theories involving the
definition of the beginning of human life, evolution, and creationism are
hotly debated topics in the law.

### __Legal Definition list

                
                                      * HUD Youthbuild Programs [HUD]
                      * HUD Homes
                      * HUD
                      * HUBZone Small Business Concern
                      * Hubzone Empowerment Contracting Program
                      *  __Human Beings
                      * Human Development Index [HDI]
                      * Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Aids
                      * Human Infant Born Alive
                      * Human Intrusion [Energy]
                      * Human Life Amendment
                

### __Related Legal Terms

                
                                      * American Convention on Human Rights
                      * Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor [Department of State]
                      * Bureau of Human Resources [Department of State]
                      * Chief Human Capital Officers Council [CHCOC]
                      * Corpus Humanum Non Recipit Estimationem
                      * Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
                      * Crime against Humanity
                      * Crimes Against Humanity
                      * Cruel and Inhuman Treatment
                      * Designated Physician [Human Reliability Program]
                

Attorney Help  
_Legal Definitions_  
Legal Q &A; Online  
US Legal Forms  
Legal Topics

* * *

Get the USLegal Last Will Combo Legacy Package and protect your family today!  
![](https://uslegal.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/legacy-bundle-300x128.png)
includes your Will, Power of Attorney, Living Will and more. Start Now!

* * *

__ __Advanced Search

* * *

Share:

* * *

* * *

Request a Definition

* * *

* * *

**Legal Forms**  
Last Will  
Power of Attorney  
Living Will  
Incorporation  
LLC Formation  
Real Estate  
Landlord Tenant  
Divorce  
Trusts  
View A-Z

* * *

* * *

#### Legal Information

                
                                      * Legal Topics
                      * Definitions
                      * Ask a Question
                      * Laws
                      * View All
                

#### Products

                
                                      * Personal Legal Forms
                      * Business Legal Forms
                      * FormsPass Subscriptions
                      * Marketing
                

#### For Consumer

                
                                      * Information
                      * Legal Forms
                      * Document Review
                      * Fixed Fee Services
                      * Get Legal Help
                      * Online Divorce
                      * View All
                

#### Services

                
                                      * Business Formation
                      * Document Drafting
                      * Document Review
                      * Attorney Assistance
                

#### For Business

                
                                      * Information
                      * Legal Forms
                      * Document Preparation
                      * Document Review
                      * Answers
                      * Business Formation
                      * View All
                

#### Customer Support

                
                                      * 1-877-389-0141
                      * Why USLegal?
                      * Get Help
                      * My Account
                

#### Our Sites

                
                                      * USLegalforms
                      * USLF Subscriptions
                      * USLegal
                      * FormsPass
                      * PDFfiller
                      * SignNow
                

(C) Copyright 1997-2019 airSlate Legal Forms, Inc. d/b/a USLegal  
Twitter | Facebook

As seen in: ![The Washington Post](/assets/img/promo_publications.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

