

~~~~~~~~~~~~

                
                                      *           * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                      * ________
                

Live Science

* * *
                
                                      * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * Live Science
                      * Culture
                

# Why Are Human Babies So Helpless?

By Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer | May 2, 2016 07:05am ET

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * MORE
                

![Partner

Series](https://img.purch.com/o/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvcGFydG5lcnMvMy9vcmlnaW5hbC9saWZlc2xpdHRsZS5qcGVnPzE0NTcxMTAyMTA=)

![Why Are Human Babies So

Helpless?](https://img.purch.com/w/660/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA4My8wNzAvb3JpZ2luYWwvbGxtLXdoeS1iYWJpZXMtaGVscGxlc3MuanBn)

It's a good thing babies are so adorable, because they need years of looking
after before they can survive on their own.

Credit: Flashon Studio

Some animals come into this world more self-sufficient than others.

Many can fend for themselves without any parental supervision almost
immediately -- picture baby sea turtles hatching on the sand and then somehow
finding their way to the ocean.

Other animals, like newborn giraffe calves, are able to clamber upright and
walk around on their own within hours of birth. [In Photos: How Babies Learn]

Human babies, however, are a different story.

For the first two months of life, they can't lift their heads without help.
They usually roll over for the first time at about 4 months, and sit up at
around 6 months. They usually start standing at about 9 months, and take their
first tentative steps at around 1 year old, according to infant developmental
milestones compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

But even then, babies are just getting started. Fine-tuning the most basic
survival skills, such as walking and feeding themselves, takes at least
another year or more, and the little ones generally remain dependent on
parents or caregivers for well over a decade before they're even able to begin
to navigate parts of the world on their own.

And that's OK, experts say. The extra time that humans need to acquire these
abilities is part of the evolutionary trade-off for having highly developed
brains capable of managing complex reasoning, communication and social
interaction, alongside the physical requirements and capabilities of our adult
bodies.

## Leaving the nest

When animals produce self-sufficient young, it's for a number of reasons
related to both biology and behavior, according to John Dumbacher, a curator
of ornithology and mammalogy at the California Academy of Sciences. [ **The 10
Wildest Pregnancies in the Animal Kingdom** ]

Some animals need their young to be mobile as quickly as possible -- in water
or on land -- because adults are constantly on the move and the young need to
keep up (or keep away from predators). Other species that don't roam as widely
hunker down with helpless young in their nests or burrows.

And there can be a lot of variation among animals from the same group.

Take birds, for example. "Songbirds -- robins, bluebirds -- those tend to be
born more or less naked, with their eyes closed, and they can't do much more
than lifting up their heads and getting a meal from their parents," Dumbacher
told Live Science.

Newly hatched chickens, on the other hand, are much more capable of taking
care of themselves. "They have downy feathers; they can walk around; they can
peck at the ground," Dumbacher said. And ducks, he added, can hop into the
water shortly after hatching and swim after their mother.

The variety and the hatchling's ability can be partly explained by the size of
the adult bird, Dumbacher said, which translates into the maximum size of the
egg it can lay. Bigger-bodied ducks, chickens and geese can lay larger eggs
that hold more nutrients, so an embryo can spend more time developing inside.
Songbird eggs are already as large as they can be relative to the parents'
body size, so their young are born in a less-developed state and require more
time under the parents' wings, Dumbacher added. [That's Incredible! 9 Brainy
Baby Abilities]

## Biology and behavior

There is similar variability in mammals, Dumbacher said. Although all mammal
newborns are dependent on their mothers for nutrition, some are more
physically capable as newborns than others.

Foals can stand up and walk independently soon after birth because adult
female horses are big enough, and can gestate long enough, for their young to
develop substantially before birth, making them more physically capable even
as newborns, Dumbacher explained.

However, shrews -- like songbirds -- are born nearly naked and with closed
eyes, and must be kept warm by a nest and their mother's body heat.

"With its high metabolic rate and a small body size, it's hard for something
like a shrew to carry a baby for a long period of time," Dumbacher said.

Physical and metabolic limitations also apply to human gestation and birth,
according to a study published in 2012. [Why Pregnancy Really Lasts 9 Months]

It was already known that the brains -- and skulls -- of developing babies
can't grow bigger than they do in the womb (on average) because they wouldn't
fit through the mother's pelvis. The study found that a nine-month gestation
period (again, on average) is likely the longest that a woman could safely
sustain the accelerated metabolic rate required during pregnancy.

But self-sufficiency of mammal newborns is dependent on more than a species'
size and metabolic rate, Dumbacher added. "It's also determined by the ecology
of the species, and how much of their behavior can be coded in instinct versus
how much has to be learned from their parents," he said.

In other words, the more information about behavior that a juvenile has to
absorb from adults of its own kind, the more important the role of long-term
parental care is in integrating a young newcomer into the patterns and
practices of the group.

That starts to explain the long road that a human baby must travel from
helpless newborn, to child, to adult, considering how much they need to learn
from their parents about communication and social behavior.

## Slow and steady

The lengthy development process that humans experience is "a luxury," said
Marianella Casasola, an associate professor in the Department of Human
Development at Cornell University. And it extends even later in life than
experts once thought.

"There's a lot of development that goes on in the prefrontal cortex [of the
brain] even into early adulthood," Casasola told Live Science.

Though it may seem like humans' early physical capabilities lag behind those
of other animals as newborns, in the long run, humans' lengthy period of
relative helplessness eventually delivers a substantial cognitive payoff.

"We know that things evolve in a certain way because there's an advantage to
it," Casasola told Live Science. "The longer maturation rate allows us to
develop much more complex thinking."

_Follow Mindy Weisberger on_ _Twitter_ _ and __Google+ __. _ _Follow Live
Science 's Life's Little Mysteries __ @LLMysteries_ _, _ _Facebook_ _  &
__Google+_ _. _

### You'd Also Like

                
                                      * #### Why Do Babies Babble?
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Why Are There So Many Marsupials in Australia?
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### How Do Emperor Penguin Dads Stop Their Eggs From Freezing?
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Why Do Babies Cry on Airplanes?
                

LiveScience __

Author Bio

* * *

Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer

Mindy Weisberger is a senior writer for Live Science covering general science
topics, especially those relating to brains, bodies, and behaviors in humans
and other animals -- living and extinct. Mindy studied filmmaking at Columbia
University; her videos about dinosaurs, biodiversity, human origins,
evolution, and astrophysics appear in the American Museum of Natural History,
on YouTube, and in museums and science centers worldwide. Follow Mindy on
Twitter.

                
                                 **Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer** on
                

Science Newsletter: Subscribe

Submit

Follow Us

Most Popular

                
                                      1. Pregnant Women Who Eat More Fiber May Lower Child's Celiac Risk
                
                      2. Please Do Not Feed These Tweezer-Beaked, Hopping Rats Peanut Butter!!!
                
                      3. Can Physicists Really Save Schrödinger’s Cat?
                
                      4. Mysterious 'Bridge' of Radio Waves Between Galaxies Seems to Be Smashing the Laws of Physics (But It’s Not)
                
                      5. These First Americans Vanished Without a Trace — But Hints of Them Linger
                

HomeAbout Us

Company

                
                                      * Company Info
                      * About Us
                      * Contact Us
                      * Advertise with Us
                      * Using Our Content
                      * Licensing & Reprints
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Copyright Policy
                      * Privacy Policy
                

Network

                
                                      * Top Ten Reviews
                      * Tom's Guide
                      * Laptop Mag
                      * Tom's Hardware
                      * Space.com
                      * Live Science
                      * AnandTech
                      * Dignifyed
                

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

