
                
                                      * Español
                

![familydoctor.org](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/logo-2.png)

Choose a language Español English

Trusted medical advice from the  
American Academy of Family Physicians.

![familydoctor.org](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/logo-2.png)

Trusted medical advice from the  
American Academy of Family Physicians.

![magnifying glass icon](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/themes/familydoctor-child/images/icon-search-orange.png)

                
                                      *           * Twitter Channel __
                      * Facebook Profile __
                      * Pinterest Profile __
                
                      * Diseases and Conditions
                      * Prevention and Wellness
                        * Staying Healthy
                          * Healthy Living
                          * Travel
                          * Occupational Health
                          * First Aid and Injury Prevention
                          * Crisis Situations
                          * Pets and Animals
                          * myhealthfinder
                        * Food and Nutrition
                          * Healthy Food Choices
                          * Weight Loss and Diet Plans
                          * Nutrients and Nutritional Info
                          * Sugar and Sugar Substitutes
                        * Exercise and Fitness
                          * Exercise Basics
                          * Sports Safety
                          * Injury Rehabilitation
                        * Emotional Well-Being
                          * Mental Health
                        * Sex and Birth Control
                          * Sex and Sexuality
                          * Birth Control
                      * Family Health
                        * Infants and Toddlers
                        * Kids and Teens
                        * Pregnancy and Childbirth
                        * Women
                        * Men
                        * Seniors
                      * Your Health Resources
                        * Healthcare Management
                          * Insurance & Bills
                          * Self Care
                          * Working With Your Doctor
                          * Doctors' Notes
                        * Drugs, Procedures & Devices
                          * Over-the-counter Products
                          * Procedures & Devices
                          * Prescription Medicines
                        * Health Tools
                          * Dictionary
                          * Symptom Checker
                          * BMI Calculator
                          * myhealthfinder
                          * Immunization Schedules
                          * Nutrient Shortfall Questionnaire
                

Visit The Symptom Checker

![Depressed teenage boy sitting alone with word cloud describing symptoms of

depression](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2012/04/30641310_l-220x150.jpg)

Read More

##### Depression in Children and Teens

![Doctor talking to patient](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/shutterstock_130170572-220x150.jpg)

Read More

##### BMI Calculator

Anemia

Taking Care of You and Your Baby While You're Pregnant

Breech Babies: What Can I Do if My Baby is Breech?

Changes in Your Body During Pregnancy: Second Trimester

Changes in Your Body During Pregnancy: Third Trimester

Recovering from Delivery (Postpartum Recovery)

De Quervain’s Tenosynovitis

Ending a Pregnancy

Home **Family Health** Pregnancy and Childbirth __ Changes in Your Body During
Pregnancy: First Trimester

# Changes in Your Body During Pregnancy: First Trimester

Share

* * *

![Print Friendly, PDF &

Email](https://erygi42lxye3x93s11zt8kf1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/themes/familydoctor-child/images/icon-print.png) Print

![Close up picture of a pregnant woman holding her belly in the first

trimester](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/10/80552408_l-705x470.jpg)

Advertisement

The first trimester of pregnancy can be exciting and scary. A woman’s body
goes through a lot of changes. Some of these changes may begin before you even
know or confirm you are pregnant. It can help to know what to look for and
expect so you can prepare.

## **Path to well being**

### **How do I know I’m pregnant?**

A missed period is often the first sign of pregnancy. You may have some other
physical signs as well. These include mild cramping and a little bleeding when
the fertilized egg implants itself in your uterus.

If you’ve missed your period and think you may be pregnant, you can take a
home pregnancy test. These tests are very accurate if you take them a few days
after you expected to get your period. Call your doctor if the test is
positive.

### **Why do I feel so tired?**

Feeling very tired is another common symptom of early pregnancy. Your body is
working hard to adjust to all the new physical changes. This can cause extreme
fatigue. You may need to sleep longer than usual at night. If possible, you
can take short naps during the day. Your energy will most likely return in the
second trimester of pregnancy.

### **What is morning sickness?**

Morning sickness consists of nausea and vomiting. It is caused by pregnancy
hormones. Many pregnant women have it to some degree in their first trimester.
Despite what it sounds, morning sickness can occur at any time of day. Certain
foods or smells might make you feel sick and sometimes vomit. Some women seem
to feel sicker when their stomachs are empty. Morning sickness usually goes
away by the second trimester.

## **What other changes can I expect during the first trimester?**

**Frequent urination.** Towards the end of the first trimester, you will feel
like urinating more often. This is because your growing uterus pushes on your
bladder. You may even leak a little urine when you cough or sneeze.

**Lightheadedness.** Your body is working overtime to make extra blood to
support your baby. This can cause you to feel dizzy or lightheaded. Hunger,
weakness, or stress can cause these symptoms as well.

**Heartburn.** The muscles that break down food become more relaxed during
pregnancy. Hormone changes also slow down this process. Food also stays in
your stomach longer to give your body more time to absorb nutrients. All these
things can cause or worsen heartburn.

**Constipation.** You should be taking a daily prenatal vitamin that contains
iron. The iron in the vitamin can lead to constipation. The slow process of
breaking down food also can cause constipation, gas, and bloating. Your doctor
may suggest taking fiber supplements or a stool softener to provide relief.
Make sure you drink plenty of water (about eight glasses per day). Tell your
doctor if you have severe problems. They may switch you to a different
prenatal vitamin.

**Visible veins.** Your body makes extra blood and your heart pumps faster to
meet the needs of pregnancy. This can cause the blue veins in your belly,
breasts, and legs to become more noticeable. You may develop spider veins on
your face, neck, or arms. These are tiny blood vessels that branch out from a
central area, like the legs of a spider.

**Skin changes.** You may notice that your skin looks more rosy and shiny.
Some people call this a “pregnancy glow.” It is caused by increased blood
circulation. Pregnancy hormones can cause extra oil on your skin. It may cause
you to have flares of acne.

**Breast changes.** Most women notice changes in their breasts early in
pregnancy. The hormones in your body change to prepare for breastfeeding. As
this occurs, your breasts may feel tender and swollen. You might notice small
bumps forming in the area around your nipples. Your breasts will continue to
grow and change throughout your pregnancy. They may feel even bigger and
fuller later on.

**Vaginal changes.** The lining of your vagina will become thicker and less
sensitive. You may notice a thin, white discharge. This is normal during
pregnancy. Mild vaginal bleeding (spotting) is also normal and common.
However, you should call your doctor if you have vaginal bleeding. If the
bleeding is heavy or painful, go to the emergency room.

**A growing belly.** Your waistline will begin to expand as your baby and
uterus grow larger. Depending on your size before pregnancy, you may not
notice this change until the second trimester. It is normal to gain no or
little weight in your first trimester.

**Emotional symptoms.** Your hormones are on overload during pregnancy. You
might feel moody, forgetful, or unable to focus. Fatigue and stress can
increase these symptoms.

## **Things to consider**

Keep in mind that each pregnancy experience is unique. Even the same woman may
have different changes in her multiple pregnancies. For each change, your
symptoms may be mild or severe. Do not worry if the changes do not happen at a
certain time. Talk to your doctor if you have any concerns.

## **When to see your doctor**

Contact your doctor if you think or know you are pregnant. They will make an
appointment to confirm your pregnancy and talk to you about prenatal care.

## **Questions to ask your doctor**

                
                                      * Am I pregnant?
                      * How far along am I in my pregnancy?
                      * What kinds of physical and emotional changes should I expect?
                      * Are my symptoms normal?
                      * Are there any risks that I should be aware of?
                      * Which prenatal vitamin do you recommend I take?
                

## **Resources**

American Academy of Family Physicians, Taking Care of You and Your Baby While
You’re Pregnant

Last Updated: January 19, 2018

This article was contributed by familydoctor.org editorial staff.

Categories: Family Health, Pregnancy and Childbirth

Tags: female, Nausea and Vomiting, Obstetrical, Pregnant Women, prenatal care

October 1, 2009 ![American Academy of Family Physicians

Logo](https://familydoctor.org/wp-content/themes/familydoctor-

child/images/aafp-logo.png)

![Family Doctor Logo](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/01/admin-logo.png)

Copyright © American Academy of Family Physicians

_This information provides a general overview and may not apply to everyone.
Talk to your family doctor to find out if this information applies to you and
to get more information on this subject._

Advertisement

Visit our interactive symptom checker ![Symptom Checker

Graphic](https://familydoctor.org/wp-content/themes/familydoctor-

child/images/symptom-checker-img.png)

Visit our interactive symptom checker

Get Started

Advertisement

##### Related Articles

![](https://familydoctor.org/wp-content/themes/familydoctor-child/images/icon-

divider.png)

Labor Induction

Read Article >>

### Labor Induction

Information for pregnant women about the reasons for and what to expect during
labor induction from the American Academy…

Changes in Your Body During Pregnancy: Third Trimester

Read Article >>

Pregnancy and Childbirth

### Changes in Your Body During Pregnancy: Third Trimester

Learn how a woman's body changes during the third trimester of pregnancy.

Bleeding During Pregnancy – What‘s Normal?

Read Article >>

Pregnancy and Childbirth

### Bleeding During Pregnancy – What‘s Normal?

Vaginal bleeding can occur during pregnancy for serious and non-serious
reasons.

                
                                      * About
                      * Support Us
                      * Copyright & Permissions
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Contact
                

familydoctor.org is powered by

![American Academy of Family Physicians Logo](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/aafp-e1520870301332.png)![American Academy of Family

Physicians Foundation Logo](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/aafp-foundation-e1520869366904.png)

© 2019 American Academy of Family Physicians

![familydoctor.org logo](https://familydoctor.org/wp-

content/themes/familydoctor-child/images/logo-mobile.png)

submit site search

                
                                      * Diseases and Conditions
                      * Prevention and Wellness
                        * Staying Healthy
                          * Healthy Living
                          * Travel
                          * Occupational Health
                          * First Aid and Injury Prevention
                          * Crisis Situations
                          * Pets and Animals
                          * myhealthfinder
                        * Food and Nutrition
                          * Healthy Food Choices
                          * Weight Loss and Diet Plans
                          * Nutrients and Nutritional Info
                          * Sugar and Sugar Substitutes
                        * Exercise and Fitness
                          * Exercise Basics
                          * Sports Safety
                          * Injury Rehabilitation
                        * Emotional Well-Being
                          * Mental Health
                        * Sex and Birth Control
                          * Sex and Sexuality
                          * Birth Control
                      * Family Health
                        * Infants and Toddlers
                        * Kids and Teens
                        * Pregnancy and Childbirth
                        * Women
                        * Men
                        * Seniors
                      * Your Health Resources
                        * Healthcare Management
                          * Insurance & Bills
                          * Self Care
                          * Working With Your Doctor
                          * Doctors' Notes
                        * Drugs, Procedures & Devices
                          * Over-the-counter Products
                          * Procedures & Devices
                          * Prescription Medicines
                        * Health Tools
                          * Dictionary
                          * Symptom Checker
                          * BMI Calculator
                          * myhealthfinder
                          * Immunization Schedules
                          * Nutrient Shortfall Questionnaire
                
                      * Diseases and Conditions
                      * Prevention and Wellness
                        * Staying Healthy
                          * Healthy Living
                          * Travel
                          * Occupational Health
                          * First Aid and Injury Prevention
                          * Crisis Situations
                          * Pets and Animals
                          * myhealthfinder
                        * Food and Nutrition
                          * Healthy Food Choices
                          * Weight Loss and Diet Plans
                          * Nutrients and Nutritional Info
                          * Sugar and Sugar Substitutes
                        * Exercise and Fitness
                          * Exercise Basics
                          * Sports Safety
                          * Injury Rehabilitation
                        * Emotional Well-Being
                          * Mental Health
                        * Sex and Birth Control
                          * Sex and Sexuality
                          * Birth Control
                      * Family Health
                        * Infants and Toddlers
                        * Kids and Teens
                        * Pregnancy and Childbirth
                        * Women
                        * Men
                        * Seniors
                      * Your Health Resources
                        * Healthcare Management
                          * Insurance & Bills
                          * Self Care
                          * Working With Your Doctor
                          * Doctors' Notes
                        * Drugs, Procedures & Devices
                          * Over-the-counter Products
                          * Procedures & Devices
                          * Prescription Medicines
                        * Health Tools
                          * Dictionary
                          * Symptom Checker
                          * BMI Calculator
                          * myhealthfinder
                          * Immunization Schedules
                          * Nutrient Shortfall Questionnaire
                

Visit our interactive symptom checker

Visit our interactive symptom checker

Get Started

__

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=297209990620305&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=249633735563230&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

