

![Flower logo](../../images/header/logo.png)

![The Natural Child Project](../../images/header/natural_child_project.png)

![The Natural Child

Project](../../images/header/natural_child_project_small.png)

![View shopping cart](../../images/header/cart.png)

Shop Articles Books

Counsel Art Donate

# The Human Baby

by James Kimmel, Ph.D.

"Tenderness appeared in man's mammalian ancestors eons before he learned to
preserve fire or shape a stone."

          * Lewis Mumford, The Conduct of Life 

The human infant is a helpless creature at birth. He is virtually immobile, he
cannot creep, walk, or speak, and is greatly limited in his ability to act
with purpose. Unlike other primates, he cannot even hold on to or cling to his
mother. He must be carried if he is to go from one place to another. Seventy-
five per cent of his brain develops after birth. He cannot continue to live
without the efforts of another human. He requires years of development before
he can care for himself. A baby's helplessness and immature development
requires a source of care. Nature has provided a source to match this need -
the human mother.

Mothers are biologically and genetically designed to nurture their babies. A
newborn's mother has everything a baby needs - arms to hold him, breasts with
human milk to feed and comfort him, a human body to share with him, a person
to protect and be there for him. She is someone who has evolved with the power
and specific resources that will allow her baby to continue to live and to
develop normally after he is born. Mother and infant did not evolve
separately, but together. The mother is the other half of the human nurturing
process, a process which begins at conception and which continues for many
years after birth. Although a mother and her baby are from the moment of
conception structurally separate, they evolved to function together as a unit.
Donald Winnicott, the English psychologist, has said that, "There is no such
thing as a baby, there is a baby and someone." This statement captures the
reality of the human baby - a reality which is often overlooked in our society
because babies are inaccurately perceived from the moment of birth as separate
individuals.

It is not possible to fully understand the human baby or his development if we
study him in separateness from the "someone" who keeps him alive. There has
never been a baby who lived without the help and support of another human -
with the possible exception of a few isolated and unproven reports of feral
children raised by animals. And since those few individuals were abnormal in
their development when they were found, it seems safe to conclude that a baby
who develops without the care of another human being will be abnormal. So,
when we talk about babies, or about their needs, we must also talk about
mothers - or the "someone" or "someones" who take her place. Babies' needs and
who babies become, have to do, not only with their genes, but with their
caretakers and the society in which they develop.

Babies enter the world with only one power - the power to elicit the emotion
of tenderness and a caring response to them from other humans, especially and
specifically from their mothers. Everything about an infant is designed to
bring about such a response. She is small, soft, vulnerable, harmless and
engaging. Her need for care and protection is obvious. Her cry evolved to make
her mother (and other humans) anxious and concerned. It is a signal of
distress to which emotionally appropriate human beings respond to with efforts
to be of help. Mother and baby are at first strangers to each other, but the
mother, by affirming her baby's life with herself, establishes a joined entity
in which each becomes a part of the other. The mother becomes the "someone"
who makes it possible for the baby to continue to live and develop after
birth.

A baby will, shortly after birth, begin to smile, to make pleasant and sweet
happy sounds, to recognize and to explore his mother, and then to laugh, reach
out, touch and hug, all of which increases his mother's tender attachment to
him. He indicates that he likes being with his mother, that he wants to be
with her, that he is not a stranger, that he is a friendly, social being, that
he has all the human emotions that she does _. Mother and baby are
structurally separate and without a placental attachment after birth, but they
are not physically or emotionally separate._ They evolved to be a nursing
couple in close, physical contact day and night - a couple who are reactive to
each other's moods and feelings. A mother smiles when her baby smiles, laughs
when her baby laughs, is anxious when her baby is anxious, content when he is
content, peaceful when he is peaceful, and sad when he is unhappy. A baby
smiles when his mother smiles, laughs at her sounds of delight, becomes upset
when his mother is upset, anxious, distant, angry, or not available when he
wants to be with her.

The mother-infant relationship, because of its physical intimacy, minimal
separateness, strong mutual dependency, and the necessity for unity in
functioning, collaboration, empathy, and identification may well be the most
social of all human relationships. No other relationship, including that of
the adult couple, tests the power of the human capacity to imagine, wonder,
and become "another", since it is at first nonverbal, and then minimally
verbal for many years. A baby cannot tell you with language who he is, what he
feels, or what he wants or needs. The mother must come in touch with the
"forgotten language", those non-verbal ways of communicating with another of
our kind, that once was for humans (before we developed language) the only way
to express our caring feelings to another.

For a baby, innately social, the relationship with his mother is his
introduction to humanity, his first human relationship, and the one that sets
the tone for all of his future relationships. For the mother, it is an
opportunity to nurture and cherish the life of another, to directly share and
participate in the development and creation of a human being, and by so doing,
grow in her human connection.

A baby isn't at first aware that he can have an effect on his mother, that he
has the power to make her feel tenderness toward him. Neither can he do
anything special to make her take care of him. He is, without knowing it,
relying on millions of years of mammalian evolution, on the fact that he is a
baby and that she is a mother, in order to receive the tenderness and
nurturing that his mother evolved to provide to her children.

We are a species whose existence is genetically rooted in our ability to feel
tenderness toward the life we create and the capacity to nurture this life,
both before and after birth. Prior to birth, the nurturing process follows its
own natural genetic and biological course, and, in its tenacity, can only be
terminated by miscarriage or abortion. The mother's body spontaneously
accommodates as well as conditions permit to the growing embryo and fetus.
Even unwanted conceptions that are carried to full term can deliver healthy
infants. For many individuals, the process prior to birth, because it is
independent of culture, may be the only time in their lives when they are
nurtured in a normal human way.

As with all mammals, human gestation does not end with birth. The nurturing
process after birth, although it is genetically and biologically continuous
with the process before birth, is unfortunately not automatic. In humans, the
mother can choose, and be influenced by others within her culture, to
discontinue being a part of this process. It is likely that in our human
beginnings mothers were governed much more by hormonal, instinctive, and
reflexive processes in their response to their newborns than they later came
to be. But as we developed our modern brain, the care of infants and young
children became a conscious activity, and as consciousness became more and
more determined by culture, the care of infants and children became a cultural
process, greatly influenced by the socioeconomic organization of a society.

Babies are no longer cared for in ways that fit them, but in ways that make
them fit their society. We are a species that is genetically designed to
nurture our offspring and also one which can, because of our capacity for
consciousness and awareness, understand, value, and give priority to the
newborn's need for nurturing. We can - as individuals and as a society -
encourage mothers to nurture their babies. However, consciousness is a two-
edged sword. From cultural conditioning, we can believe, for example, that
biological mothering is unimportant, unnecessary, and an unfair and burdensome
intrusion on women's lives, or that too much nurturing "spoils" babies and is
harmful to their development, or even that some babies, depending on their
gender, "imperfection" at birth, parentage, or "illegitimacy," should not
live.

We can be certain that for the bulk of human existence, mothers, mothering,
and a baby's need for a mother were highly valued and given great priority by
the human group. If such had not been the case, we would not have survived as,
or continued to be, a species that required mothering. Mother and baby could
not have lived very long on their own, separate from the group. Neither could
they have survived without the support of the group.

Ninety-nine percent of all humans who have ever lived were hunter-gatherers
(Nanda). Studies of hunter-gatherer societies readily confirm the respect
given, and the support provided, by the group to a mother nurturing a baby.
Since ancient times, however, continuing until the present, there has been a
concerted effort in Western civilization to eliminate the necessity for the
natural mother to nurture her newborn. Mothers in many cultures and at various
times have been encouraged to suppress their tender feelings toward their
babies, discouraged from nurturing them in the biological human way, and to
give over their baby's care to others. The wet nurse and baby bottle attest to
these historical facts. Both of these cultural methods of providing infants
with sustenance have - to our misfortune - succeeded in achieving their goal
of eliminating the necessity for the natural mother to have to care for her
baby. They have dramatically changed the biological conditions for human
reproduction, the way new human life develops and, perhaps, the human species
itself.

The history of childhood in the civilized world reveals that babies have not
always been perceived as lovable or needing tenderness. At various times and
for varied reasons, they have been seen as evil, harmful, burdensome,
worthless, unwanted, and expendable. They have, of course, been treated in
accordance with these beliefs about them (deMause, Beekman). Lloyd de Mause,
in his book on the history of child care, has stated, "The history of
childhood is a nightmare from which we have only recently begun to awaken. The
further back in history one goes, the lower the level of child care, and the
more likely children are to be killed, abandoned, beaten, terrorized, and
sexually abused".

DeMause is referring to the societies of civilization, not to societies of
people living outside civilization. The story of people who live as hunter-
gatherers is quite different as regards children than the one described by
him. Studies by anthropologists of hunter-gatherer groups do not describe
infant and child care in these groups as a "nightmare." They usually describe
the care of the young as "indulgent". One does find, however, that as these
groups are exposed to "civilized ways", the care of babies and young children
becomes less nurturing and more harsh, cruel, and punitive.

Humans evolved in the natural world and evolved to adapt to that world.
Crucial to our success as a species when we lived in that world was our
capacity to collaborate as a unified group. The human individual, as compared
to other animals, is poorly endowed to survive in nature. We have no claws or
fangs that can serve as weapons, we are slow-moving, and we have no protective
armor. Even our superior brain, coupled with the manual dexterity that allows
us to create what we can imagine, would have little survival value if we were
not able to act collectively. Indeed, the human brain, with its capacity for
language, empathy, and the ability to imagine and to play at being another,
evolved as it did to enhance our capacity for collaborative and collective
behavior. Those traits that allow us to survive in the modern world, such as
self-sufficiency, independence, competitiveness, selfishness, and indifference
to the plight or misfortune of others would have had little adaptive value
when we lived in small groups as hunter-gatherers. Our adaptive strength then
was in our ability for combined and unified functioning, not in our individual
and separate skills, powers, possessions, or wealth.

The nurturing mother-infant interaction, rooted in the mother's capacity to
care about the life she creates, was for most of our existence the model for
all human relationships and the foundation for human society. It allowed the
newborn to be born in an immature state and to slowly develop his brain and
mind in relation to loving others. The nurturing process, predicated on the
unity of mother and baby, developed individuals who would find it natural to
function in unison with others. We would be a very different kind of species -
a very unsocial one - if we were born fully developed and did not require
mothering.

A human baby born today, to any parents anywhere in the world, would have no
trouble fitting into a hunter-gatherer society. He evolved to do so. On the
other hand, any baby born today in modern society does not fit _our_ world,
nor would any baby born in the past fit it either. Babies (and mothers) have
not changed in their reproductive biological or genetic structure; it is
society and mothers who have changed in their response to, and in their
attitude toward, babies. We no longer value and support mothering or the
babies' critical need to develop in relation to a tender, nurturing mother. We
have deviated from the nurturing aspect of reproductive biology by changing
the baby's "someone".

In a society where a baby lives and develops without his mother's presence and
without human tenderness, some babies, if not most, become a different kind of
human than they were meant to be. They must adapt to and fit the substitutes
that have replaced natural mothering: formula, pacifiers, cribs, playpens,
security objects, and substitute caregivers. In doing so, they are, as adults,
different from adults who develop in relation to a nurturing mother.
Inappropriately and poorly nurtured children grow up without the
internalization of tenderness. We evolved to pass on to the newborn our tender
feelings for them.

Babies need tenderness. They do not grow well without it. It is the stuff that
makes us human.

> **References:**

>

> Beekman, Daniel. The Mechanical Baby. Westport, CT: Laurence Hill, 1977.  
>  deMause, Lloyd. The History of Childhood. New York: The Psychohistory
Press, 1974.  
>  Mumford, Lewis. The Conduct of Life. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1951.  
>  Nanda, Serena. Cultural Anthropology, Third Edition. Belmont, CA: Wadswoth
Publishing, 1987.  
>  Winnicott, D. The Family and Individual Development. New York: Basic Books,
1966.

More Articles by James Kimmel

![Share on Facebook](../../images/share/share.png)
![Tweet](../../images/share/tweet.png) ![Send

email](../../images/share/send.png)

Children behave as well as they are treated.

HomeAboutNewsletter

AdvertiseContact

Your kind support helps make our work possible. Donate

Site content © 1996-2019 The Natural Child Project, unless otherwise stated.
Terms of use

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

