
                
                                      * Home
                      * Life
                      * Shop
                      * Learn + Play
                      * Love + Village
                      * Work + Money
                      * My Journey
                      * MotherlyLoves
                      * News
                      * Guides
                      * ParentCo
                      * Parenting
                      * Trending homepage
                      * Careers
                

This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our
website.

Learn More Got It

![](//s3.amazonaws.com/roar-assets-auto.rbl.ms/motherly/menu.svg)

Topics _20x20 Export Created with Sketch._

Registry EssentialsAges + StagesPregnancyLearn + PlayHome + FoodBeauty +
StyleSelf + WellnessLove + VillageWork + MoneyNews

VideoPodcastBookShopEvents

AboutSubscribe | Login

Motherly

![](//s3.amazonaws.com/roar-assets-auto.rbl.ms/motherly/search.svg)

A modern lifestyle brand redefining motherhood

# Breastfeeding your newborn: Your guide to the first 7 days of nursing

Wendy Wisner

![Print Friendly and PDF](https://assets.rbl.ms/19247731/2000x.png)

Breastfeeding is normal, natural and instinctual, but it's also a learned
process for both moms and babies.

* * *

It's normal to have questions. It's to be expected that new moms will need
information as breastfeeding unfolds after birth. Along with some loving care
and guidance, and a good dose of trust in the process and your body, it's
vital to have good information about what to expect in the first few days of
breastfeeding, especially since so much changes that first week—from birth to
colostrum to “milk in"!

This article provides an overview of what happens over the course of the first
week and beyond of breastfeeding, but the keys to remember are:

—Keep baby close with skin-to-skin.

—Nursing every 2 hours is normal.

—Rooting, fist-to-mouth and lip-smacking, are baby's hunger signs.

—Check diaper output: Generally 3 to 5 poopy diapers and 5 to 6 wet diapers
per day.

—Your latch shouldn't be painful. Get help if needed.

## _**“A mother's milk is liquid love."**_

## **Here's a breakdown of the first week: what's normal + what to do if

something goes wrong.**

## **1. Breastfeeding the first few hours after birth**

## **Maintain skin-to-skin.**

Unless you or your baby has a medical condition that requires immediate
attention, it's important to spend a good few hours with your baby skin-to-
skin directly after birth. Even babies born via C-section can be placed in a
mother's arms after birth.

## **Check your early latch.**

Most babies (especially ones born to mothers who didn't have pain medication)
will crawl up to the breast and latch on themselves. Numerous studies have
shown the importance of these first few hours ( here's one). Babies are most
alert and primed to nurse in these post-birth hours.

FEATURED VIDEO

__ALL OUR VIDEOS

## **Remember baby's deep sleep.**

After the first few hours, babies often fall into a deep sleep and are less
able to nurse well. There is also evidence that nursing in the first few hours
leads to long nursing duration in the long-term. Babies are learning as soon
as they are born, so give them the chance to learn to nurse. If you aren't
able to, or if something goes wrong, don't worry—with help, almost all babies
can learn to latch later.

## **2. Breastfeeding on days 1 to 3**

## **Nurse frequently.**

For the first few days after birth, expect your baby to nurse very frequently.
There is absolutely no schedule yet. If you are in a hospital, have your baby
room-in with you. Keep your baby skin-to-skin with you for most of the day.
This way, anytime your baby looks for the breast, it will be right there!
Rooting, head bobbing, fist sucking, mouth fluttering—these are all signs your
baby is ready to nurse.

## **Avoid artificial nipples.**

You can't nurse too often. Ask that the hospital give your baby no artificial
nipples—no bottles or pacifiers. You are all the food and comfort your baby
needs.

## **All hail colostrum.**

During the first three days, you are producing a kind of milk called
colostrum. It's small in amount, but rich in vitamins, proteins, antibodies
and antiviral agents. It's your baby's first inoculation. It also acts as a
laxative and helps your baby clear out his first poop (meconium).

## **Keep an eye on baby** ' **s weight loss.**

It is normal for breastfed babies to lose a bit of weight in the first three
days of life. Five to 7% is in the normal range. Part of this is the passage
of the first poop and other fluids from birth.

You don't need to supplement your baby. In fact, your baby's stomach is about
the size of a marble right now, so feeding a few ounces in a bottle will most
likely make your baby spit up. The colostrum your body produces is small in
amount for a reason—it's just the right amount for your baby's stomach to
hold.

## **Having latching issues?**

What if your baby is not latching? While rare, it does happen that some babies
have trouble latching in the first few days. If this is the case, get some
help from a lactation consultant or trusted helper right away.

In the meantime, keep your baby skin-to-skin, hand express your colostrum
(pumps don't work as well in these first few days before your milk “comes in")
and feed your baby the colostrum with a small spoon or a medicine dropper.

## **3. Breastfeeding on days 3 to 5**

Sometime between the third and fifth day after birth, your milk will become
more abundant.

## **Milk letdown arrives.**

It can often happen suddenly, but is sometimes more gradual. Some women just
feel fuller, and might notice their baby swallowing more milk (not everyone
can hear a baby swallow, and that doesn't mean the baby isn't getting milk!).
Other women become quite engorged when their milk comes in, which can be a
challenge in itself.

## **Overfilling is possible.**

The key is to make sure your baby is deeply latched on, and to nurse
frequently to empty your breasts and prevent them from overfilling.

## **Try hand expressing.**

If your breasts are so full that your nipples become flattened, your baby may
have trouble latching on. Hand expressing a little milk to soften the nipple,
or trying a technique called Reverse Pressure Softening, can make the nipple
more pliable and make latching easier.

## **Gently massage.**

Get some help with these techniques if necessary. If you are so engorged that
your milk isn't flowing, gentle massage can help. Cold packs or chilled
cabbage between feedings can also be helpful.

## **Do a diaper check.**

Soon after your milk comes in, your baby's poops will transition to a
greenish-brownish color, and will take on a mustard yellow color soon after.
Wet diapers will become more abundant as well.

## **4. Breastfeeding on days 5 to 7**

Once you've gotten over the hump of the first few days, you might be starting
to find a groove with breastfeeding. Your baby will still be nursing very
frequently, about 10 times in 24 hours. Some will have a slightly longer
stretch (though not always at night!), but most will need to nurse every two
hours or so.

## **Learn baby** ' **s hunger cues.**

Once your milk is in and you know that your baby is gaining weight, you can
let some longer stretches happen, but remember to always nurse when your baby
shows cues like rooting, head bobbing and fist sucking. Even a baby making
light sucking motions is a cue to nurse!

## **Schedules vary.**

Some babies will seem to have an erratic eating schedule, wanting to nurse
every hour for a few hours, and then being passed out for a few hours after
that ( cluster feeding). All of it is normal.

## **Continue checking diapers.**

Babies generally have three to five poopy diapers per 24 hours. The poops
should be at least the size of a quarter, yellow in color and sometimes seedy
in texture. Variations in color are normal too. Some babies will poop after
every feeding, and some will consolidate the poops more. Pee diapers vary, but
five to six wet diapers per day is normal.

## **Check baby's weight.**

Diapers only tell half the story of how much milk a baby is getting. The most
reliable test is a weight check (no clothes or diaper, and on the same scale
each time if possible).

## **Get help if you need it.**

It can take up to two weeks for a baby to get back to his birthweight, but by
the end of the first week, _a baby should be gaining rather than continuing to
lose weight_. If your baby isn't gaining weight, get help right away!

## **Supplement if needed.**

If you need to supplement, pump your milk and feed it to your baby. Here is a
post I wrote about supplementing the breastfed baby, and the importance of
doing so early on if your baby is losing too much weight.

## **Tenderness should subside.**

Nursing should be pain free by the end of the first week. Some mild tenderness
when your baby first latches is within the spectrum of normal, but pain that
is severe, lasts more than a few seconds, lasts between feeds, or that is
accompanied by broken or cracked skin, is _not normal_.

## **Get help!**

If this is the case, get help sooner rather than later because these problems
only tend to get worse with time. Often all that you need is a quick
adjustment to your latch, or positioning. Some moms and babies need a little
more help. Find a lactation consultant or other trusted helper. This type of
thing usually requires in-person help.

> “Birth is not only about making babies. Birth is about making mothers—
strong, competent, capable mothers who trust themselves and know their inner
strength."

— Barbara Katz Rothman

## **5. Beyond the first week**

You just had a baby and your body needs to heal after birth.

## **Relax + snuggle.**

Your baby will want to nurse a lot and be near you. Now is the time to clear
your schedule and let yourself be lazy and snuggly with your baby! Lots of new
moms have trouble with this because they are used to getting things done and
feeling independent. But this time is brief and you will thank yourself later
for taking the time to rest and establish breastfeeding.

## **Ask for help.**

Remember, you don't have to do everything alone. Get help! Your partner, your
family, your neighbors—accept all offers of help. Let others keep house and
feed you so you can rest and nurse.

## **Find support + find your tribe.**

Do you love breastfeeding? Hate it? Feel overwhelmed? All these feelings are
normal, and it's normal to feel all of them all at once. ( Here is a good
article to help you distinguish these normal feelings from postpartum
depression or anxiety.)

Once you have recovered from birth and breastfeeding is established, join a
local breastfeeding support group. Meeting other breastfeeding moms will help
you feel normal. Plus, more concerns come up after that first week, and it's
great to have the wisdom and support of other mothers.

![](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xNzUwMTk4NS85ODB4LnBuZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjAzMzgwNDV9.fip__arFC7ZmCMg3LVfAacUuz9QuTrhan7wObCwZStU/img.png)

_Wendy Wisner is a mom of two, a freelance writer and a lactation consultant
(IBCLC)._

* * *

Wendy Wisner

Wendy is a mom of two, a freelance writer, and a lactation consultant (IBCLC).
Her essays about parenting and breastfeeding appear widely. She is the author
of two books of poems, and writes a blog about motherhood, breastfeeding,
writing, and more.

breastfeeding week100 new motherhood newborn 0 weeks old Mama breastfeeding
guide

Who said motherhood doesn't come with a manual?

## Subscribe to get inspiration and super helpful ideas to rock your

# momlife. Motherhood looks amazing on you.

SUBSCRIBE

Already a subscriber? Log in here.

## Dear husband: You’ll always be our hero

Motherly + Hooray Heroes

The other night, I watched you and our daughter through the window as you
played in the backyard. As you swung her through the evening air, inspected
bugs and raced through the grass, one thing became increasingly clear to
me―you are, in every way, her hero.

Truthfully, you're mine, too.

Watching you made me think of all the things you do, big and small, that help
us get through our day. It might be taking out the garbage, it might be waking
up with the girls and reading together so I can get an extra hour of sleep, it
might be driving an hour to and from work every day to support us.

**And, like so many heroes, your work often goes largely unpraised―and
sometimes unnoticed—especially by our little girls. But I hope you know I see
you. And as our children grow, I see so much of you in them.**

### You are, and have always been, so kind.

****Whether you're rescuing a beetle in the house (that I probably would have
just flushed) or stooping down to masterfully pull a splinter from our
toddler's heal, everything you do is done with such gentleness. You laugh at
our 3-year-old's silly jokes. You teach both girls about loving each other as
sisters. And you still find time to thank me for all I do for the family. I
know our children will be as kind as you are as adults.

### You are, and always have been, so strong.

And I'm not just talking about your ability to carry our baby's car seat four
city blocks―though I really appreciate when you do that! You also carry my
emotional burdens. You listen to me during the moments when motherhood breaks
me down or step in when a tantrum threatens to undo me. You take the
responsibilities of fatherhood seriously, and I've never wondered whether or
not you would step up to the plate when needed.

### You are, and always have been, so fun.

****You're the parent who doesn't tell them to "be careful" and thinks there
should be no limit to how high they go on the swing. You swirl them in the
pool and play "tickle monster" and chase them around the living room as they
shriek and giggle and beg for more. You're the one who teaches them about
hockey and playing guitar and all the other hobbies where my expertise (or
lack thereof) would fail them. When they remember their childhood, I know so
many of the happy moments will be forever tied up in you.

![hooray heroes

book](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU2MDM4Ni85ODB4LnBuZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjA1MTg5MTl9.QFYPM5Oi40t1m6_WDQBVRcQRFwq7OVBg0lQJUWlkivE/img.png)

**The best part of seeing all these good things in you is seeing them shine
through in our children. Our daughters are so kind, strong and fun―and the
older they get, the more I see your favorite things becoming theirs as well.**

So, when I thought about what to get you this Father's Day, I wanted to make
sure it honored you as the hero of our family. Nothing seemed more perfect
than a gift for you and our girls to share a personalized Daddy edition of the
_When My Child Grows Up_ book.

I came across a Hooray Heroes video a few days ago on Facebook and was touched
by the reactions of dads receiving their own books. I love the idea of
personalizing our kids (and even you as their dad!) in a book that captures
not only the special relationship you have with our children, but also shows
how those dreams you inspire today could become our children's future. No
matter which path they choose, I know they will always look to you for
inspiration and guidance and this adorable book will remain our family
keepsake forever. I can't wait to see you reading this story together, I know
our girls will love the personalized illustrations that look just like them.

There are so many dreams I have for our children when they grow up, but
regardless of what their profession turns out to be, I know they'll always
remember what an incredible father you are and always have been. You'll always
be our hero.

_This article is sponsored byHooray Heroes. Thank you for supporting the
brands that support Motherly and mamas._

* * *

hooray heroes dear husband daddy daughter kids and dad fatherhood father's day

Our Partners

## We talked to the parents behind this heartwarming viral video of a baby

'talking' to his dad 😍

Jacqui Tapp

29m

If you've been anywhere near the internet this week, you've probably come
across this seriously heartwarming clip.

Casually seated on the couch, a dad and his 18-month-old son have a full-on
conversation. The son might not form many _actual_ words—but his hand
gestures, mannerisms and expressions are all _entirely_ on point.

**Watch the adorable viral video here:  
**

![](https://cdn.jwplayer.com/thumbs/ibR4Gx0K-1920.jpg)

It's a precious moment to behold—and the internet could barely handle it.

Since it was posted on Tuesday night, the video has been viewed over 39M
times. I even saw it pop up in Will Smith's IG feed.

We caught up with proud parents DJ and Shanieke Pryor, who were appropriately
blown away by the public reaction to this clip, that sat in Shanieke's camera
roll for about a month before she posted it. They've been touched by how the
captured moment has resonated and spread joy to so many.

The Pryors say their boy has been a character from day one—often cracking his
parents up with his expressions and hand gestures.

Shanieke, who is a full-time RN and a full-time mom, says, "With the joy that
he's bringing—and the laughs that are in the house—it could be the littlest
thing, but he honestly just amazes us, this little mind."

DJ continues, "I know every parent probably thinks this—but seeing his growth
every day and how he interprets what he sees—it's thrilling to me."

We love how this video captures such a sweet and hilarious moment shared
between father and son. DJ is a comedian as well as a dad, and it seems clear
that Kingston inherited some of his father's timing. Shanieke says she sees
her husband in her son every day.

"I just love their bond overall with each other. I look at Kingston and think,
he acts just like you—some of it he hasn't even learned yet, it's just within
him. It's a beautiful thing to watch."

Shanieke's initial video post included the hashtag #HeNeedsHisOwnShow. We
agree. And if it gets greenlit—we'll be here for it. 😍

### **You may also like:**

                
                                      * This viral video of a soldier surprising his wife after she gave birth is 😭
                      * Mindy Kaling talks to her baby 'all the time'—and you should, too
                      * It's science: Babies are smarter than you think
                

* * *

good dads viral video parenting win video viral video son gibberish dad
talking to son heartwarming video jwplatform.com

Video player exemption

## Granger Smith's tragedy: What you need to know about drowning risks

Heather Marcoux

1h

Country music fans are mourning with singer Granger Smith after the father of
three revealed his youngest, 3-year-old son River, died this week.

"Amber and I made the decision to say our last goodbyes and donate his organs
so that other children will be given a second chance at life," Smith captioned
a photo of himself with River in happier times.

Representatives for Smith confirmed river "died in a tragic drowning accident
at home," _People_ reports.

> Granger Smith on Instagram: “I have to deliver unthinkable news. We’ve lost
our youngest son, River Kelly Smith. Following a tragic accident, and despite
doctor’s best…”

River's death comes just over a year after another high profile couple,
athletes Bode and Morgan Miller, lost their daughter after a swimming pool
drowning. The Millers have since become vocal advocates for water safety. The
CDC notes that drowning is the leading cause of death for children under 4
(except congenital anomalies), something many parents don't know. The Millers
have spent the last year making sure that more parents know how many children
die from drowning every year.

### Water safety tips:

                
                                      *  **If you have a pool:** Install a 4-sided fence that is at least 4 feet tall and separates the pool from the house and the rest of the yard from the pool. Make sure you select a gate that is self-closing and self- latching to minimize the risk of having the gate be left open. 
                      * **If you're visiting a home with a pool or hot tub:** Make sure all gates, patio door and other means of pool access are secured and follow the tips below. 
                      * **Always assign an adult supervisor:** The Mayo Clinic recommends that when kids are using a pool, parents take turns as the "designated watcher" so that one adult is always focused on the kids and  CDC wants supervisors of preschool children to be close enough to reach the child at all times. 
                      * **Keep toys away from the pool:** The CDC suggests that as soon as pool time is over, parents put away any toys, floats or other fun objects that may be in or around the pool. Removing the toys removes an element of temptation for children.
                      *  **Take swimming lessons:** According to the AAP, "children over age one may be at a lower risk of drowning if they have had some formal swimming instruction. However, there is no evidence that swimming lessons or water survival skills courses can prevent drowning in babies younger than one year of age."
                      *  **Take a CPR course:** When seconds count, you want to be ready to do everything possible to save a child.
                

### You might also like:

                
                                      * Parents need to know more about the risks surrounding drowning, say grieving moms
                      * Bode and Morgan Miller share powerful message about pool safety
                      * Bode Miller's baby son learns how to swim in a touching video
                

##

##

* * *

drowning granger smith pool safety

## Our fave 5: These are the most flattering swimsuits for mamas

Courtney Thompson

4h

Summertime means vacation, grilling, parades, fireworks, beach days, lemonade
stands and block parties! This season is chock full of fun activities we've
been waiting all year for. That is, except for one glaring item.

It's also the time that we mamas will have to put on a bathing suit. After a
long winter of wearing high-waisted jeans and slouchy sweaters, this can a
daunting prospect.

**And if you're like us and don't have a glorious private pool in your
backyard, you're going to have to cool off in public, which means wearing a
bathing suit to your town beach, lake or pool. While you're bent over helping
a toddler learn to walk or dripping wet after going down a water slide 15
times.**

Fear not, gals, Motherly to the rescue. Because summer is about having
FUN—jumping in that pool with your babies, diving headfirst into that wave
with your middle schoolers—we've scoured the market for the best, most
flattering bathing suits moms can actually "mom" in. We want you spending way
less time fretting about your appearance and way more time having a blast with
your families.

## Give any of these stable, flattering suits a try and you'll be the most

confident, beautiful and worry-free mama out there.

### Summersalt Sidestroke

![Summersalt

Sidestroke](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU4MjkxMS9vcmlnaW4uanBnIiwiZXhwaXJlc19hdCI6MTU2MDM1NDU4N30.KpgO_6bb9sQUswPxf_GxbNPBNnv3eAKtRx1L5aT62mA/img.jpg?width=584&coordinates=289%2C69%2C127%2C0&height=598)

In the world of flattering swimwear, Summersalt did not come to play. The
brand took 1.5 million body measurements from 10,000 women to inform their
suits' fits and it shows. The one-shoulder Sidestroke is expertly cut, just
grazing the underarms but not pinching (no armpit chub bubbles!).

**Why we love it** : One, the compression. This suit is double layered and
sucks you in big time. Two, the color blocking pattern is not only pretty, but
also deflecting, taking the focus away for your midsection and on the fun,
summery colors.

**Fit tip** : Go one size up if you're a D-cup or larger.

**Sizes** : 2-24

**Price:** $95.00

##### SHOP

### Boden Santorini

![Boden Santorini

Swimsuit](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU4MjgwMi85ODB4LmpwZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjAxMTEyMzZ9.yL6oOZHy0AC87KZMtJbTWG8ggjCUdz8EHz6cQr-2CmY/img.jpg)

This swimsuit is proof that flattering swimwear doesn't only come in black.
We're loving—nay, we're _obsessed_ with—the "highland green/geo" pattern that
mixes Kelly greens with navy and white. The result is a crisp, Bardot-esque
suit that has a retro vibe thanks to chaste cuts and a thick halter strap
(which, FYI, doesn't dig into your skin!).

**Why we love it** : The color blocked panels that are incredibly
flattering—and, bonus, they provide an optical illusion that make all torsors
seem flatter than they actually are. Fun hack: Pull the halter down, tie it
behind your back and you've got yourself a strapless suit, too!

**Fit tip** : This one is true to size and provides the most amount of
coverage of any suit on our list, with ample fabric on your rear.

**Sizes** : 2-16

**Price** : $90.00

##### SHOP

### Knix’s Peekaboo One-Piece #MySizeRox

![Knix Peekaboo One-

Piece](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU4MjgzNy85ODB4LmpwZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjAyMjQwNjV9.8gnxkKwP5KOc1AWG141OwV6nfySSFM1x3QJbCHW-8PM/img.jpg)

When an intimates brand comes out with a swimwear line, you know it's going to
be good and Knix's new collection does not disappoint. Why? Its silhouettes
graze your body in a way that is more seamless and less bulky than other
swimsuits. That said, the fabric is made of dual-layered fabric that sucks in
your tummy. Definitely the sexiest suit on our list. News alert: Moms are
allowed to wear sexy swimwear! The Peekaboo cut-out shows just the a tad of
under-boob, while hiding a sturdy built-in bra that keeps your chest exactly
where it should be ( _inside_ the suit).

**Why we love it** : If you're in the #bigboobs club, this is your suit. The
largest size can wrangle 40 E/F/G cups. And as a bonus, this suit will look
GREAT worn as a body suit with high-waisted jeans or a full skirt this summer.

**Fit tip** : The swimsuit has a higher cut leg than is standard, so you may
run into a tan line issue if all your other bathing suits are lower cut. The
good news? Your legs look longer!

**Sizes** : Small-XXL

**Price** : $95.00

##### SHOP

### Land’s End V-Neck One Piece Swimsuit

![Land's End

Swim](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU4MjgzMS85ODB4LmpwZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjAyMjQ3NzR9.ddYr_oAXjlIXvU51NE74EEKoDiHokQQ75AOo4ITz4Ow/img.jpg)

We know, we know, when you think of Land's End you might think of camping gear
or kid backpacks or thick wool socks… and not swimwear. But the brand is a
major player in the flattering bathing suits category, with so many options it
was hard to choose which one would actually make our list! Ultimately, we
decided on this v-neck cutie, with its sweet scallop-trimmed neckline and
flattering cut.

**Why we love i** t: The criss-cross straps in the back provide extra support
for your chest, and the vertical piping seemingly elongates your torso. It
totally sucks you in and has modest cuts around the leg lines.

**Fit tip** : If you're firmly in the #smallboobs club, this is your suit, as
the neckline (and removable cups) will enhance what you've already got.

**Sizes** : 4-16 in both regular and long

**Price** : SALE $56.97 with code SHINE (Regularly $94.95)

##### SHOP

### H&M Shaping Swimsuit

![H&M Shaping

Swimsuit](https://assets.rebelmouse.io/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpbWFnZSI6Imh0dHBzOi8vYXNzZXRzLnJibC5tcy8xOTU4MjgwNi85ODB4LmpwZyIsImV4cGlyZXNfYXQiOjE1NjAzMTk4NzB9.okHpWGouXzdJF9SNyJMtGCBoVShQVUogrj432MUak_8/img.jpg)

Looking for a suit that sucks you in and flatters you in all the right placeS,
but doesn't feel or look like a scuba suit? This is it. With an easy-breezy
wrap top and a double-lined, ruched torso, the one-piece provides a sculpting
effect that seemingly shaves pounds off your body. The wide, adjustable straps
don't dig into your skin and provide loads of support for larger chest sizes,
but they don't have the industrial look of an ancient bra. As for the color
options, we're HERE for the red hue, because, um, why not?!

**Why we love it** : At under $50, the price is right. So right, in fact, that
you should buy two.

**Fit tip** : Don't let the wrap top fool you, this suit has built-in cups
that—with the extra sturdy straps—will keep your chest firmly in place, even
when you're at a water park.

**Sizes** : 12-22 (for sizes 0-18, go here)

**Price** : $49.99

##### SHOP

_Motherly is your daily #momlife manual; we are here to help you easily find
the best, most beautiful products for your life that actually work. We share
what we love—and we may receive a commission if you choose to buy. You've got
this._

FEATURED VIDEO

__ALL OUR VIDEOS

### You might also like:

                
                                      * The only pair of postpartum jeans you need
                      * 14 must-haves for taking baby to the beach this summer
                      * This $6 Target fanny pack doubles as a cooler 🙌
                

* * *

our fave 5 most flattering swimsuits for women flattering one-piece bathing
suits best bathing suits for moms flattering swimwear for moms flattering one-
piece bathing suits for moms best one-piece bathing suits 2019 best swimsuits
for women 2019 most flattering swimsuits for moms

Shop

## Dear Mama-to-be, I envy you

Danielle Moore

6h

My beautiful sister-in-law is about to meet her first baby in a handful of
weeks. I am lucky to be a part of her journey. I love being on the receiving
end of the texts and phone calls as we discuss little things, like the best
baby swaddle, to big things, like how to advocate for longer maternity leave.

It wasn't that long ago I was in her shoes, and I will always be appreciative
of the moms who stopped to talk anything and everything baby with me. I
remember looking at those moms who seemed to have everything figured out with
a slight twinge of envy. Thinking everything from, _How does she do it so
flawlessly?_ to, _I'm never going to be able to breastfeed in public the way
that she does,_ to even _She looks insanely awesome in those mom jeans._

**Once I got to the other side, I quickly realized that no one, including the
most seasoned moms, has everything figured out. This is why the sisterhood of
motherhood sticks so closely together—we need each other. And now as I connect
and swoon with first-time mamas about join the sisterhood, I realize _I am
actually a little envious of them_.**

FEATURED VIDEO

__ALL OUR VIDEOS

Every stage goes by so quickly. Just like that, two years have passed since I
was waiting for my own baby to arrive. Each moment, big and small, is
imprinted on my heart and I wouldn't change a single thing. I am blessed
beyond measure for the days that have gone by and I pray vigorously for the
days to come.

This life is wonderful. So wonderful in fact that I would go back and live it
again and again, which is why it is with bittersweet envy that I celebrate
expecting moms and the amazing moments ahead of them.

So, to all the new mamas out there awaiting their baby:

**I envy your childlike anticipation as you count down the months, weeks, days
and hours until you meet your baby.**

Yes, easier said in retrospect without the pains of a growing belly, the
sleepless nights and the constant trips to the bathroom. But during those last
months of pregnancy, my heart felt magic that you rarely find as an adult.

_What will my baby look like? What will I say to her when we meet? How will my
husband react when he sees her for the first time?_

Those beautiful mysteries are so short-lived. Write them down. Soak them up.
Remember what this fire in your heart feels like because you will want to hold
onto it for forever.

**I envy you as you feel your baby kick and cartwheel in your belly.**

You alone are the only person who will ever know what it feels like to carry
your baby; what a joy it is to soak in that sacred intimacy. Yes, holding your
baby in your arms is a thousand times better than any wiggle in your belly,
but there is a quiet loneliness that comes when they go away, one that I never
anticipated. To this day, I feel the occasional phantom flutter and my heart
skips a beat as my mind takes me back to the days when it was just my baby and
me.

**I envy the showers and swooning.**

Being pregnant with my first baby felt a lot like being engaged. People
treated me like a beautiful, mythical creature, and man, did I feel like I was
walking on sunshine during those cherished months.

Yes, people continued to swoon over my gorgeous newborn when she arrived, but
I quickly felt invisible to everyone but my baby and other new moms who were
in the thick of it too. In fact, perhaps I felt even worse than invisible—I
felt like someone who wasn't worthy of the title "mom" to such a precious,
perfect human being.

The disparity between how expecting moms and new moms are treated is extreme,
and we as a society need to do better.

Just remember that _you_ matter, mama. Your postpartum feelings and emotions
are valid and important. Your baby is beautiful _and so are you_.

Actively surround yourself with a group of women who reinforce these truths in
your life and delete, unfollow and ignore anyone who doesn't.

**I envy the moment your baby is placed on your chest in what will certainly
be one of, if not the most, euphoric moment of your life.**

This moment will change you and stay with you until the grave. We only get so
many moments that can be summed up as _the best moment of our lives_ and this
is one of them. It's going to be fleeting, and yet, you are going to feel it
forever.

Whether your baby is coming to you from adoption, surrogacy, C-section, or
natural birth, there will be a moment when you hold _your child_ for the first
time and the love you are going to wrap your arms around is unimaginable until
you experience it for yourself.

**I envy those first breaths, first cries, first smiles, first giggles and all
of the firsts in between.**

Life will come to you like a tidal wave and these moments will ground you as a
constant reminder of the preciousness of life. And you know what? They keep
getting sweeter and sweeter.

I love watching my daughter's fascination with a flower and the way her face
lights up when she learns something new as much as I loved seeing her gummy
smile for the first time.

**I envy the day you realize you are stronger than you ever imagined.**

One of the most defining moments of motherhood has nothing to do with kids
—it's the moment you see yourself as the hero you are. Life will undoubtedly
throw a lot of uncertainty at you and you'll be faced with situations and
decisions that will stretch you thin and challenge you to your core.

But mama, you are strong. When it feels like you are failing, remind yourself
that you and only you were selected to be your child's mother.

You are uniquely prepared to handle whatever comes your way, so trust your gut
and don't forget to shower yourself and others with compassion. If you are
reading this and thinking I'm crazy because you in no way relate to feeling
like a hero, then mama, go look in a mirror. Right. Now. You are a warrior and
today is a beautiful day to embrace it.

We are all living a moment that someone envies to hold now.

Motherhood is loving today and already missing it before it is gone, and maybe
one day I will be lucky enough to experience these firsts with a second baby,
but nothing is a given except for the gifts we hold now. _Go enjoy it, mama._

### You might also like:

                
                                      * From one sleep-deprived mama to another, please rest
                      * 11 simple ways for any mama to become a minimalist
                      * No worries, Mama: Saying "Dada" first actually means you + baby are super bonded
                

* * *

new mama new mom new motherhood mama

Life

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/17529091/2000x.png)

Ages + StagesNewsLoveWorkChildLifePodcastBookShop

AboutShare Your StoryCareersContact

Follow Us

Motherly provides information of a general nature and is designed for
educational purposes only. This site does not provide medical advice,
diagnosis or treatment.Your use of the site indicates your agreement to be
bound by our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Information on our advertising
guidelines can be found here.

__

__

__

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?cv=2.0&cj=1&c1=2&c2=24634445&c6=Learn+%2B+Play&c8=Breastfeeding+your+newborn%3A+Your+guide+to+the+first+7+days+of+nursing)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

