

# Three-Fifths Compromise

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

The **Three-Fifths Compromise** was a compromise reached among state delegates
during the 1787 United States Constitutional Convention. Whether and, if so,
how slaves would be counted when determining a state's total population for
legislative representation and taxing purposes was important, as this
population number would then be used to determine the number of seats that the
state would have in the United States House of Representatives for the next
ten years. The compromise solution was to count three out of every five slaves
as a person for this purpose. Its effect was to give the southern states a
third more seats in Congress and a third more electoral votes than if slaves
had been ignored, but fewer than if slaves and free people had been counted
equally. The compromise was proposed by delegate James Wilson and seconded by
Charles Pinckney on June 11, 1787.[1]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Background
                        * 1.1 Confederation Congress
                        * 1.2 Constitutional Convention
                        * 1.3 Compromise and enactment
                      * 2 Impact before the Civil War
                      * 3 After the Civil War
                      * 4 See also
                      * 5 References
                      * 6 Bibliography
                

## Background[edit]

Part of a series on  
Slavery

* * *

![IJzeren voetring voor gevangenen transparent

background.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/IJzeren_voetring_voor_gevangenen_transparent_background.png/125px-

IJzeren_voetring_voor_gevangenen_transparent_background.png)

Contemporary

                
                                      * Child labour
                      * Child soldiers
                      * Conscription
                      * Debt
                      * Forced marriage
                        * Bride buying
                        * Wife selling
                      * Forced prostitution
                      * Human trafficking
                      * Peonage
                      * Penal labour
                      * Contemporary Africa
                      * 21st-century Islamism
                      * Sexual slavery
                      * Wage slavery
                

Historical

Antiquity

                
                                      * Ancient Rome
                      * Ancient Greece
                      * Asia
                      * Babylonia
                      * Medieval Europe
                      * The Muslim World
                      * Byzantine Empire
                      * Ottoman Empire
                

Topics and practices

                
                                      * Atlantic slave trade
                        * Middle Passage
                      * Arab slave trade
                        * Ghilman
                        * Mamluk
                        * Saqaliba
                        * Harem
                      * Ottoman slave trade
                        * Circassian beauties
                        * Devshirme
                        * Millet system
                        * Imperial Harem
                        * Odalisque
                      * Barbary slave trade
                        * Barbary corsairs
                        * The Barbary Coast
                        * Turkish Abductions
                      * Aztec
                      * Blackbirding
                      * Coolie
                      * Corvée labor
                      * Field slaves in the United States
                      * House slaves
                      * Kholop
                      * Panyarring
                      * Thrall
                      * Serfs
                        * History
                        * Russia
                      * Slave market
                      * Slave raiding
                      * Child soldiers
                

Naval

                
                                      * Galley slave
                      * Impressment
                      * Pirates
                      * Shanghaiing
                      * Slave ship
                

By country or region

Sub-Saharan Africa

                
                                      * Contemporary Africa
                      * Slave Coast
                      * Angola
                      * Chad
                      * Ethiopia
                      * Mali
                      * Mauritania
                      * Niger
                      * Somalia
                      * South Africa
                      * Sudan
                      * Seychelles
                

North and South America

                
                                      * Americas indigenous
                        * U.S. Natives
                      * Brazil
                        * Lei Áurea
                      * Canada
                      * Caribbean
                        * Barbados
                        * Code Noir
                      * Cuba
                      * Haiti
                        * revolt
                        * Restavek
                      * Latin America
                      * (Encomienda)
                      * Puerto Rico
                      * Trinidad
                      * United States
                        * colonial
                        * maps
                        * female
                        * partus
                        * penal labor
                        * Slave codes
                        * interregional
                        * Human trafficking
                      * Virgin Islands
                

Central, East, and South Asia

                
                                      * Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
                      * Bhutan
                      * China
                        * Booi Aha
                        * Laogai
                        * penal system
                      * India
                        * Debt bondage
                        * Chukri System
                      * Japan
                        * comfort women
                      * South Korea
                        * Yankee princess
                      * North Korea
                      * Vietnam
                

Australia and Oceania

                
                                      * Blackbirding
                      * Human trafficking in Australia
                      * Slave raiding in Easter Island
                      * Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
                      * Blackbirding in Polynesia
                

Europe and North Asia

                
                                      * Sex trafficking in Europe
                      * Britain
                      * Denmark
                      * Dutch Republic
                      * Germany in World War II
                      * Malta
                      * Norway
                      * Poland
                      * Portugal
                      * Romania
                      * Russia
                      * Spain
                        * colonies
                      * Sweden
                

North Africa and West Asia

                
                                      * Iran
                      * Libya
                      * Human trafficking in the Middle East
                      * Yemen
                

Religion

                
                                      * Slavery and religion
                      * Bible
                      * Christianity
                        * Catholicism
                        * Mormonism
                      * Islam
                        * 21st century
                        * Mukataba
                        * Ma malakat aymanukum
                      * Judaism
                      * Bahá'í Faith
                

Opposition and resistance

                
                                      * Abolitionism
                        * U.K.
                        * U.S.
                      * Anti-Slavery International
                      * Blockade of Africa
                        * U.K.
                        * U.S.
                      * Colonization
                        * Liberia
                        * Sierra Leone
                      * Compensated emancipation
                      * Freedman
                        * manumission
                      * Freedom suit
                      * Abolitionists
                      * Slave Power
                      * Underground Railroad
                        * songs
                      * Slave rebellion
                      * Slave Trade Acts
                      * International law
                      * Third Servile War
                      * 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution
                      * Timeline of abolition of slavery and serfdom
                

Related

                
                                      * Common law
                      * Indentured servitude
                      * Unfree labour
                      * Fugitive slaves
                        * laws
                        * Great Dismal Swamp maroons
                      * List of slaves
                        * owners
                      * Slave narrative
                        * films
                        * songs
                      * Slave name
                      * Slave catcher
                      * Slave patrol
                      * Slave Route Project
                      * Treatment in U.S.
                        * breeding
                        * court cases
                        * Washington
                        * Jefferson
                        * Adams
                        * Lincoln
                        * 40 acres
                        * Freedmen's Bureau
                        * bit
                      * Emancipation Day
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

### Confederation Congress[edit]

The three-fifths ratio originated with an amendment proposed to the Articles
of Confederation on April 18, 1783.[2][3] The amendment was to have changed
the basis for determining the wealth of each state, and hence its tax
obligations, from real estate to population, as a measure of ability to
produce wealth. The proposal by a committee of the Congress had suggested that
taxes "shall be supplied by the several colonies in proportion to the number
of inhabitants of every age, sex, and quality, except Indians not paying
taxes".[4][5] The South immediately objected to this formula since it would
include slaves, who were viewed primarily as property, in calculating the
amount of taxes to be paid. As Thomas Jefferson wrote in his notes on the
debates, the southern states would be taxed "according to their numbers and
their wealth conjunctly, while the northern would be taxed on numbers
only".[6]

After proposed compromises of one-half by Benjamin Harrison of Virginia and
three-fourths by several New Englanders failed to gain sufficient support,
Congress finally settled on the three-fifths ratio proposed by James
Madison.[7] But this amendment ultimately failed, falling two states short of
the unanimous approval required for amending the Articles of Confederation
(only New Hampshire and New York were opposed).

### Constitutional Convention[edit]

The Convention had unanimously accepted the principle that representation in
the House of Representatives would be in proportion to the relative state
populations. However, since slaves could not vote, leaders in slave states
would thus have the benefit of increased representation in the House and the
Electoral College. Delegates opposed to slavery proposed that only free
inhabitants of each state be counted for apportionment purposes, while
delegates supportive of slavery, on the other hand, opposed the proposal,
wanting slaves to count in their actual numbers.

The proposal to count slaves by a three-fifths ratio was first proposed on
June 11, and agreed to by nine states to two with only a brief debate.[8] It
was debated at length between July 9 and 13, inclusive, when it was initially
voted down by the members present at the Convention.[9][10] A few southern
delegates, seeing an opportunity, then proposed full representation for their
slave population.[11][12] Seeing that the states could not remain united
without some sort of compromise measure, the ratio of three fifths was brought
back to the table and agreed to by eight states to two.[13]

### Compromise and enactment[edit]

After a contentious debate, the compromise that was finally agreed upon—of
counting "all other persons" as only three-fifths of their actual
numbers—reduced the representation of the slave states relative to the
original proposals, but improved it over the Northern position.[14] An
inducement for slave states to accept the Compromise was its tie to taxation
in the same ratio, so that the burden of taxation on the slave states was also
reduced.

The Three-Fifths Compromise is found in Article 1, Section 2, Clause 3 of the
United States Constitution, which reads:

> Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several
States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective
Numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole Number of free
Persons, including those bound to Service for a Term of Years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other Persons.

A contentious issue at the 1787 Constitutional Convention was whether slaves
would be counted as part of the population in determining representation of
the states in the Congress or would instead be considered property and, as
such, not be considered for purposes of representation. Delegates from states
with a large population of slaves argued that slaves should be considered
persons in determining representation, but as property if the new government
were to levy taxes on the states on the basis of population. Delegates from
states where slavery had become rare argued that slaves should be included in
taxation, but not in determining representation.

The proposed ratio was, however, a ready solution to the impasse that arose
during the Constitutional Convention. In that situation, the alignment of the
contending forces was the reverse of what had been obtained under the Articles
of Confederation in 1783. In amending the Articles, the North wanted slaves to
count for more than the South did because the objective was to determine taxes
paid by the states to the federal government. In the Constitutional
Convention, the more important issue was representation in Congress, so the
South wanted slaves to count for more than the North did.[15]

> Much has been said of the impropriety of representing men who have no will
of their own.... They are men, though degraded to the condition of slavery.
They are persons known to the municipal laws of the states which they inhabit,
as well as to the laws of nature. But representation and taxation go
together.... Would it be just to impose a singular burden, without conferring
some adequate advantage?

>

> — Alexander Hamilton[16]

## Impact before the Civil War[edit]

The Three-Fifths Compromise gave a disproportionate representation of slave
states in the House of Representatives relative to the voters in free states
until the American Civil War. In 1793, for example, Southern slave states had
47 of the 105 members but would have had 33, had seats been assigned based on
free populations. In 1812, slave states had 76 out of 143 instead of the 59
they would have had; in 1833, 98 out of 240 instead of 73. As a result,
Southern states had disproportionate influence on the presidency, the
speakership of the House, and the Supreme Court in the period prior to the
Civil War.[17] Along with this must be considered the number of slave and free
states, which remained mostly equal until 1850, safeguarding the Southern bloc
in the Senate as well as Electoral College votes.

Historian Garry Wills has speculated that without the additional slave state
votes, Jefferson would have lost the presidential election of 1800. Also,
"slavery would have been excluded from Missouri ... Jackson's Indian removal
policy would have failed ... the Wilmot Proviso would have banned slavery in
territories won from Mexico ... the Kansas-Nebraska bill would have
failed."[17] While the Three-Fifths Compromise could be seen to favor Southern
states because of their large slave populations, for example, the Connecticut
Compromise tended to favor the Northern states (which were generally smaller).
Support for the new Constitution rested on the balance of these sectional
interests.[18]

## After the Civil War[edit]

Section 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment (1868) later superseded Article 1,
Section 2, Clause 3 and explicitly repealed the compromise. It provides that
"representatives shall be apportioned ... counting the whole number of persons
in each State, excluding Indians not taxed." A later provision of the same
clause reduced the Congressional representation of states who denied the right
to vote to adult male citizens, but this provision was never effectively
enforced.[19] (The Thirteenth Amendment, passed in 1865, had already
eliminated almost all persons from the original clause's jurisdiction by
banning slavery; the only remaining persons subject to it were those sentenced
for a crime to penal servitude, which the amendment excluded from the ban.)

After the Reconstruction Era came to an end in 1877, however, the former slave
states subverted the objective of these changes by using various strategies to
disenfranchise their black citizens, while obtaining the benefit of
apportionment of representatives on the basis of the total populations. These
measures effectively gave white Southerners even greater voting power than
they had in the antebellum era, inflating the number of Southern Democrats in
the House of Representatives as well as the number of votes they could
exercise in the Electoral College in the election of the president.

The disenfranchisement of black citizens eventually attracted the attention of
Congress, and in 1900 some members proposed stripping the South of seats,
related to the number of people who were barred from voting.[20] In the end,
Congress did not act to change apportionment, largely because of the power of
the Southern bloc. The Southern bloc comprised Southern Democrats voted into
office by white voters and constituted a powerful voting bloc in Congress
until the 1960s. Their representatives, re-elected repeatedly by one-party
states, controlled numerous chairmanships of important committees in both
houses on the basis of seniority, giving them control over rules, budgets and
important patronage projects, among other issues. Their power allowed them to
defeat federal legislation against racial violence and abuses in the
South.[21][ _not in citation given_ ]

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/32px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png)United States portal
                
                      * Section 127 of the Australian Constitution, excluding Aboriginal people from the census for purposes of determining allocation of seats in Parliament; repealed in 1967.
                      * Slave Trade Acts
                

## References[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** Madison, James (1902) _The Writings ofJames Madison_ , vol. 3, _1787: The Journal of the Constitutional Convention, Part I_ (edited by G. Hunt), p. 143
                      2. **^** Story, Joseph (1833) _Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States_ , §641 (Book 3, Chapter 9)
                      3. **^** American Politics: The American Republic and Its Government
                      4. **^** Wills pg. 51
                      5. **^** Hannis Taylor (1911). _The Origin and Growth of the American Constitution: An Historical Treatise_. Houghton Mifflin Company. p. 131.
                      6. **^** Wills pp. 51–52
                      7. **^** Wills pg 53.
                      8. **^** Madison, pp. 143-4
                      9. **^** The Three Lives of James Madison: Genius, Partisan, President
                      10. **^** Madison Debates, July 11, the actual vote was 6 to 4, against counting by 3/5ths
                      11. **^** Slavery and the Founders: Race and Liberty in the Age of Jefferson
                      12. **^** Madison Debates July 12, only two states favored full representation for slaves: South Carolina and Georgia. All other states voted no.
                      13. **^** Madison, p. 416
                      14. **^** Paul Finkelman, "How The Proslavery Constitution Led To The Civil War", _Rutgers Law Journal_ Volume 43 Fall/Winter 2013 Number 3, p405
                      15. **^** Madison, James (1902) _The Writings ofJames Madison_ , vol. 3, _1787: The Journal of the Constitutional Convention, Part I_ (edited by G. Hunt), p. 397
                      16. **^** Jonathan Elliot, ed. (1866). _The Debates In The Several State Conventions On The Adoption Of The Federal Constitution, As Recommended By The General Convention At Philadelphia, In 1787_. J.B. Lippincott & Co. Washington: Taylor & Maury. p. 237.
                      17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wills pp. 5–6.
                      18. **^** Banning, Lance (August 31, 2004). "Three-Fifths Historian". The Claremont Institute. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved January 21, 2008.
                      19. **^** Friedman, Walter (January 1, 2006). "Fourteenth Amendment". _Encyclopedia of African-American Culture and History_.  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2013.
                      20. **^** Committee At Odds on Reapportionment, _The New York Times_ , December 20, 1900, accessed March 10, 2008
                      21. **^** Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon", _Constitutional Commentary_ , Vol. 17, 2000, p. 10, accessed 10 Mar 2008
                

## Bibliography[edit]

                
                                      * Wills, Garry (2003). _"Negro President": Jefferson and the Slave Power_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-34398-9.
                      * Walton, Hanes, Jr.; Smith, Robert C. (2006). _American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom_ (3rd ed.). New York: Pearson Longman. ISBN 0-321-29237-5.
                      * Wiencek, Henry (2004). _An Imperfect God: George Washington, His Slaves, and the Creation of America_. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. ISBN 0-374-52951-5.
                      * Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and Justice
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Constitution of the United States

* * *

Articles|

                
                                      * Preamble
                      * I
                      * II
                      * III
                      * IV
                      * V
                      * VI
                      * VII
                

Amendments|

| Ratified|

| Bill of Rights|

                
                                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * 3
                      * 4
                      * 5
                      * 6
                      * 7
                      * 8
                      * 9
                      * 10
                

---|---  
1795 - 1804|

                
                                      * 11
                      * 12
                

Reconstruction|

                
                                      * 13
                      * 14
                      * 15
                

Twentieth century|

                
                                      * 16
                      * 17
                      * 18
                      * 19
                      * 20
                      * 21
                      * 22
                      * 23
                      * 24
                      * 25
                      * 26
                      * 27
                

Pending|

                
                                      * Congressional Apportionment
                      * Titles of Nobility
                      * Corwin Amendment
                      * Child Labor
                

Unsuccessful|

                
                                      * Equal Rights
                      * District of Columbia Voting Rights
                
                      * Amendment proposals in Congress
                      * Convention to propose amendments
                      * State ratifying conventions
                

Formation|

                
                                      * History
                      * Articles of Confederation
                      * Mount Vernon Conference
                      * Annapolis Convention
                      * Philadelphia Convention
                        * Virginia Plan
                        * New Jersey Plan
                        * Connecticut Compromise
                        * Three-Fifths Compromise
                        * Committee of Detail
                        * Signing
                        * Independence Hall
                        * Syng inkstand
                      * _The Federalist Papers_
                      * Anti-Federalist Papers
                      * Massachusetts Compromise
                      * Virginia Ratifying Convention
                      * Hillsborough Convention
                      * Rhode Island ratification
                      * Drafting and ratification timeline
                

Clauses|

                
                                      * Appointments
                      * Appropriations
                      * Assistance of Counsel
                      * Case or Controversy
                      * Citizenship
                      * Commerce
                      * Compact
                      * Compulsory Process
                      * Confrontation
                      * Congressional enforcement
                      * Contract
                      * Copyright and Patent
                      * Double Jeopardy
                      * Due Process
                      * Elections
                      * Equal Protection
                      * Establishment
                      * Exceptions
                      * Excessive Bail
                      * _Ex post facto_
                      * Extradition
                      * Free Exercise
                      * Free Speech
                      * Fugitive Slave
                      * Full Faith and Credit
                      * General Welfare
                      * Guarantee
                      * Impeachment
                      * Import-Export
                      * Ineligibility
                      * Militia
                      * Natural-born citizen
                      * Necessary and Proper
                      * New States
                      * No Religious Test
                      * Oath or Affirmation
                      * Origination
                      * Pardon
                      * Petition
                      * Postal
                      * Presentment
                      * Presidential succession
                      * Privileges and Immunities
                      * Privileges or Immunities
                      * Recess appointment
                      * Recommendation
                      * Self-Incrimination
                      * Speech or Debate
                      * Speedy Trial
                      * State of the Union
                      * Supremacy
                      * Suspension
                      * Take Care
                      * Takings
                      * Taxing and Spending
                      * Territorial
                      * Title of Nobility
                      * Treaty
                      * Trial by Jury
                      * Vesting
                      * Vicinage
                      * War Powers
                      * List of clauses
                

Interpretation|

                
                                      * Concurrent powers
                      * Constitutional law
                      * Criminal procedure
                      * Criminal sentencing
                      * Dormant Commerce Clause
                      * Enumerated powers
                      * Equal footing
                      * Executive privilege
                      * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
                      * Judicial review
                      * Nondelegation doctrine
                      * Preemption
                      * Saxbe fix
                      * Separation of church and state
                      * Separation of powers
                      * Taxation power
                      * Unitary executive theory
                

Display  
and legacy|

                
                                      * National Archives
                        * Charters of Freedom Rotunda
                      * Independence Mall
                      * Constitution Day
                      * Constitution Gardens
                      * National Constitution Center
                      * _Scene at the Signing of the Constitution_ (painting)
                      * _A More Perfect Union_ (film)
                      * USS _Constitution_
                      * Worldwide influence
                

**US Government Portal** • **Law Portal** • **Wikipedia book**

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Three-
Fifths_Compromise&oldid=900250214"

Categories:

                
                                      * Drafting of the United States Constitution
                      * Slavery in the United States
                      * History of African-American civil rights
                      * History of the United States (1776–89)
                      * 1787 in the United States
                      * 1787 in American politics
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Subscription required using via
                      * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
                      * Use mdy dates from May 2016
                      * All articles with failed verification
                      * Articles with failed verification from September 2014
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Català
                      * Dansk
                      * Deutsch
                      * Español
                      * Français
                      * 한국어
                      * Português
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 4 June 2019, at 12:18 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

