

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

New York

SubscribeLog In

Log In

Today’s Paper

New York|Determining the Legal Rights of Slaves

                
                                      *           *           *           *           * Advertisement
                

Supported by

F.Y.I.

# Determining the Legal Rights of Slaves

By Michael Pollak

                
                                      * March 27, 2014
                      *             *             *             *             *             * Q. I recently read the memoirs of a woman who fled the French Revolution, settled for a while in New York State and wrote of what slavery was like there. She said the slaves had rights: For example, if they thought their owner was treating them unfairly, they had the right to demand that they be sold to someone else. Is this true? Did slaves have legal rights in New York?
                

A. It depends on the era, Eric Foner, professor of history at Columbia and an
authority on American race relations, said in an email. “In the Dutch period,
slaves had several such rights,” he said. “The British tended to tighten the
system.” According to The Encyclopedia of New York City, the Dutch
administration in New Amsterdam allowed slaves to be married in church, but a
year after the British took over, the Laws of 1665, the first legal code in
the colony, no longer recognized those marriages as legal. In the 18th
century, the encyclopedia said, “slaves did have a few rights; for instance,
people who willfully killed or maimed slaves were punishable under a law
passed in 1686, but the purpose of most laws was to control rather than to
protect slaves.”

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2014/03/30/nyregion/30FYI_SPAN/30FYI-

articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

CreditRischgitz/Getty Images

Despite the legal nonrecognition of marriages, slaves formed strong kinship
bonds. One of their biggest hardships was the separation of husbands from
wives, and parents from their children: “Slave families in New York City
seldom shared one household,” the encyclopedia notes. “Mothers and young
children lived together, but men were housed separately.”

One of the greatest fears tormenting slave families was being broken up for
sale; some buyers, seeking hard labor, might want only the man. A New York
State law in 1788, cited by Professor Foner, prohibited selling a slave out of
the state. An 1809 law prohibited the forced breakup of slave families and
allowed slaves to legally marry. By the 1790s, he said, slaves were
negotiating with their owners about matters like their sale and how they might
become free, “but whether that was something codified in law I tend to doubt.”

With American independence began a slow, halting improvement in the lives of
New York slaves. A 1785 law guaranteed blacks a jury trial if charged with
capital crimes. The Gradual Emancipation Act of 1799 and another in 1817
mandated the liberation of most slaves in New York by 1827. The law spurred
negotiated manumissions of slaves by their masters, 260 of them between 1799
and 1801. Patrick Rael, in “The Long Death of Slavery” (2005, in “Slavery in
New York” by the New-York Historical Society), wrote, “Masters and slaves
negotiated nearly every facet of bondage and freedom: slaves’ length of
remaining service, the cost of self-purchase, slaves’ capacity to purchase
family and friends, conduct expected of slaves during the remainder of their
service, possibilities for resale, and sometimes goods or funds to be
furnished to slaves upon manumission.”

Unfortunately, he added, masters held the upper hand; they could renege on
their promises with no penalty.

Email: fyi@nytimes.com

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page MB3 of the New York
edition. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

                
                                      *           *           *           * Advertisement
                

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

                
                                      * home page
                      * world
                      * U.S.
                      * politics
                      * New York
                      * business
                      * tech
                      * science
                      * climate
                      * sports
                      * obituaries
                      * the upshot
                      * today's paper
                      * corrections
                

opinion

                
                                      * today's opinion
                      * op-ed columnists
                      * editorials
                      * op-ed Contributors
                      * letters
                      * sunday review
                      * video: opinion
                

arts

                
                                      * today's arts
                      * art & design
                      * books
                      * dance
                      * movies
                      * music
                      * Pop Culture
                      * television
                      * theater
                      * watching
                      * video: arts
                

living

                
                                      * automobiles
                      * Cooking
                      * crossword
                      * education
                      * food
                      * health
                      * jobs
                      * magazine
                      * parenting
                      * real estate
                      * style
                      * t magazine
                      * travel
                      * weddings
                

listings & more

                
                                      * Reader Center
                      * Wirecutter
                      * Live Events
                      * The Learning Network
                      * tools & services
                      * N.Y.C. events guide
                      * multimedia
                      * photography
                      * video
                      * Newsletters
                      * NYT store
                      * times journeys
                      * manage my account
                

### news

                
                                      * home page
                      * world
                      * U.S.
                      * politics
                      * New York
                      * business
                      * tech
                      * science
                      * climate
                      * sports
                      * obituaries
                      * the upshot
                      * today's paper
                      * corrections
                

### opinion

                
                                      * today's opinion
                      * op-ed columnists
                      * editorials
                      * op-ed Contributors
                      * letters
                      * sunday review
                      * video: opinion
                

### arts

                
                                      * today's arts
                      * art & design
                      * books
                      * dance
                      * movies
                      * music
                      * Pop Culture
                      * television
                      * theater
                      * watching
                      * video: arts
                

### living

                
                                      * automobiles
                      * Cooking
                      * crossword
                      * education
                      * food
                      * health
                      * jobs
                      * magazine
                      * parenting
                      * real estate
                      * style
                      * t magazine
                      * travel
                      * weddings
                

### more

                
                                      * Reader Center
                      * Wirecutter
                      * Live Events
                      * The Learning Network
                      * tools & services
                      * N.Y.C. events guide
                      * multimedia
                      * photography
                      * video
                      * Newsletters
                      * NYT store
                      * times journeys
                      * manage my account
                

### Subscribe

                
                                      * home delivery
                      * digital subscriptions
                      * Crossword
                      * Cooking
                      * email newsletters
                      * corporate subscriptions
                      * education rate
                      * mobile applications
                      * replica edition
                

## Site Information Navigation

                
                                      * © 2019 The New York Times Company
                      * Contact Us
                      * Work with us
                      * Advertise
                      * Your Ad Choices
                      * Privacy
                      * Terms of Service
                      * Terms of Sale
                      * Site Map
                      * Help
                      * Help
                      * Subscriptions
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

