

__Member Login

__

                
                                      * __Ovulation Calendar
                      * __Pregnancy Calculator
                      * __Baby Names
                

__Member Login

American Pregnancy Association ![American Pregnancy Association

Logo](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/themes/apa/library/img/logo_horiz.png)

_Follow Your Pregnancy Week-By-Week_  
Subscribe to our **free** week-by-week email newsletter

__Enroll Now

Toggle navigation

                
                                      *  Trying To Conceive 
                        *  Getting Pregnant
                        *  Infertility
                        *  Adoption
                        *  Planning and Preparing
                        *  Prenatal Testing
                        *  Preventing Pregnancy
                      *  Your Pregnancy 
                        *  Your Developing Baby
                        *  Pregnancy Wellness
                        *  Multiples Pregnancy
                        *  Week by Week
                        *  Naturally
                      *  Pregnancy Concerns 
                        *  Unplanned Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Complications
                        *  Birth Defects & Disorders
                        *  Is it Safe While Pregnant
                        *  Medications & Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Loss
                      *  Birth & Beyond 
                        *  Labor and Birth
                        *  Birth & Beyond
                        *  Breastfeeding
                        *  Women's Health
                      *  About 
                        * Blog
                        *  Discussion
                        *  About APA
                        *  Online Advertising
                        *  Medical Advisory Committee
                        *  Corporate Sponsor Info
                        *  Corporate Sponsors
                        * Delivering Excellence
                        *  Fertility Shop
                      * (800) 672-2296
                      * Live Chat
                      * English
                        * Espa√±ol
                

Donate

# Pregnancy Week 1 & 2

Home / Week by Week / Pregnancy Week 1 & 2

![Woman who is in her 1st or 2nd week of

pregnancy](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2012/05/1-2-weeks-

pregnant.jpg)

## First and Second Week of Pregnancy

Congratulations! During these first two weeks, your body is preparing for
possible conception.

### How is pregnancy calculated?

Calculating the day your baby begins to develop and keeping track of your
pregnancy dates can be a challenge. The development of pregnancy is counted
from the first day of the woman's last normal menstrual period (LMP), even
though the development of the fetus does not begin until conception, which is
about two weeks later.

Pregnancy is calculated from this day because each time a woman has a period,
her body is preparing for pregnancy. Counting from the LMP, most women are
pregnant an **average of 280 days**. Calculating from the LMP also gives a
standard of measurement for health care providers to follow since it is
extremely difficult to know exactly when conception occurred.

**For more information on how pregnancy is measured, please see our
information oncalculating your dates.**

Get the Free American Pregnancy Association app: iOS Android

### What changes are occurring with your body?

Your period has just begun, and you may be thinking about becoming pregnant.
Your ovulation time is the most important thing you need to understand when
trying to conceive. Ovulation occurs when a mature egg is released from the
ovary, pushed down the fallopian tube, and available to be fertilized.

The lining of the uterus has thickened to prepare for a fertilized egg. If
conception does not occur, the uterine lining will be shed. The shedding of an
unfertilized egg and the uterine wall occurs during menstruation.

**There are also several facts that you need to know concerning ovulation:**

                
                                      * An egg lives **12-24 hours** after leaving the ovary.
                      * Normally, only one egg is released each time you ovulate.
                      * Ovulation can be affected by stress, illness, travel, and significant changes in weight, exercise, and sleeping patterns.
                      * Some women may experience light spotting during ovulation. This is not considered to be an actual period, but rather ovulatory bleeding.
                

### What is happening with your baby?

Nothing is happening yet, but be patient while the stage is being set. Before
long, an egg will be released and will be available to be fertilized.

### How do you track ovulation?

A woman's monthly cycle is measured from the first day of her menstrual period
until the first day of her next period. On average, a woman's cycle normally
is **between 28-32 days**. Ovulation is calculated by starting with the first
day of the cycle, which is the day the menstrual period begins.

Most women ovulate on any one day **between Day 11 - Day 21** of their cycle.
This is what many refer to as the "fertile time" or "fertility window" of a
woman's cycle because sexual intercourse during this time increases the chance
of pregnancy.

**For more information on tracking ovulation please see:**

                
                                      * Fertility Awareness
                      * Understanding Ovulation
                      * Ovulation Calendar
                

### What should you plan at this time?

There may need to be some lifestyle changes made at this time to increase your
chances of conceiving and having a healthy baby down the road. Adequate
exercise and a balanced diet are important factors to evaluate.

**It is recommended to begin taking prenatal vitamins and stop using
substances such as:**

                
                                      * Caffeine
                      * Artificial sweeteners
                      * Alcohol
                      * Recreational drugs
                      * Nicotine
                

If you are taking prescription drugs, check with your health care provider to
see if such medication is safe to take during pregnancy. For more information
on nutrition during pregnancy, please see our information on pre-conception
nutrition.

### Tips for making your pregnancy better

The most important thing you can do right now is to act in the way you would
if you already knew you were pregnant. Since it can be weeks before you know
if conception has occurred, this will protect both you and your future baby
from any substances or activities that could cause problems.

### Tips for mom's partner

Many times the male partner does not feel he has a role in a potential
pregnancy at this time. However, his health and lifestyle can also affect your
future baby. He may need to evaluate his nutrition, medication intake, as well
as habits like smoking, and using drugs or alcohol.

Men can also benefit from taking prenatal vitamins or another type of vitamin
supplement, including a proper diet, prior to conception.

Last updated: November 24, 2018 at 8:44 am

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

311 Shares

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

311 Shares

__Search

Find Healthcare Providers That Can Help You Through Your Pregnancy.

Type Of Provider

Acupuncturist Adoption Professional Birth Center Childbirth Educator
Chiropractor Counselor Doula Family Law General Practitioner Genetic Counselor
Holistic Healthcare Specialist Homeopath Hospital Infertility Specialist
Lactation Consultant Life Insurance Massage Therapist Maternity Home Medicaid
Office Midwife Nutritionist Ob-Gyn Pediatrician Pharmacy Physical Therapist
Pregnancy Center Support Group WIC Center Yoga or Fitness Instructor

Zip Code

Radius 1 mile 5 miles 10 miles 15 miles 20 miles 30 miles 50 miles 100 miles

### Education Supported By

                
                                      * ![Amareta](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/amereta.gif)
                      * ![DNA Diagnostic Center](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ddc.png)
                      * ![Dream Belly](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/dream-belly.png)
                      * ![eHealthcare Solutions](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ehealthcare-solutions.png)
                      * ![Fairhaven Health](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/fairhaven-health.png)
                      * ![IsoLove](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/isolove.jpg)
                      * ![Milkies](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/milkies.png)
                      * ![My Fetal Life](https://americanpregnancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/MyFetalLife-image-for-APA.png)
                      * ![Nordic Naturals](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/nordic-naturals.png)
                      * ![Safe Catch](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/safe-catch.png)
                      * ![Viacord](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/viacord.png)
                

#### Helpful Information

                
                                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * Corporate Sponsors
                

#### Planning

                
                                      * Adoption
                      * Birth & Beyond
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Labor and Birth
                

#### Pregnancy

                
                                      * Planning and Preparing
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Pregnancy Concerns
                      * Your Pregnancy
                

#### Connect

                
                                      * ____
                      * ____
                

* * *

__Contact Us Here __Donate to APA

(C) 2019 American Pregnancy Association. | Web Design by AXZM

__

The information on this site is not intended or implied to be a substitute for
professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. All content, including
text, graphics, images, and information, contained on or available through
this website is for general information purposes only. The purpose of this is
to help with education and create better conversations between patients and
their healthcare providers.

Week by Week editor

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

