

# Abortion in Japan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

**Abortion in Japan** is available to women in limited circumstances,
including endangerment of their health or economic hardship. Chapter XXIX of
the Penal Code of Japan makes abortion _de jure_ illegal in the country, but
exceptions to the law are broad enough that it is widely accepted and
practiced. Meanwhile, the Maternal Health Protection Law allows approved
doctors to practice abortion with the consent of the mother and her spouse, if
the pregnancy has resulted from rape, or if the continuation of the pregnancy
may severely endanger the maternal health because of physical reasons or
economic reasons. Anyone trying to practice abortion without the consent of
the woman will be punished, including the doctors.

No abortifacient has been approved in Japan. Approved doctors, however, can
choose to use imported abortifacient under the same terms above. Any other
people who abort the fetus using abortifacients will be punished.

Emergency contraceptive pills were approved by the Ministry of Health, Labour
and Welfare of Japan in 2011.[1]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 History
                      * 2 Statistics
                      * 3 Contraceptive use
                      * 4 See also
                      * 5 References
                

## History[edit]

In 1842, the Shogunate in Japan banned induced abortion in Edo, but the law
did not affect the rest of the country until 1869, when abortion was banned
nationwide.[2][3] However, the crime was rarely punished unless the conception
was a result of adultery or the woman died as a result of the abortion
procedure.[2]

According to the scholar Tiana Norgern, the abortion policy under the Meiji
government was similar to that of the Edo period, and was fueled by the belief
that a large population would yield more military and political influence on
the international stage.[2] In 1868, the emperor banned midwives from
performing abortions, and in 1880, Japan's first penal code declared abortion
a crime.[2] The punishments for abortion grew more severe in 1907 when the
penal code revised: women could be incarcerated for up to a year for having an
abortion; practitioners could be jailed for up to seven.[2] The Criminal
Abortion Law of 1907 is still technically in effect today, but other
legislation has overridden its effects.[2]

In 1923, doctors were granted legal permission to perform emergency abortions
to save the mother's life; abortions performed under different, less life-
threatening circumstances were still prosecuted.[2] In 1931, the Alliance for
Reform of the Anti-Abortion Law ( _Datai Hō Kaisei Kiseikai_ ) was formed by
Abe Isoo and argued that "it is a woman's right not to bear a child she does
not want, and abortion is an exercise of this right".[2] This organization
believed that abortion should be made legal in circumstances in which there
was a high chance of genetic disorder; in which a woman was poor, on public
assistance, or divorced; in which it endangered the woman's health; and in
which the pregnancy was a result of rape.[2] In 1934, the Fifth All-Japan
Women's Suffrage Congress wrote up resolutions calling for the legalization of
abortion as well as contraception.[2] This did not result in any immediate
reaction from the government at the time, but after the war, these resolutions
were consulted when drafting legislation legalizing abortion.

In 1940, the National Eugenic Law stopped short of explicitly calling abortion
legal by outlining a set of procedures a doctor had to follow in order to
perform an abortion; these procedures included getting second opinions and
submitting reports, though these could be ignored when it was an emergency.[2]
This was a daunting and complicated process that many physicians did not want
to deal with, and some sources attribute the fall in abortion rate between
1941 and 1944 from 18,000 to 1,800 to this legislation.[2]

After World War II, Japan found itself in a population crisis. In 1946, 10
million people were declared at risk of starvation, and between the years 1945
and 1950, the population increased by 11 million.[2] In 1948, Japan legalized
abortion under special circumstances.[4] The Eugenic Protection Law of 1948
made Japan one of the first countries to legalize induced abortion. This law
was revised as the Maternal Body Protection Law in 1996.[5]

Currently, abortion is widely accepted in Japan. According to a 1998 survey,
79 percent of unmarried and 85 percent of married women approved of
abortion.[6] According to researchers at Osaka University in 2001, 341,588
legal abortions were carried out in Japan, a 2.5 percent increase from 1998 to
2001.[7] However, in 2007 the figure had decreased to around 256,000.[5]

## Statistics[edit]

Abortion statistics showed that the abortion rate (the number of cases of
induced abortions per 1,000 women per year) increased for women younger than
20 from 1975 to 1995. The abortion ratio (number of cases per 1,000 live
births) remained the highest amongst women aged 40–44. An increase in the
abortion ratio was seen in the two youngest groups (younger than 20 and
20-24), especially among those who were born after 1955. The proportion of
abortions that were experienced by women younger than 25 increased from 18
percent between 1976 and 1980 to 30 percent between 1991 and 1995, and a
slight increase was also observed among women aged 40–44.[8]

Overall, in 1995, the total number of abortions reported was 343,024,
representing a 49 percent decrease from the number reported for 1975. The
overall abortion rate changed from 22 to 11 abortions per 1,000 women in 1975
and 1995, respectively; and the overall abortion ratio changed from 353 to 289
abortions per 1,000 live births in the same 20-year period. In more than 99
percent of cases, the reason reported for performing an abortion was to
protect the woman's health; this percentage remained constant during
1975-1995.[8]

The official Japanese government statistics on abortion, however, cannot be
considered as very accurate, since physicians tend to under-report the number
of abortions they perform as a way of avoiding income tax payments (Coleman
1991), and because of social pressures to protect women's confidentiality,
especially that of young women who are junior high or high school students.

## Contraceptive use[edit]

A scenario study was conducted to assess the extent to which the unintended
pregnancy rate in Japan, where oral contraceptives (OC) have not been
legalized for family planning purposes and couples rely mainly on condoms,
might change if more women were to use OC. Because current rates of unintended
pregnancy and abortion in Japan are not known, data provided by the 1994
Japanese National Survey on Family Planning were used to construct scenarios
for national contraceptive use. Annual failure rates of contraceptive methods
and nonuse were applied to the contraceptive use scenarios, to obtain
estimates of the annual number of contraceptive failure-related pregnancies.
Subsequently, contraceptive practice situations assuming higher OC use rates
were defined, and the associated change in the number of contraceptive
failure-related pregnancies was estimated for each situation. It emerged that
OC use rates of 15% decreased the expected number of unintended pregnancies by
13-17%, whereas use rates of 25% resulted in decreases of 22-29% and use rates
of 50% in decreases of 45-58%. The findings were reasonably robust to
variation in the assumptions that were made. In conclusion, each theoretical
percentage increase in the OC use rate in Japan was found to lead to a roughly
equivalent percentage decrease in the number of unintended pregnancies.[9]

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Abortion
                      * Abortion law
                      * Mizuko kuyo
                      * Birth Control in Japan
                

## References[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Abortion in
Japan**_.  
---|--- 
                
                                      1. **^** “Sosei Receives Approval From Japan MHLW for NorLevo(R) TABLETS 0.75mg Emergency Contraceptive Pill”, Sosei Group Corporation press release, 23 February 2011
                      2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ Norgren, Tiana. _Abortion before Birth Control: The Politics of Reproduction in Postwar Japan_ Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
                      3. **^** Obayashi, M. (1982). Historical background of the acceptance of induced abortion. Josanpu Zasshi 36(12), 1011-6. Retrieved April 12, 2006.
                      4. **^** 第１４７回国会 国民福祉委員会 第１０号 (in Japanese). National Diet Library. 2000-03-15. Retrieved 2008-03-18.
                      5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kato, Mariko (October 20, 2009). "FYI: Abortion and the Pill: Abortion Still Key Birth Control". FYI (column). _The Japan Times_.
                      6. **^** Population Problems Research Council of the Mainichi Newspapers. 1996. Report on the 23rd National Survey on Family Planning. Tokyo; Mainichi Newspapers.
                      7. **^** J Stage Environmental Health and Preventative Medicine vol. 10 2005 [ _permanent dead link_ ]
                      8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Goto, A., Fujiyama-Koriyama, C., Fukao, A., & Reich, M. "Abortion Trends in Japan, 1975–95". _Studies in Family Planning_ , Vol. 31, No. 4 (December 2000), pp. 301–308. Population Council.
                      9. **^** Oddens B.J. & Lolkema, A. "A scenario study of oral contraceptive use in Japan: Toward fewer unintended pregnancies". _Contraception_ , Volume 58, Issue 1, July 1998, pages 13–19.
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Abortion in Asia

* * *

Sovereign states|

                
                                      * Afghanistan
                      * Armenia
                      * Azerbaijan
                      * Bahrain
                      * Bangladesh
                      * Bhutan
                      * Brunei
                      * Cambodia
                      * China
                      * Cyprus
                      * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
                      * Egypt
                      * Georgia
                      * India
                      * Indonesia
                      * Iran
                      * Iraq
                      * Israel
                      * Japan
                      * Jordan
                      * Kazakhstan
                      * North Korea
                      * South Korea
                      * Kuwait
                      * Kyrgyzstan
                      * Laos
                      * Lebanon
                      * Malaysia
                      * Maldives
                      * Mongolia
                      * Myanmar
                      * Nepal
                      * Oman
                      * Pakistan
                      * Philippines
                      * Qatar
                      * Russia
                      * Saudi Arabia
                      * Singapore
                      * Sri Lanka
                      * Syria
                      * Tajikistan
                      * Thailand
                      * Turkey
                      * Turkmenistan
                      * United Arab Emirates
                      * Uzbekistan
                      * Vietnam
                      * Yemen
                

States with  
limited recognition|

                
                                      * Abkhazia
                      * Artsakh
                      * Northern Cyprus
                      * Palestine
                      * South Ossetia
                      * Taiwan
                

Dependencies and  
other territories|

                
                                      * British Indian Ocean Territory
                      * Christmas Island
                      * Cocos (Keeling) Islands
                      * Hong Kong
                      * Macau
                
                      * ![Wikipedia book](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/89/Symbol_book_class2.svg/16px-Symbol_book_class2.svg.png) Book
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                      * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Asia portal
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

                
                                      * History of abortion
                      * Methods of abortion
                      * Abortion debate
                      * Abortion law
                

Movements|

                
                                      * Abortion-rights movements
                      * Anti-abortion movements
                

Issues|

                
                                      * Abortion and mental health
                      * Beginning of human personhood
                      * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
                      * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
                      * Anti-abortion violence
                      * Abortion under communism
                      * Birth control
                      * Crisis pregnancy center
                      * Ethical aspects of abortion
                      * Eugenics
                      * Fetal rights
                      * Forced abortion
                      * Genetics and abortion
                      * Late-term abortion
                      * Legalized abortion and crime effect
                      * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
                      * Limit of viability
                      * Men's rights
                      * Minors and abortion
                      * One-child policy
                      * Paternal rights and abortion
                      * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
                      * Prenatal development
                      * Reproductive rights
                      * Self-induced abortion
                      * Sex-selective abortion
                      * Sidewalk counseling
                      * Societal attitudes towards abortion
                      * Toxic abortion
                      * Unsafe abortion
                      * Women's rights
                

By country|

| Africa|

                
                                      * Algeria
                      * Angola
                      * Benin
                      * Botswana
                      * Burkina Faso
                      * Burundi
                      * Cameroon
                      * Cape Verde
                      * Central African Republic
                      * Chad
                      * Egypt
                      * Ghana
                      * Namibia
                      * Nigeria
                      * South Africa
                      * Uganda
                      * Zimbabwe
                

---|---  
Asia|

                
                                      * Afghanistan
                      * Armenia
                      * Azerbaijan
                      * Bahrain
                      * Bangladesh
                      * Bhutan
                      * Brunei
                      * Cambodia
                      * China
                      * Cyprus
                      * Georgia
                      * East Timor
                      * India
                      * Iran
                      * Israel
                      * Japan
                      * Kazakhstan
                      * Northern Cyprus
                      * South Korea
                      * Philippines
                      * Qatar
                      * Saudi Arabia
                      * Turkey
                

Europe|

                
                                      * Albania
                      * Andorra
                      * Austria
                      * Belarus
                      * Belgium
                      * Bosnia and Herzegovina
                      * Bulgaria
                      * Croatia
                      * Czech Republic
                      * Denmark
                      * Estonia
                      * Finland
                      * France
                      * Germany
                      * Greece
                      * Hungary
                      * Iceland
                      * Ireland
                      * Italy
                      * Kazakhstan
                      * Latvia
                      * Liechtenstein
                      * Lithuania
                      * Luxembourg
                      * Malta
                      * Moldova
                      * Monaco
                      * Montenegro
                      * Netherlands
                      * North Macedonia
                      * Norway
                      * Poland
                      * Portugal
                      * Romania
                      * Russia
                      * San Marino
                      * Serbia
                      * Slovakia
                      * Slovenia
                      * Spain
                      * Sweden
                      * Switzerland
                      * Ukraine
                      * United Kingdom
                

North America|

                
                                      * Belize
                      * Canada
                      * Costa Rica
                      * Cuba
                      * Dominican Republic
                      * El Salvador
                      * Guatemala
                      * Mexico
                      * Nicaragua
                      * Panama
                      * Trinidad and Tobago
                      * United States
                

Oceania|

                
                                      * Australia
                      * Micronesia
                      * Fiji
                      * Kiribati
                      * Marshall Islands
                      * New Zealand
                      * Papua New Guinea
                      * Samoa
                      * Solomon Islands
                      * Tonga
                      * Tuvalu
                      * Vanuatu
                

South America|

                
                                      * Argentina
                      * Bolivia
                      * Brazil
                      * Chile
                      * Colombia
                      * Ecuador
                      * Guyana
                      * Paraguay
                      * Peru
                      * Suriname
                      * Uruguay
                      * Venezuela
                

Law|

                
                                      * Case law
                      * Constitutional law
                      * History of abortion law
                      * Laws by country
                      * Buffer zones
                      * Conscientious objection
                      * Fetal protection
                      * Heartbeat bills
                      * Informed consent
                      * Late-term restrictions
                      * Parental involvement
                      * Spousal consent
                

Methods|

                
                                      * Vacuum aspiration
                      * Dilation and evacuation
                      * Dilation and curettage
                      * Intact D&X
                      * Hysterotomy
                      * Instillation
                      * Menstrual extraction
                      * Abortifacient drugs
                        * Methotrexate
                        * Mifepristone
                        * Misoprostol
                        * Oxytocin
                      * Self-induced abortion
                      * Unsafe abortion
                

Religion|

                
                                      * Buddhism
                      * Christianity
                        * Catholicism
                      * Hinduism
                      * Islam
                      * Judaism
                      * Scientology
                
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abortion_in_Japan&oldid=884545672"

Categories:

                
                                      * Health law in Japan
                      * Abortion in Asia
                      * Abortion by country
                      * Women's rights in Japan
                      * Birth control in Japan
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja)
                      * CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)
                      * All articles with dead external links
                      * Articles with dead external links from October 2016
                      * Articles with permanently dead external links
                      * Commons category link from Wikidata
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Español
                      * 한국어
                      * 日本語
                      * Polski
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 22 February 2019, at 10:05 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

