

#### Common Questions and Myths

Read about common questions and myths such as:

If I have an abortion, will I be able to get pregnant again?

Does abortion cause an increased risk of breast cancer?

Is there a post-abortion syndrome?

#### Making an Informed Choice

We want you to be able to make an informed decision, no matter what option you
may choose. The information in these pages can help you think through your
options.

Abortion: ending your pregnancy.  
Adoption: giving someone else the legal right and responsibility to raise your
child.  
Parenthood: carrying the pregnancy to term and raising your child.

#### Need Help?

For information and financial assistance, call the NAF hotline:

## 1-800-772-9100

For clinic referrals only (no funding):

## 1-877-257-0012

![National Abortion Federation](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-

wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/naf-logo.png) ![National Abortion

Federation](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/naf-logo2x.png)

                
                                      * About NAF
                        * History
                        * NAF Blog
                        * NAF International
                        * Press Room
                        * Careers
                        * Get Involved
                        * Support NAF
                        * Contact Us
                      * Think You're Pregnant?
                        * I'm Pregnant. What Are My Options?
                          * Abortion
                          * Parenthood
                          * Adoption
                        * I Want An Abortion. What Should I Expect?
                        * Find A Provider
                        * NAF Hotline Fund
                        * What Should I Expect After the Abortion?
                        * Common Questions and Myths
                        * Resources
                      * Education & Advocacy
                        * About Abortion
                        * U.S. Public Policy
                        * Violence
                        * Downloads & Resources
                        * Clinical Policy Guidelines
                        * Patient Partnership
                        * Share Your Story
                      * Health Care Professionals
                        * NAF Membership
                        * Continuing Medical Education
                        * Educational Resources
                        * NAF Publications
                        * Research
                        * Conferences
                        * Clinicians in Abortion Care
                      * Donate
                      * # History of Abortion
                

Home/Education & Advocacy/About Abortion/History of Abortion

Â­

History of Abortionprochoice2015-01-29T00:36:01-04:00

# In the United States, the history of abortion goes back much farther than

the 1973 Supreme Court case _Roe v. Wade_ , which made abortion legal and
marked an important turning point in public health policy.

See also Legal Abortion in Canada.

# Abortion Was Legal

Abortion has been performed for thousands of years, and in every society that
has been studied. It was legal in the United States from the time the earliest
settlers arrived. At the time the Constitution was adopted, abortions before
"quickening" were openly advertised and commonly performed.

## Making Abortion Illegal

In the mid-to-late 1800s states began passing laws that made abortion illegal.
The motivations for anti-abortion laws varied from state to state. One of the
reasons included fears that the population would be dominated by the children
of newly arriving immigrants, whose birth rates were higher than those of
"native" Anglo-Saxon women.

## Medical Practice

During the 1800s, all surgical procedures, including abortion, were extremely
risky. Hospitals were not common, antiseptics were unknown, and even the most
respected doctors had only primitive medical educations. Without today's
current technology, maternal and infant mortality rates during childbirth were
extraordinarily high. The dangers from abortion were similar to the dangers
from other surgeries that were not outlawed.

As scientific methods began to dominate medical practice, and technologies
were developed to prevent infection, medical care on the whole became much
safer and more effective. But by this time, the vast majority of women who
needed abortions had no choice but to get them from illegal practitioners
without these medical advances at their disposal. The "back alley" abortion
remained a dangerous, often deadly procedure, while areas of legally
sanctioned medicine improved dramatically.

## The Medical Establishment

The strongest force behind the drive to criminalize abortion was the attempt
by doctors to establish for themselves exclusive rights to practice medicine.
They wanted to prevent "untrained" practitioners, including midwives,
apothecaries, and homeopaths, from competing with them for patients and for
patient fees.

The best way to accomplish their goal was to eliminate one of the principle
procedures that kept these competitors in business. Rather than openly
admitting to such motivations, the newly formed American Medical Association
(AMA) argued that abortion was both immoral and dangerous. By 1910 all but one
state had criminalized abortion except where necessary, in a doctor's
judgment, to save the woman's life. In this way, legal abortion was
successfully transformed into a "physicians-only" practice.

## Back-Alley Abortions

The prohibition of legal abortion from the 1880s until 1973 came under the
same anti-obscenity or Comstock laws that prohibited the dissemination of
birth control information and services.

Criminalization of abortion did not reduce the numbers of women who sought
abortions. In the years before _Roe v. Wade_ , the estimates of illegal
abortions ranged as high as 1.2 million per year.1 Although accurate records
could not be kept, it is known that between the 1880s and 1973, many thousands
of women were harmed as a result of illegal abortion.

Many women died or suffered serious medical problems after attempting to self-
induce their abortions or going to untrained practitioners who performed
abortions with primitive methods or in unsanitary conditions. During this
time, hospital emergency room staff treated thousands of women who either died
or were suffering terrible effects of abortions provided without adequate
skill and care.

Some women were able to obtain relatively safer, although still illegal,
abortions from private doctors. This practice remained prevalent for the first
half of the twentieth century. The rate of reported abortions then began to
decline, partly because doctors faced increased scrutiny from their peers and
hospital administrators concerned about the legality of their operations.

# Liberalization of Abortion Laws

Between 1967 and 1973 one-third of the states liberalized or repealed their
criminal abortion laws. However, the right to have an abortion in all states
was only made available to American women in 1973 when the Supreme Court
struck down the remaining restrictive state laws with its ruling in _Roe v.
Wade_.

# _Roe v. Wade_

The 1973 Supreme Court decision in _Roe v. Wade_ made it possible for women to
get safe, legal abortions from well-trained medical practitioners. This led to
dramatic decreases in pregnancy-related injury and death.

The _Roe_ case arose out of a Texas law that prohibited legal abortion except
to save a woman 's life. At that time, most other states had laws similar to
the one in Texas. Those laws forced large numbers of women to resort to
illegal abortions.

Jane Roe, a 21-year-old pregnant woman, represented all women who wanted
abortions but could not get them legally and safely. Henry Wade was the Texas
Attorney General who defended the law that made abortions illegal.

After hearing the case, the Supreme Court ruled that Americans' right to
privacy included the right of a woman to decide whether to have children, and
the right of a woman and her doctor to make that decision without state
interference.

# After _Roe v. Wade_

The reaction to _Roe_ was swift. Supporters of legal abortion rejoiced and
generally felt their battle was won. However, others faulted the Court for the
decision. Those opposed to legal abortion immediately began working to prevent
any federal or state funding for abortion and to undermine or limit the effect
of the decision.

Some turned to measures directly aimed at disrupting clinics where abortions
were being provided. Their tactics have included demonstrating in front of
abortion clinics, harassing people trying to enter, vandalizing clinic
property, and blocking access to clinics.

As time passed, the level of anti-abortion violence escalated. Increasingly,
clinic bombings, physical attacks, and even murders endanger abortion
providers and create a hostile environment for women seeking abortions.

# Retreat from _Roe v. Wade_

Initially, the framework of _Roe v. Wade_ was the basis by which the
constitutionality of state abortion laws was determined. In recent years,
however, the Supreme Court has begun to allow more restrictions on abortion.

For instance, the Supreme Court's ruling in _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ in
1992 established that states can restrict pre-viability abortions.
Restrictions can be placed on first trimester abortions in ways that are not
medically necessary, as long as the restrictions do not place an "undue
burden" on women seeking abortion services.

Many states now have restrictions in place such as parental involvement,
mandatory waiting periods, and biased counseling. Only the requirement that a
woman involve her spouse in her decision was disallowed.

# A Timeline of Reproductive Rights

**1821** : Connecticut passes the first law in the United States barring
abortions after "quickening."

**1860** : Twenty states have laws limiting abortion.

**1965** : _Griswold v. Connecticut_ Supreme Court decision strikes down a
state law that prohibited giving married people information, instruction, or
medical advice on contraception.

**1967** : Colorado is the first state to liberalize its abortion laws.

**1970** : Alaska, Hawaii, New York, and Washington liberalize abortion laws,
making abortion available at the request of a woman and her doctor.

**1972** : _Eisenstadt v. Baird_ Supreme Court decision establishes the right
of unmarried people to use contraceptives.

**1973** : _Roe v. Wade_ Supreme Court decision strikes down state laws that
made abortion illegal.

**1976** : Congress adopts the first Hyde Amendment barring the use of federal
Medicaid funds to provide abortions to low-income women.

**1977** : A revised Hyde Amendment is passed allowing states to deny Medicaid
funding except in cases of rape, incest, or "severe and long-lasting" damage
to the woman's physical health.

**1991** : _Rust v. Sullivan_ upholds the constitutionality of the 1988 "gag
rule" which prohibits doctors and counselors at clinics which receive federal
funding from providing their patients with information about and referrals for
abortion.

**1992** : _Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey_
reaffirms the "core" holdings of _Roe_ that women have a right to abortion
before fetal viability, but allows states to restrict abortion access so long
as these restrictions do not impose an "undue burden" on women seeking
abortions.

**1994** : Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances (FACE) Act is passed by
Congress with a large majority in response to the murder of Dr. David Gunn.
The FACE Act forbids the use of "force, threat of force or physical
obstruction" to prevent someone from providing or receiving reproductive
health services. The law also provides for both criminal and civil penalties
for those who break the law.

**2000** : _Stenberg v. Carhart (Carhart I)_ rules that the Nebraska statute
banning so-called "partial-birth abortion" is unconstitutional for two
independent reasons: the statute lacks the necessary exception for preserving
the health of the woman, and the definition of the targeted procedures is so
broad as to prohibit abortions in the second trimester, thereby being an
"undue burden" on women. This effectively invalidates 29 of 31 similar
statewide bans.

**2000** : Food and Drug Administration approves mifepristone (RU-486) as an
option in abortion care for very early pregnancy.

**2003** : A federal ban on abortion procedures is passed by Congress and
signed into law by President Bush. The National Abortion Federation
immediately challenges the law in court and is successful in blocking
enforcement of the law for its members.

**2004** : NAF wins lawsuit against federal abortion ban. Justice Department
appeals rulings by three trial courts against ban.

## References

                
                                      1. Tietze C, Henshaw SK. _Induced Abortion: A World Review_ , 1986. New York: The Guttmacher Institute, 1986
                
                      * Education & Advocacy
                      * About Abortion
                        * Abortion Facts
                        * Abortion Myths
                        * Patient Stories
                        * Unequal Access to Abortion
                        * History of Abortion
                      * U.S. Public Policy
                        * State Policy
                        * Federal Policy
                        * In the Courts
                      * Violence
                        * Violence Statistics & History
                        * Anti-Abortion Extremists
                          * No Parole for Murderer Michael Griffin
                        * Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act
                        * Buffer Zones
                      * Downloads & Resources
                      * Clinical Policy Guidelines
                      * Patient Partnership
                      * Share Your Story
                
                      * ![](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/slide_4.jpg)
                

Sign up to  
receive Act for  
Choice Alerts!

![](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/iphone.png)

                
                                      * ![](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/blue-bg.jpg)
                

Support NAF  
and help us  
keep abortion  
providers safe

![](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/logo-small.png)

                
                                      * Recent
                      *           * 2018: Alarming escalation in anti-abortion trespassing, obstruction, and vandalism
                

May 24th, 2019

                
                                      * The Women's Health Protection Act offers a ray of reason
                

May 23rd, 2019

                
                                      * Alabama passes attack on Roe v. Wade
                

May 14th, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/825a12f7ac23e8e46c7a441635593723?s=52&d=mm&r=g)
                

Stephanie Stephens says:

My body my right

                
                                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ebb65ceaeba037aba404c7da298bd65a?s=52&d=mm&r=g)
                

Laura Huffstetler says:

I would like to start a bill to revoke the male enhancementâ¦

                
                                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/07edb62d5ce7d40601d3ebed3d48f771?s=52&d=mm&r=g)
                

Douglas smyth says:

I support naf

![NAF Logo](https://5aa1b2xfmfh2e2mk03kk8rsx-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/NAFlogo_wht_horiz.png)

The National Abortion Federation (NAF) is the professional association of
abortion providers. Our work supports the dedicated health care professionals
who make reproductive choice a reality, as well as the women they serve.

#### Recent Posts

                
                                      * 2018: Alarming escalation in anti-abortion trespassing, obstruction, and vandalism
                      * The Women's Health Protection Act offers a ray of reason
                      * Alabama passes attack on Roe v. Wade
                      * U.S. Senate Judiciary Committeeâs 20-week abortion ban hearing
                      * S. 311 is a bill of inflammatory language demonizing women
                

#### @NatAbortionFed

Tweets by @NatAbortionFed

                
                                      * NAF Canada
                      * En espaÃ±ol
                      * En franÃ§ais
                      * Usage and Privacy Policy
                      * Site Map
                

Copyright 2019 National Abortion Federation | All Rights Reserved

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

