

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

# Ayn Rand

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Russian-American writer and philosopher

Ayn Rand

* * *

![Black and white photo of a white woman facing the camera with her body

turned to the

side.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/e/e2/Ayn_Rand_by_Talbot_1943.jpg/220px-

Ayn_Rand_by_Talbot_1943.jpg)

Ayn Rand in 1943

Born| Alisa Zinovyevna Rosenbaum  
(1905-02-02)February 2, 1905  
St. Petersburg, Russian Empire (now Russia)  
Died| March 6, 1982(1982-03-06) (aged 77)  
Manhattan, New York, United States  
Resting place| Kensico Cemetery  
Valhalla, New York, United States  
Pen name| Ayn Rand  
Occupation| Writer  
Language| English  
Citizenship| 1905–1917 (Russian Empire)  
1917 (Russian Republic)  
1917–1922 (Russian SFSR)  
1922–1931 (Soviet Union)  
1931–1982 (United States)  
Alma mater| Petrograd State University (diploma in history, 1924)  
Period| 1934–1982  
Subject| Philosophy  
Notable works| _The Fountainhead_  
_Atlas Shrugged_  
Notable awards| Prometheus Award Hall of Fame inductee in 1987 (for _Anthem_ )
and co-inaugural inductee in 1983 (for _Atlas Shrugged_ )  
Spouse|

Frank O'Connor  
(m. 1929; his death 1979)

* * *

Signature| ![Ayn

Rand](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Ayn_Rand_signature_1949.svg/160px-

Ayn_Rand_signature_1949.svg.png)

**Ayn Rand** (/ aɪn/;[1] born **Alisa Zinovyevna Rosenbaum** ;[a] February 2
[O.S. January 20] 1905 – March 6, 1982) was a Russian-American writer and
philosopher.[2] She is known for her two best-selling novels, _The
Fountainhead_ and _Atlas Shrugged_ , and for developing a philosophical system
she named Objectivism. Educated in Russia, she moved to the United States in
1926. She had a play produced on Broadway in 1935 and 1936. After two early
novels that were initially unsuccessful, she achieved fame with her 1943
novel, _The Fountainhead_. In 1957, Rand published her best-known work, the
novel _Atlas Shrugged_. Afterward, she turned to non-fiction to promote her
philosophy, publishing her own periodicals and releasing several collections
of essays until her death in 1982.

Rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge and rejected
faith and religion. She supported rational and ethical egoism and rejected
altruism. In politics, she condemned the initiation of force as immoral[3] and
opposed collectivism and statism as well as anarchism, instead supporting
_laissez-faire_ capitalism, which she defined as the system based on
recognizing individual rights, including property rights.[4] In art, Rand
promoted romantic realism. She was sharply critical of most philosophers and
philosophical traditions known to her, except for Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas
and classical liberals.[5]

Literary critics received Rand's fiction with mixed reviews[6] and academia
generally ignored or rejected her philosophy, though academic interest has
increased in recent decades.[7][8][9] The Objectivist movement attempts to
spread her ideas, both to the public and in academic settings.[10] She has
been a significant influence among libertarians and American
conservatives.[11]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Life
                        * 1.1 Early life
                        * 1.2 Arrival in the United States
                        * 1.3 Early fiction
                        * 1.4 _The Fountainhead_ and political activism
                        * 1.5 _Atlas Shrugged_ and Objectivism
                        * 1.6 Later years
                      * 2 Philosophy
                      * 3 Reception and legacy
                        * 3.1 Critical reception
                        * 3.2 Popular interest
                        * 3.3 Political influence
                        * 3.4 Academic reaction
                        * 3.5 Objectivist movement
                      * 4 Selected works
                      * 5 See also
                      * 6 Notes
                      * 7 References
                        * 7.1 Works cited
                      * 8 External links
                

## Life[edit]

### Early life[edit]

Rand was born Alisa Zinovyevna Rosenbaum (Russian: Алиса Зиновьевна Розенбаум)
on February 2, 1905, to a Russian-Jewish bourgeois family living in Saint
Petersburg.[12] She was the eldest of three daughters of Zinovy Zakharovich
Rosenbaum and his wife, Anna Borisovna (née Kaplan). Her father was upwardly
mobile and a pharmacist and her mother was socially ambitious and religiously
observant.[13] Rand later said she found school unchallenging and began
writing screenplays at the age of eight and novels at the age of ten.[14] At
the prestigious Stoiunina Gymnasium [ru], her closest friend was Vladimir
Nabokov's younger sister, Olga. The two girls shared an intense interest in
politics and would engage in debates at the Nabokov mansion: while Olga
defended constitutional monarchy, Alisa supported republican ideals.[15]

She was twelve at the time of the February Revolution of 1917, during which
she favored Alexander Kerensky over Tsar Nicholas II. The subsequent October
Revolution and the rule of the Bolsheviks under Vladimir Lenin disrupted the
life the family had previously enjoyed. Her father's business was confiscated,
and the family fled to the Crimean Peninsula, which was initially under
control of the White Army during the Russian Civil War. While in high school,
she realized that she was an atheist and valued reason above any other human
virtue. After graduating from high school in the Crimea in June 1921, she
returned with her family to Petrograd (as Saint Petersburg was renamed at that
time), where they faced desperate conditions, on occasion nearly
starving.[16][17]

![The Twelve Collegia of what was then Petrograd State

University](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/Spb_06-2012_University_Embankment_06.jpg/220px-

Spb_06-2012_University_Embankment_06.jpg)

Rand completed a three-year program at Petrograd State University.

After the Russian Revolution, universities were opened to women, allowing her
to be in the first group of women to enroll at Petrograd State University.[18]
At the age of 16, she began her studies in the department of social pedagogy,
majoring in history.[19] At the university she was introduced to the writings
of Aristotle and Plato,[20] who would be her greatest influence and counter-
influence, respectively.[21] She also studied the philosophical works of
Friedrich Nietzsche.[22] Able to read French, German and Russian, she also
discovered the writers Fyodor Dostoevsky, Victor Hugo, Edmond Rostand, and
Friedrich Schiller, who became her perennial favorites.[23]

Along with many other bourgeois students, she was purged from the university
shortly before graduating. After complaints from a group of visiting foreign
scientists, however, many of the purged students were allowed to complete
their work and graduate,[24] which she did in October 1924.[25] She then
studied for a year at the State Technicum for Screen Arts in Leningrad. For an
assignment she wrote an essay about the Polish actress Pola Negri, which
became her first published work.[26]

By this time she had decided her professional surname for writing would be
_Rand_ ,[27] possibly because it is graphically similar to a vowelless excerpt
Рзнб of her birth surname in Cyrillic handwriting,[28] and she adopted the
first name _Ayn_ , either from a Finnish name _Aino_ or from the Hebrew word
עין ( _ayin_ , meaning "eye").[b]

### Arrival in the United States[edit]

![A brown book cover with black-and-white drawings and text in Russian. The

drawing on the left is a portrait of a woman with dark hair; the drawing on

the right is of

skyscrapers.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f1/Pola_Negri_by_Ayn_Rand_cover.jpg/170px-

Pola_Negri_by_Ayn_Rand_cover.jpg)

Cover of Rand's first published work, a 2,500-word monograph on actress Pola
Negri published in 1925[26]

In late 1925, Rand was granted a visa to visit relatives in Chicago.[31] She
departed on January 17, 1926.[32] When she arrived in New York City on
February 19, 1926, she was so impressed with the skyline of Manhattan that she
cried what she later called "tears of splendor".[33] Intent on staying in the
United States to become a screenwriter, she lived for a few months with her
relatives, one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens
of films free of charge. She then left for Hollywood, California.[34]

In Hollywood, a chance meeting with famed director Cecil B. DeMille led to
work as an extra in his film _The King of Kings_ and a subsequent job as a
junior screenwriter.[35] While working on _The King of Kings_ , she met an
aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor; the two were married on April 15, 1929.
She became a permanent American resident in July 1929 and an American citizen
on March 3, 1931.[36] Taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her
writing, she worked for a time as the head of the costume department at RKO
Studios.[37] She made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the
United States, but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate.[38]

### Early fiction[edit]

See also: Night of January 16th, We the Living, and Anthem (novella)

Rand's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay _Red Pawn_
to Universal Studios in 1932, although it was never produced.[39] This was
followed by the courtroom drama _Night of January 16th_ , first produced by E.
E. Clive in Hollywood in 1934 and then successfully reopened on Broadway in
1935. Each night a jury was selected from members of the audience; based on
the jury's vote, one of two different endings would be performed.[40] In 1941,
Paramount Pictures produced a movie loosely based on the play. Rand did not
participate in the production and was highly critical of the result.[41]
_Ideal_ is a novel and play written in 1934 which were first published in 2015
by her estate. The heroine is an actress who embodies Randian ideals.[42]

Rand's first published novel, the semi-autobiographical _We the Living_ , was
published in 1936. Set in Soviet Russia, it focused on the struggle between
the individual and the state. In a 1959 foreword to the novel, Rand stated
that _We the Living_ "is as near to an autobiography as I will ever write. It
is not an autobiography in the literal, but only in the intellectual sense.
The plot is invented, the background is not ..."[43] Initial sales were slow
and the American publisher let it go out of print,[44] although European
editions continued to sell.[45] After the success of her later novels, Rand
was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three
million copies.[46] In 1942, without Rand's knowledge or permission, the novel
was made into a pair of Italian films, _Noi vivi_ and _Addio, Kira_.
Rediscovered in the 1960s, these films were re-edited into a new version which
was approved by Rand and re-released as _We the Living_ in 1986.[47]

Her novella _Anthem_ was written during a break from the writing of her next
major novel, _The Fountainhead_. It presents a vision of a dystopian future
world in which totalitarian collectivism has triumphed to such an extent that
even the word 'I' has been forgotten and replaced with 'we'.[48] It was
published in England in 1938, but Rand initially could not find an American
publisher. As with _We the Living_ , Rand's later success allowed her to get a
revised version published in 1946, which has sold more than 3.5 million
copies.[49]

### _The Fountainhead_ and political activism [edit]

See also: The Fountainhead and The Fountainhead (film)

During the 1940s, Rand became politically active. She and her husband worked
as full-time volunteers for the 1940 presidential campaign of Republican
Wendell Willkie. This work led to Rand's first public speaking experiences;
she enjoyed fielding sometimes hostile questions from New York City audiences
who had viewed pro-Willkie newsreels.[50] This activity brought her into
contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism. She
became friends with journalist Henry Hazlitt and his wife, and Hazlitt
introduced her to the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises. Despite her
philosophical differences with them, Rand strongly endorsed the writings of
both men throughout her career, and both of them expressed admiration for her.
Mises once referred to Rand as "the most courageous man in America", a
compliment that particularly pleased her because he said "man" instead of
"woman".[51] Rand also became friends with libertarian writer Isabel Paterson.
Rand questioned Paterson about American history and politics long into the
night during their many meetings and gave Paterson ideas for her only non-
fiction book, _The God of the Machine_.[52]

Rand's first major success as a writer came in 1943 with _The Fountainhead_ ,
a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven
years.[53] The novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named Howard
Roark and his struggle against what Rand described as "second-handers"—those
who attempt to live through others, placing others above themselves. It was
rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs-
Merrill Company on the insistence of editor Archibald Ogden, who threatened to
quit if his employer did not publish it.[54] While completing the novel, Rand
was prescribed the amphetamine Benzedrine to fight fatigue.[55] The drug
helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the novel,
but afterwards she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks'
rest.[56] Her use of the drug for approximately three decades may have
contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood
swings.[57]

_The Fountainhead_ became a worldwide success, bringing Rand fame and
financial security.[58] In 1943, Rand sold the rights for a film version to
Warner Bros. and she returned to Hollywood to write the screenplay. Finishing
her work on that screenplay, she was hired by producer Hal B. Wallis as a
screenwriter and script-doctor. Her work for Wallis included the screenplays
for the Oscar-nominated _Love Letters_ and _You Came Along_.[59] Rand also
worked on other projects, including a planned nonfiction treatment of her
philosophy to be called _The Moral Basis of Individualism_. Although the
planned book was never completed, a condensed version was published as an
essay titled "The Only Path to Tomorrow" in the January 1944 edition of
_Reader's Digest_ magazine.[60]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-

logo.svg/38px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) | Wikisource has original text related
to this article:

**Ayn Rand's testimony before the House of Representatives Committee on Un-
American Activities**

---|--- 

Rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism
while working in Hollywood. She became involved with the Motion Picture
Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a Hollywood anti-Communist
group, and wrote articles on the group's behalf. She also joined the anti-
Communist American Writers Association.[61] A visit by Isabel Paterson to meet
with Rand's California associates led to a final falling out between the two
when Paterson made comments, which Rand considered rude, to valued political
allies.[62] In 1947, during the Second Red Scare, Rand testified as a
"friendly witness" before the United States House Un-American Activities
Committee. Her testimony described the disparity between her personal
experiences in the Soviet Union and the portrayal of it in the 1944 film _Song
of Russia_.[63] Rand argued that the film grossly misrepresented conditions in
the Soviet Union, portraying life there as much better and happier than it
actually was.[64] She wanted to also criticize the lauded 1946 film _The Best
Years of Our Lives_ for what she interpreted as its negative presentation of
the business world, but she was not allowed to testify about it.[65] When
asked after the hearings about her feelings on the effectiveness of the
investigations, Rand described the process as "futile".[66]

After several delays, the film version of _The Fountainhead_ was released in
1949. Although it used Rand's screenplay with minimal alterations, she
"disliked the movie from beginning to end", and complained about its editing,
acting, and other elements.[67]

### _Atlas Shrugged_ and Objectivism [edit]

See also: Atlas Shrugged, Objectivism (Ayn Rand), and Objectivist movement

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Famous_fantastic_mysteries_195306.jpg/220px-

Famous_fantastic_mysteries_195306.jpg)

Rand's novella _Anthem_ was reprinted in the June 1953 issue of the pulp
magazine _Famous Fantastic Mysteries_.

In the years following the publication of _The Fountainhead_ , Rand received
numerous letters from readers, some of whom the book profoundly influenced. In
1951, Rand moved from Los Angeles to New York City, where she gathered a group
of these admirers around her. This group (jokingly designated "The
Collective") included future Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, a young
psychology student named Nathan Blumenthal (later Nathaniel Branden) and his
wife Barbara and Barbara's cousin Leonard Peikoff. Initially the group was an
informal gathering of friends who met with Rand on weekends at her apartment
to discuss philosophy. She later began allowing them to read the drafts of her
new novel, _Atlas Shrugged_ , as the manuscript pages were written. In 1954
Rand's close relationship with the younger Nathaniel Branden turned into a
romantic affair, with the consent of their spouses.[68]

_Atlas Shrugged_ , published in 1957, was considered Rand's _magnum opus_.[69]
Rand described the theme of the novel as "the role of the mind in man's
existence—and, as a corollary, the demonstration of a new moral philosophy:
the morality of rational self-interest".[70] It advocates the core tenets of
Rand's philosophy of Objectivism and expresses her concept of human
achievement. The plot involves a dystopian United States in which the most
creative industrialists, scientists, and artists respond to a welfare state
government by going on strike and retreating to a mountainous hideaway where
they build an independent free economy. The novel's hero and leader of the
strike, John Galt, describes the strike as "stopping the motor of the world"
by withdrawing the minds of the individuals most contributing to the nation's
wealth and achievement. With this fictional strike, Rand intended to
illustrate that without the efforts of the rational and productive, the
economy would collapse and society would fall apart. The novel includes
elements of mystery, romance, and science fiction,[71][72] and it contains an
extended exposition of Objectivism in the form of a lengthy monologue
delivered by Galt.[73]

Despite many negative reviews, _Atlas Shrugged_ became an international
bestseller. In an interview with Mike Wallace, Rand declared herself "the most
creative thinker alive".[74] However, Rand was discouraged and depressed by
the reaction of intellectuals to the novel.[75] _Atlas Shrugged_ was Rand's
last completed work of fiction; it marked the end of her career as a novelist
and the beginning of her role as a popular philosopher.[76]

In 1958, Nathaniel Branden established Nathaniel Branden Lectures, later
incorporated as the Nathaniel Branden Institute (NBI), to promote Rand's
philosophy. Collective members gave lectures for NBI and wrote articles for
Objectivist periodicals that she edited. Rand later published some of these
articles in book form. Critics, including some former NBI students and Branden
himself, later described the culture of NBI as one of intellectual conformity
and excessive reverence for Rand, with some describing NBI or the Objectivist
movement itself as a cult or religion.[77] Rand expressed opinions on a wide
range of topics, from literature and music to sexuality and facial hair, and
some of her followers mimicked her preferences, wearing clothes to match
characters from her novels and buying furniture like hers.[78] However, some
former NBI students believed the extent of these behaviors was exaggerated,
and the problem was concentrated among Rand's closest followers in New
York.[79] Rand was unimpressed with many of the NBI students[80] and held them
to strict standards, sometimes reacting coldly or angrily to those who
disagreed with her.[81]

### Later years[edit]

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Rand developed and promoted her Objectivist
philosophy through her nonfiction works and by giving talks to students at
institutions such as Yale, Princeton, Columbia,[82] Harvard, and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.[83] She received an honorary Doctorate
of Humane Letters from Lewis & Clark College on 2 October 1963.[84] She also
began delivering annual lectures at the Ford Hall Forum, responding afterward
to questions from the audience.[85] During these speeches and Q&A sessions,
she often took controversial stances on political and social issues of the
day. These included supporting abortion rights,[86] opposing the Vietnam War
and the military draft (but condemning many draft dodgers as "bums"),[87]
supporting Israel in the Yom Kippur War of 1973 against a coalition of Arab
nations as "civilized men fighting savages",[88] saying European colonists had
the right to develop land taken from American Indians,[89] and calling
homosexuality "immoral" and "disgusting", while also advocating the repeal of
all laws about it.[90] She also endorsed several Republican candidates for
President of the United States, most strongly Barry Goldwater in 1964, whose
candidacy she promoted in several articles for _The Objectivist
Newsletter_.[91]

![Twin gravestone bearing the names "Frank O'Connor" and "Ayn Rand

O'Connor"](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/23/Ayn_Rand_Marker.jpg/220px-

Ayn_Rand_Marker.jpg)

Grave marker for Rand and her husband at Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, New
York

In 1964, Nathaniel Branden began an affair with the young actress Patrecia
Scott, whom he later married. Nathaniel and Barbara Branden kept the affair
hidden from Rand. When she learned of it in 1968, though her romantic
relationship with Branden had already ended,[92] Rand terminated her
relationship with both Brandens, which led to the closure of NBI.[93] Rand
published an article in _The Objectivist_ repudiating Nathaniel Branden for
dishonesty and other "irrational behavior in his private life".[94] Branden
later apologized in an interview to "every student of Objectivism" for
"perpetuating the Ayn Rand mystique" and for "contributing to that dreadful
atmosphere of intellectual repressiveness that pervades the Objectivist
movement".[95] In subsequent years, Rand and several more of her closest
associates parted company.[96]

Rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1974 after decades of heavy
smoking.[97] In 1976, she retired from writing her newsletter and, after her
initial objections, she allowed social worker Evva Pryor, an employee of her
attorney, to enroll her in Social Security and Medicare.[98][99] During the
late 1970s her activities within the Objectivist movement declined, especially
after the death of her husband on November 9, 1979.[100] One of her final
projects was work on a never-completed television adaptation of _Atlas
Shrugged_.[101]

Rand died of heart failure on March 6, 1982, at her home in New York
City,[102] and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery, Valhalla, New York.[103]
Rand's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers, including Alan
Greenspan. A 6-foot (1.8 m) floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign
was placed near her casket.[104] In her will, Rand named Leonard Peikoff to
inherit her estate.[105]

## Philosophy[edit]

## Objectivist movement

![A statue of a muscular man holding a hollow globe on his shoulders. A

skyscraper towers above the statue in the

background.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Objectivist1.jpg/136px-

Objectivist1.jpg)

Philosophy

                
                                      * Objectivism
                

Rational egoism

                
                                      * Individualism
                

Capitalism

                
                                      * Romantic realism
                

Organizations

                
                                      * Ayn Rand Institute
                

The Atlas Society  
Nathaniel Branden Institute  
Objectivist Party

                
                                      * Libertarianz
                

Theorists

Ayn Rand  
**Ayn Rand Institute**  
Leonard Peikoff  
Allan Gotthelf **_*_ Harry Binswanger  
Onkar Ghate ****_Tara Smith  
Andrew Bernstein _****Yaron Brook  
John Ridpath **_*_ Elan Journo  
** Other**  
David Kelley  
George Reisman **_*_ Tibor Machan  
Stephen Hicks ** *** Nathaniel Branden

Literature

Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal  
For the New Intellectual  
Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology  
The New Left  
Objectivism: The Philosophy of Ayn Rand  
Philosophy: Who Needs It  
The Romantic Manifesto  
The Virtue of Selfishness  
Objectivist periodicals  
The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies

Related topics

                
                                      * Objectivism and homosexuality
                

Objectivism and libertarianism  
Objectivism's rejection of the primitive  
Randian hero

                
                                      * Philosophy portal
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Main article: Objectivism (Ayn Rand)

Rand called her philosophy "Objectivism", describing its essence as "the
concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose
of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason
as his only absolute".[106] She considered Objectivism a systematic philosophy
and laid out positions on metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, political
philosophy, and aesthetics.[107]

In metaphysics, Rand supported philosophical realism, and opposed anything she
regarded as mysticism or supernaturalism, including all forms of
religion.[108]

In epistemology, she considered all knowledge to be based on sense perception,
the validity of which she considered axiomatic,[109] and reason, which she
described as "the faculty that identifies and integrates the material provided
by man's senses".[110] She rejected all claims of non-perceptual or _a priori_
knowledge, including "'instinct,' 'intuition,' 'revelation,' or any form of
'just knowing'".[111] In her _Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology_ , Rand
presented a theory of concept formation and rejected the analytic–synthetic
dichotomy.[112]

In ethics, Rand argued for rational and ethical egoism (rational self-
interest), as the guiding moral principle. She said the individual should
"exist for his own sake, neither sacrificing himself to others nor sacrificing
others to himself".[113] She referred to egoism as "the virtue of selfishness"
in her book of that title,[114] in which she presented her solution to the is-
ought problem by describing a meta-ethical theory that based morality in the
needs of "man's survival _qua_ man".[115] She condemned ethical altruism as
incompatible with the requirements of human life and happiness,[9] and held
that the initiation of force was evil and irrational, writing in _Atlas
Shrugged_ that "Force and mind are opposites."[116]

Rand's political philosophy emphasized individual rights (including property
rights),[117] and she considered _laissez-faire_ capitalism the only moral
social system because in her view it was the only system based on the
protection of those rights.[4] She opposed statism, which she understood to
include theocracy, absolute monarchy, Nazism, fascism, communism, democratic
socialism, and dictatorship.[118] Rand believed that natural rights should be
enforced by a constitutionally limited government.[119] Although her political
views are often classified as conservative or libertarian, she preferred the
term "radical for capitalism". She worked with conservatives on political
projects, but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and
ethics.[120] She denounced libertarianism, which she associated with
anarchism.[121] She rejected anarchism as a naïve theory based in subjectivism
that could only lead to collectivism in practice.[122]

In aesthetics, Rand defined art as a "selective re-creation of reality
according to an artist's metaphysical value-judgments". According to her, art
allows philosophical concepts to be presented in a concrete form that can be
easily grasped, thereby fulfilling a need of human consciousness.[123] As a
writer, the art form Rand focused on most closely was literature, where she
considered romanticism to be the approach that most accurately reflected the
existence of human free will.[124] She described her own approach to
literature as "romantic realism".[125]

Rand acknowledged Aristotle as her greatest influence[126] and remarked that
in the history of philosophy she could only recommend "three A's"—Aristotle,
Aquinas, and Ayn Rand.[127] In a 1959 interview with Mike Wallace, when asked
where her philosophy came from she responded: "Out of my own mind, with the
sole acknowledgement of a debt to Aristotle, the only philosopher who ever
influenced me. I devised the rest of my philosophy myself."[128] However, she
also found early inspiration in Friedrich Nietzsche,[129] and scholars have
found indications of his influence in early notes from Rand's journals,[130]
in passages from the first edition of _We the Living_ (which Rand later
revised),[131] and in her overall writing style.[132] However, by the time she
wrote _The Fountainhead_ , Rand had turned against Nietzsche's ideas,[133] and
the extent of his influence on her even during her early years is
disputed.[134] Rational egoism was embodied by Russian author Nikolay
Chernyshevsky in the 1863 novel _What Is to Be Done?_ [135] and several
critics[136] claim that _What Is to Be Done?_ is one of the sources of
inspiration for Rand's thought. For example, the book's main character Lopuhov
says "I am not a man to make sacrifices. And indeed there are no such things.
One acts in the way that one finds most pleasant."[137] Among the philosophers
Rand held in particular disdain was Immanuel Kant, whom she referred to as a
"monster",[138] although philosophers George Walsh[139] and Fred Seddon[140]
have argued that she misinterpreted Kant and exaggerated their differences.

Rand said her most important contributions to philosophy were her "theory of
concepts, [her] ethics, and [her] discovery in politics that evil—the
violation of rights—consists of the initiation of force".[141] She believed
epistemology was a foundational branch of philosophy and considered the
advocacy of reason to be the single most significant aspect of her
philosophy,[142] stating: "I am not _primarily_ an advocate of capitalism, but
of egoism; and I am not _primarily_ an advocate of egoism, but of reason. If
one recognizes the supremacy of reason and applies it consistently, all the
rest follows."[143]

## Reception and legacy[edit]

See also: List of people influenced by Ayn Rand

### Critical reception[edit]

During Rand's lifetime, her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation.
Rand's first novel, _We the Living_ , was admired by the literary critic H. L.
Mencken,[144] her Broadway play _Night of January 16th_ was both a critical
and popular success,[145] and _The Fountainhead_ was hailed by _The New York
Times_ reviewer Lorine Pruette as "masterful".[146] Rand's novels were derided
by some critics when they were first published as being long and
melodramatic.[6] However, they became bestsellers largely through word of
mouth.[147]

The first reviews Rand received were for _Night of January 16th_. Reviews of
the production were largely positive, but Rand considered even positive
reviews to be embarrassing because of significant changes made to her script
by the producer.[145] Rand believed that her first novel, _We the Living_ ,
was not widely reviewed, but Rand scholar Michael S. Berliner writes "it was
the most reviewed of any of her works", with approximately 125 different
reviews being published in more than 200 publications. Overall these reviews
were more positive than the reviews she received for her later work.[148] Her
1938 novella _Anthem_ received little attention from reviewers, both for its
first publication in England and for subsequent re-issues.[149]

Rand's first bestseller, _The Fountainhead_ , received far fewer reviews than
_We the Living_ , and reviewers' opinions were mixed.[150] Lorine Pruette's
positive review in _The New York Times_ was one that Rand greatly
appreciated.[151] Pruette called Rand "a writer of great power" who wrote
"brilliantly, beautifully and bitterly", and stated that "you will not be able
to read this masterful book without thinking through some of the basic
concepts of our time".[146] There were other positive reviews, but Rand
dismissed most of them as either not understanding her message or as being
from unimportant publications.[150] Some negative reviews focused on the
length of the novel,[6] such as one that called it "a whale of a book" and
another that said "anyone who is taken in by it deserves a stern lecture on
paper-rationing". Other negative reviews called the characters unsympathetic
and Rand's style "offensively pedestrian".[150]

Rand's 1957 novel _Atlas Shrugged_ was widely reviewed and many of the reviews
were strongly negative.[6][152] In _National Review_ , conservative author
Whittaker Chambers called the book "sophomoric" and "remarkably silly". He
described the tone of the book as "shrillness without reprieve" and accused
Rand of supporting a godless system (which he related to that of the Soviets),
claiming "From almost any page of _Atlas Shrugged_ , a voice can be heard,
from painful necessity, commanding: 'To a gas chamber—go!'".[153] _Atlas
Shrugged_ received positive reviews from a few publications, including praise
from the noted book reviewer John Chamberlain,[152] but Rand scholar Mimi
Reisel Gladstein later wrote that "reviewers seemed to vie with each other in
a contest to devise the cleverest put-downs", calling it "execrable claptrap"
and "a nightmare"—they also said it was "written out of hate" and showed
"remorseless hectoring and prolixity".[6]

Rand's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had. The tenor of
the criticism for her first nonfiction book, _For the New Intellectual_ , was
similar to that for _Atlas Shrugged_ ,[154][155] with philosopher Sidney Hook
likening her certainty to "the way philosophy is written in the Soviet
Union",[156] and author Gore Vidal calling her viewpoint "nearly perfect in
its immorality".[157] Her subsequent books got progressively less attention
from reviewers.[154]

On the 100th anniversary of Rand's birth in 2005, Edward Rothstein, writing
for _The New York Times_ , referred to her fictional writing as quaint utopian
"retro fantasy" and programmatic neo-Romanticism of the misunderstood artist
while criticizing her characters' "isolated rejection of democratic
society".[158] In 2007, book critic Leslie Clark described her fiction as
"romance novels with a patina of pseudo-philosophy".[159] In 2009, _GQ_ 's
critic columnist Tom Carson described her books as "capitalism's version of
middlebrow religious novels" such as _Ben-Hur_ and the _Left Behind_
series.[160]

### Popular interest[edit]

![Engraving in capital letters that reads: "Throughout the centuries there

were men who took first steps down new roads armed with nothing but their own

vision. Ayn

Rand"](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Ayn_Rand_quote%2C_American_Adventure%2C_Epcot_Center%2C_Walt_Disney_World.jpg/220px-

Ayn_Rand_quote%2C_American_Adventure%2C_Epcot_Center%2C_Walt_Disney_World.jpg)

A quote from _The Fountainhead_ on the wall across from the entrance to The
American Adventure rotunda at Walt Disney World's Epcot

In 1991, a survey conducted for the Library of Congress and the Book-of-the-
Month Club asked club members what the most influential book in the
respondent's life was. Rand's _Atlas Shrugged_ was the second most popular
choice, after the Bible.[161] Rand's books continue to be widely sold and
read, with over 29 million copies sold as of 2013[update] (with about 10% of
that total purchased for free distribution to schools by the Ayn Rand
Institute).[162] In 1998, Modern Library readers voted _Atlas Shrugged_ the
20th century's finest work of fiction, followed by _The Fountainhead_ in
second place, _Anthem_ in seventh, and _We the Living_ eighth; none of the
four appeared on the critics' list.[163] Although Rand's influence has been
greatest in the United States, there has been international interest in her
work.[7][164]

Rand's contemporary admirers included fellow novelists, such as Ira Levin, Kay
Nolte Smith and L. Neil Smith; and later writers such as Erika Holzer and
Terry Goodkind have been influenced by her.[165] Other artists who have cited
Rand as an important influence on their lives and thought include comic book
artist Steve Ditko[166] and musician Neil Peart of Rush.[167] Rand provided a
positive view of business and subsequently many business executives and
entrepreneurs have admired and promoted her work.[168] John Allison of BB&T
and Ed Snider of Comcast Spectacor have funded the promotion of Rand's
ideas,[169] while Mark Cuban (owner of the Dallas Mavericks) as well as John
P. Mackey (CEO of Whole Foods) among others have said they consider Rand
crucial to their success.[170]

Rand and her works have been referred to in a variety of media: on television
shows including animated sitcoms, live-action comedies, dramas, and game
shows,[171] as well as in movies and video games.[172] She, or a character
based on her, figures prominently (in positive and negative lights) in
literary and science fiction novels by prominent American authors.[173] Nick
Gillespie, editor in chief of _Reason_ , has remarked that "Rand's is a
tortured immortality, one in which she's as likely to be a punch line as a
protagonist..." and that "jibes at Rand as cold and inhuman, run through the
popular culture".[174] Two movies have been made about Rand's life. A 1997
documentary film, _Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life_ , was nominated for the Academy
Award for Best Documentary Feature.[175] _The Passion of Ayn Rand_ , a 1999
television adaptation of the book of the same name, won several awards.[176]
Rand's image also appears on a 1999 U.S. postage stamp illustrated by artist
Nick Gaetano.[177]

### Political influence[edit]

See also: Objectivism and libertarianism

Although she rejected the labels "conservative" and "libertarian",[178] Rand
has had continuing influence on right-wing politics and libertarianism.[11]
Jim Powell, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, considers Rand one of the
three most important women (along with Rose Wilder Lane and Isabel Paterson)
of modern American libertarianism,[179] and David Nolan, one of the founders
of the Libertarian Party, stated that "without Ayn Rand, the libertarian
movement would not exist".[180] In his history of the libertarian movement,
journalist Brian Doherty described her as "the most influential libertarian of
the twentieth century to the public at large"[161] and biographer Jennifer
Burns referred to her as "the ultimate gateway drug to life on the
right".[181] Economist and Ayn Rand student George Reisman wrote: "Ayn
Rand...in particular, must be cited as providing a philosophical foundation
for the case of capitalism, and as being responsible probably more than anyone
else for the current spread of pro-capitalist ideas."[182]

![In a large outdoor crowd, a man holds a poster with the words "I am John

Galt"](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/43/TDTP08.JPG/220px-

TDTP08.JPG)

A protester at a 2009 Tea Party rally carries a sign referring to John Galt,
the hero of Rand's novel _Atlas Shrugged_.

She faced intense opposition from William F. Buckley, Jr. and other
contributors for the _National Review_ magazine. They published numerous
criticisms in the 1950s and 1960s by Whittaker Chambers, Garry Wills, and M.
Stanton Evans. Nevertheless, her influence among conservatives forced Buckley
and other _National Review_ contributors to reconsider how traditional notions
of virtue and Christianity could be integrated with support for
capitalism.[183]

The political figures who cite Rand as an influence are usually conservatives
(often members of the Republican Party),[184] despite Rand taking some
positions that are atypical for conservatives, such as being pro-choice and an
atheist.[185] A 1987 article in _The New York Times_ referred to her as the
Reagan administration's "novelist laureate".[186] Republican Congressmen and
conservative pundits have acknowledged her influence on their lives and have
recommended her novels.[187]

The financial crisis of 2007–2008 spurred renewed interest in her works,
especially _Atlas Shrugged_ , which some saw as foreshadowing the crisis.[188]
Opinion articles compared real-world events with the plot of the novel.[189]
During this time, signs mentioning Rand and her fictional hero John Galt
appeared at Tea Party protests.[190] There was also increased criticism of her
ideas, especially from the political left, with critics blaming the economic
crisis on her support of selfishness and free markets, particularly through
her influence on Alan Greenspan.[191] For example, _Mother Jones_ remarked
that "Rand's particular genius has always been her ability to turn upside down
traditional hierarchies and recast the wealthy, the talented, and the powerful
as the oppressed"[185] while equating Randian individual well-being with that
of the _Volk_ according to Goebbels. Corey Robin of _The Nation_ alleged
similarities between the "moral syntax of Randianism" and fascism.[192]

### Academic reaction[edit]

During Rand's lifetime, her work received little attention from academic
scholars.[10] When the first academic book about Rand's philosophy appeared in
1971, its author declared writing about Rand "a treacherous undertaking" that
could lead to "guilt by association" for taking her seriously.[193] A few
articles about Rand's ideas appeared in academic journals before her death in
1982, many of them in _The Personalist_.[194] One of these was "On the Randian
Argument" by libertarian philosopher Robert Nozick, who argued that her meta-
ethical argument is unsound and fails to solve the is–ought problem posed by
David Hume.[195] Some responses to Nozick by other academic philosophers were
also published in _The Personalist_ arguing that Nozick misstated Rand's
case.[194] Academic consideration of Rand as a literary figure during her life
was even more limited. Academic Mimi Gladstein was unable to find any
scholarly articles about Rand's novels when she began researching her in 1973,
and only three such articles appeared during the rest of the 1970s.[196]

Since Rand's death, interest in her work has gradually increased.[197]
Historian Jennifer Burns has identified "three overlapping waves" of scholarly
interest in Rand, the most recent of which is "an explosion of scholarship"
since the year 2000.[198] However, few universities currently include Rand or
Objectivism as a philosophical specialty or research area, with many
literature and philosophy departments dismissing her as a pop culture
phenomenon rather than a subject for serious study.[199]

Gladstein, Harry Binswanger, Allan Gotthelf, John Hospers, Edwin A. Locke,
Wallace Matson, Leonard Peikoff, Chris Matthew Sciabarra, and Tara Smith have
taught her work in academic institutions. Sciabarra co-edits the _Journal of
Ayn Rand Studies_ , a nonpartisan peer-reviewed journal dedicated to the study
of Rand's philosophical and literary work.[200] In 1987 Gotthelf, George Walsh
and David Kelley co-founded the Ayn Rand Society, a group affiliated with the
American Philosophical Association.[201] In 2012, the University of Pittsburgh
Press launched an "Ayn Rand Society Philosophical Studies" series based on the
proceedings of the Society.[202] Smith has written several academic books and
papers on Rand's ideas, including _Ayn Rand's Normative Ethics: The Virtuous
Egoist_ , a volume on Rand's ethical theory published by Cambridge University
Press. Rand's ideas have also been made subjects of study at Clemson and Duke
universities.[203] Scholars of English and American literature have largely
ignored her work,[204] although attention to her literary work has increased
since the 1990s.[205]

Rand scholars Douglas Den Uyl and Douglas B. Rasmussen, while stressing the
importance and originality of her thought, describe her style as "literary,
hyperbolic and emotional".[206] Political writer and Rand scholar Jack Wheeler
writes that despite "the incessant bombast and continuous venting of Randian
rage", Rand's ethics are "a most immense achievement, the study of which is
vastly more fruitful than any other in contemporary thought".[207] In the
_Literary Encyclopedia_ entry for Rand written in 2001, John David Lewis
declared that "Rand wrote the most intellectually challenging fiction of her
generation".[208] In a 1999 interview in the _Chronicle of Higher Education_ ,
Sciabarra commented, "I know they laugh at Rand", while forecasting a growth
of interest in her work in the academic community.[209]

Libertarian philosopher Michael Huemer argues that very few people find Rand's
ideas convincing, especially her ethics,[210] which he believes are difficult
to interpret and may lack logical coherence.[211] He attributes the attention
she receives to her being a "compelling writer", especially as a novelist.
_Atlas Shrugged_ thus outsells Rand's non-fiction works as well as the works
of other philosophers of classical liberalism such as Ludwig von Mises,
Friedrich Hayek, or Frederic Bastiat.[210]

Political scientist Charles Murray, while praising Rand's literary
accomplishments, criticizes her claim that her only "philosophical debt" was
to Aristotle, instead asserting that her ideas were derivative of previous
thinkers such as John Locke and Friedrich Nietzsche.[212] Although Rand
maintained that Objectivism was an integrated philosophical system,
philosopher Robert H. Bass argues that her central ethical ideas are
inconsistent and contradictory to her central political ideas.[213]

### Objectivist movement[edit]

Main article: Objectivist movement

In 1985, Rand's intellectual heir Leonard Peikoff established the Ayn Rand
Institute, a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting Rand's ideas and
works. In 1990, after an ideological disagreement with Peikoff, philosopher
David Kelley founded the Institute for Objectivist Studies, now known as The
Atlas Society.[214] In 2001, historian John McCaskey organized the Anthem
Foundation for Objectivist Scholarship, which provides grants for scholarly
work on Objectivism in academia.[215] The charitable foundation of BB&T
Corporation has also given grants for teaching Rand's ideas or works. The
University of Texas at Austin, the University of Pittsburgh, and University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill are among the schools that have received grants.
In some cases, these grants have been controversial due to their requiring
research or teaching related to Rand.[216]

## Selected works[edit]

Main article: Bibliography of Ayn Rand and Objectivism

**Novels:**

                
                                      * 1936 _We the Living_
                      * 1943 _The Fountainhead_
                      * 1957 _Atlas Shrugged_
                

**Other fiction:**

                
                                      * 1934 _Night of January 16th_
                      * 1938 _Anthem_
                      * 2015 _Ideal_
                

**Non-fiction:**

                
                                      * 1961 _For the New Intellectual_
                      * 1964 _The Virtue of Selfishness_
                      * 1966 _Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal_
                      * 1969 _The Romantic Manifesto_
                      * 1971 _The New Left: The Anti-Industrial Revolution_
                      * 1979 _Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology_
                      * 1982 _Philosophy: Who Needs It_
                

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * List of people influenced by Ayn Rand
                      * _Letters of Ayn Rand_
                      * _Journals of Ayn Rand_
                      * Murder of Marion Parker
                

## Notes[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** Russian:  Али́са Зино́вьевна Розенба́ум, [aˈlʲɪsa zʲɪˈnovʲɪvnə rəzʲɪnˈbaʊm]
                      2. **^** Rand said the origin of _Ayn_ was Finnish,[29] but some biographical sources question this, suggesting it may come from a Hebrew nickname.[30]
                

## References[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** Branden 1986, p. 71; Gladstein 1999, p. 9.
                      2. **^** Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1986, p. x; Sciabarra 1995, pp. 1–2; Kukathas 1998, p. 55; Badhwar & Long 2010.
                      3. **^** Barry 1987, p. 122; Peikoff 1991, pp. 309–314; Sciabarra 1995, p. 298; Gotthelf 2000, p. 91; Gladstein 2009, p. 46.
                      4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gotthelf 2000, pp. 91–92; Peikoff 1991, pp. 379–380.
                      5. **^** O'Neill 1977, pp. 18–20; Sciabarra 1995, pp. 12, 118.
                      6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Gladstein 1999, pp. 117–119
                      7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohen 2001.
                      8. **^** Marcus 2009
                      9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Badhwar & Long 2010.
                      10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sciabarra 1995, pp. 1–2.
                      11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Burns 2009, p. 4; Gladstein 2009, pp. 107–108, 124.
                      12. **^** Heller 2009, p. xiii.
                      13. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 3–5; Britting 2004, pp. 2–3; Burns 2009, p. 9.
                      14. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 68.
                      15. **^** Sciabarra 1995, pp. 69, 367–368; Gladstein 2009, p. 2.
                      16. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 35–39.
                      17. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 14–20.
                      18. **^** Burns 2009, p. 15.
                      19. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 77.
                      20. **^** Sciabarra 1999, pp. 5–8.
                      21. **^** Heller 2009, p. 41; Peikoff 1991, pp. 451–460.
                      22. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 17–18, 22–24.
                      23. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 17, 22.
                      24. **^** Heller 2009, p. 47; Britting 2004, p. 24.
                      25. **^** Sciabarra 1999, p. 1.
                      26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Heller 2009, pp. 49–50.
                      27. **^** Britting 2004, p. 33.
                      28. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 7; Heller 2009, p. 55.
                      29. **^** Rand 1995b, p. 40.
                      30. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 55–57.
                      31. **^** Branden 1986, p. 32; Burns 2009, pp. 18–19.
                      32. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 50–51.
                      33. **^** Heller 2009, p. 53.
                      34. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 57–60.
                      35. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 34–36.
                      36. **^** Britting 2004, p. 39; Heller 2009, p. 71.
                      37. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 35–40; Paxton 1998, pp. 74, 81, 84.
                      38. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 96–98; Britting 2004, pp. 43–44, 52.
                      39. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 40, 42.
                      40. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 76, 92.
                      41. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 78; Gladstein 2009, p. 87.
                      42. **^** Kakutani 2015.
                      43. **^** Rand 1995a, p. xviii.
                      44. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 13.
                      45. **^** Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing _We the Living_ ". In Mayhew 2004, p. 141.
                      46. **^** Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing _We the Living_ ". In Mayhew 2004, p. 143.
                      47. **^** Paxton 1998, p. 104.
                      48. **^** Burns 2009, p. 50; Heller 2009, p. 102.
                      49. **^** Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing _Anthem_ ". In Mayhew 2005a, pp. 24–27.
                      50. **^** Britting 2004, p. 57.
                      51. **^** Burns 2009, p. 114; Heller 2009, p. 249; Branden 1986, pp. 188–189.
                      52. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 75–78.
                      53. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 61–78.
                      54. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 58–61.
                      55. **^** Burns 2009, p. 85.
                      56. **^** Burns 2009, p. 89.
                      57. **^** Burns 2009, p. 178; Heller 2009, pp. 304–305.
                      58. **^** Doherty 2007, p. 149; Branden 1986, pp. 180–181
                      59. **^** Britting 2004, pp. 68–80; Branden 1986, pp. 183–198.
                      60. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 112; Heller 2009, p. 171.
                      61. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 100–101, 123.
                      62. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 130–131; Heller 2009, pp. 214–215.
                      63. **^** Mayhew 2005b, pp. 91–93.
                      64. **^** Mayhew 2005b, pp. 188–189.
                      65. **^** Burns 2009, p. 125.
                      66. **^** Mayhew 2005b, p. 83.
                      67. **^** Britting 2004, p. 71.
                      68. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 256–264, 331–343.
                      69. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 113; Mayhew 2005b, p. 78.
                      70. **^** Salmieri, Gregory. " _Atlas Shrugged_ on the Role of the Mind in Man's Existence". In Mayhew 2009, p. 248.
                      71. **^** Gladstein 1999, p. 42.
                      72. **^** McConnell 2010, p. 507.
                      73. **^** Stolyarov II, G. "The Role and Essence of John Galt's Speech in Ayn Rand's _Atlas Shrugged_ ". In Younkins 2007, p. 99.
                      74. **^** Burns 2009, p. 2
                      75. **^** Burns 2009, p. 178; Heller 2009, pp. 303–306.
                      76. **^** Gladstein 2000, p. 28; Younkins 2007, p. 1; Baker 1987, p. 17.
                      77. **^** Gladstein 2009, pp. 105–106; Burns 2009, pp. 232–233.
                      78. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 236–237.
                      79. **^** Doherty 2007, p. 235; Burns 2009, p. 235.
                      80. **^** Heller 2009, p. 303.
                      81. **^** Doherty 2007, pp. 237–238; Heller 2009, p. 329; Burns 2009, p. 235.
                      82. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 315–316
                      83. **^** Gladstein 1999, p. 14.
                      84. **^** Branden 1986, p. 318.
                      85. **^** Gladstein 1999, p. 16.
                      86. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 320–321.
                      87. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 228–229, 265; Heller 2009, p. 352.
                      88. **^** Rand 2005, p. 96; Burns 2009, p. 266.
                      89. **^** Burns 2009, p. 266; Heller 2009, p. 391.
                      90. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 362, 519.
                      91. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 204–206; Heller 2009, pp. 322–323.
                      92. **^** Britting 2004, p. 101
                      93. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 344–358.
                      94. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 378–379.
                      95. **^** Heller 2009, p. 411.
                      96. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 386–389.
                      97. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 391–393.
                      98. **^** McConnell 2010, pp. 520–521
                      99. **^** Weiss 2012, p. 62
                      100. **^** Branden 1986, pp. 392–395.
                      101. **^** Heller 2009, p. 406.
                      102. **^** Heller 2009, p. 410.
                      103. **^** Heller 2009, pp. 405, 410.
                      104. **^** Branden 1986, p. 403.
                      105. **^** Heller 2009, p. 400.
                      106. **^** Rand 1992, pp. 1170–1171
                      107. **^** Peikoff 1991, pp. 2–3; Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1986, p. 224; Gladstein & Sciabarra 1999, p. 2.
                      108. **^** Den Uyl, Douglas J. & Rasmussen, Douglas B. "Ayn Rand's Realism". In Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1986, pp. 3–20.
                      109. **^** Peikoff 1991, pp. 38–39; Gotthelf 2000, p. 54.
                      110. **^** Rand 1964, p. 22.
                      111. **^** Rand 1982, pp. 62–63.
                      112. **^** Salmieri & Gotthelf 2005, p. 1997; Gladstein 1999, pp. 85–86.
                      113. **^** Rand 1989, p. 3.
                      114. **^** Kukathas 1998, p. 55.
                      115. **^** Rand 1964, p. 25; Badhwar & Long 2010; Peikoff 1991, pp. 207, 219.
                      116. **^** Rand 1992, p. 1023; Peikoff 1991, pp. 313–320.
                      117. **^** Peikoff 1991, pp. 350–352.
                      118. **^** Peikoff 1991, pp. 369.
                      119. **^** Peikoff 1991, p. 367.
                      120. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 174–177, 209, 230–231; Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1986, pp. 225–226; Doherty 2007, pp. 189–190; Branden 1986, p. 252.
                      121. **^** Sciabarra 1995, pp. 266–267; Burns 2009, pp. 268–269.
                      122. **^** Sciabarra 1995, pp. 280–281; Peikoff 1991, pp. 371–372; Merrill 1991, p. 139.
                      123. **^** Sciabarra 1995, pp. 204–205.
                      124. **^** Peikoff 1991, p. 428.
                      125. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 207; Peikoff 1991, p. 437.
                      126. **^** Rand 1992, p. 1171
                      127. **^** Sciabarra 1995, p. 12.
                      128. **^** Podritske & Schwartz 2009, pp. 174–175.
                      129. **^** Heller 2009, p. 42; Burns 2009, pp. 16, 22; Sciabarra 1995, pp. 100–106.
                      130. **^** Rand 1997, p. 21; Burns 2009, pp. 24–25; Sciabarra 1998, pp. 136, 138–139.
                      131. **^** Merrill 1991, pp. 38–39; Sciabarra 1998, p. 135; Loiret-Prunet, Valerie. "Ayn Rand and Feminist Synthesis: Rereading _We the Living_ ". In Gladstein & Sciabarra 1999, p. 97.
                      132. **^** Badhwar & Long 2010; Sheaffer, Robert. "Rereading Rand on Gender in the Light of Paglia". In Gladstein & Sciabarra 1999, p. 313.
                      133. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 41, 68; Heller 2009, p. 42; Merrill 1991, pp. 47–49.
                      134. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 303–304; Sciabarra 1998, pp. 135, 137–138; Mayhew, Robert. " _We the Living_ '36 and '59". In Mayhew 2004, p. 205.
                      135. **^** Walicki & Andrews-Rusiecka 1979, p. 196.
                      136. **^** Weiner 2016.
                      137. **^** Sciabarra 2010, pp. 28.
                      138. **^** Rand 1971, p. 4.
                      139. **^** Walsh 2000.
                      140. **^** Seddon 2003, pp. 63–81.
                      141. **^** Rand 2005, p. 166.
                      142. **^** Rand, Ayn (1999). "The Left: Old and New". _Return of the Primitive: The Anti-Industrial Revolution_. Edited by Peter Schwartz. New York: Meridian. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-452-01184-7. OCLC 39281836..
                      143. **^** Rand 1971, p. 1.
                      144. **^** Burns 2009, p. 33; Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing _We the Living_ ". In Mayhew 2004, p. 161.
                      145. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Branden 1986, pp. 122–124.
                      146. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pruette, Lorine (May 16, 1943). "Battle Against Evil". _The New York Times_. p. BR7. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011. Reprinted in McGrath, Charles, ed. (1998). _Books of the Century_. New York: Times Books. pp. 135–136. ISBN 978-0-8129-2965-2. OCLC 38439024.
                      147. **^** Paxton 1998, p. 120; Britting 2004, p. 87.
                      148. **^** Berliner, Michael S. "Reviews of _We the Living_ ". In Mayhew 2004, pp. 147–151.
                      149. **^** Berliner, Michael S. "Reviews of _Anthem_ ". In Mayhew 2005a, pp. 55–60.
                      150. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Berliner, Michael S. " _The Fountainhead_ Reviews". In Mayhew 2006, pp. 77–82.
                      151. **^** Heller 2009, p. 152.
                      152. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berliner, Michael S. "The _Atlas Shrugged_ Reviews". In Mayhew 2009, pp. 133–137.
                      153. **^** Chambers, Whittaker (December 8, 1957). "Big Sister is Watching You". _National Review_. pp. 594–596. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      154. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gladstein 1999, p. 119.
                      155. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 193–194.
                      156. **^** Hook, Sidney (April 9, 1961). "Each Man for Himself". _The New York Times Book Review_. p. 28. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      157. **^** Vidal, Gore (1962). "Two Immoralists: Orville Prescott and Ayn Rand". _Rocking the Boat_. Boston: Little, Brown. p. 234. OCLC 291123. Reprinted from _Esquire_ , July 1961.
                      158. **^** Rothstein, Edward (February 2, 2005). "Considering the Last Romantic, Ayn Rand, at 100". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      159. **^** Clark, Leslie (February 17, 2007). "The philosophical art of looking out number one". _The Herald_. Retrieved  April 2, 2010.
                      160. **^** Corsello, Andrew (October 27, 2009). "The Bitch is Back". _GQ_. Condé Nast Publications. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved  April 9, 2011.
                      161. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Doherty 2007, p. 11.
                      162. **^** "Ayn Rand Hits a Million...Again!". Ayn Rand Institute. May 14, 2013. Retrieved  April 21, 2014.
                      163. **^** "100 Best Novels". Modern Library. Archived from the original on November 23, 2015. Retrieved  November 23, 2015.
                      164. **^** Gladstein 2003, pp. 384–386; Delbroy, Bibek (2006). "Ayn Rand—The Indian Connection". In Machan, Tibor R (ed.). _Ayn Rand at 100_. New Delhi, India: Pragun Publications. pp. 2–4. ISBN 978-81-89645-57-1. OCLC 76829742.
                      165. **^** Riggenbach, Jeff (Fall 2004). "Ayn Rand's Influence on American Popular Fiction" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **6** (1): 91–144. JSTOR 41560271. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011.
                      166. **^** Sciabarra 2004, pp. 8–11.
                      167. **^** Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (Fall 2002). "Rand, Rush, and Rock". _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **4** (1): 161–185. Retrieved  April 20, 2011.
                      168. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 168–171.
                      169. **^** Burns 2009, p. 298; Branden 1986, p. 419.
                      170. **^** Rubin, Harriet (September 15, 2007). "Ayn Rand's Literature of Capitalism". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      171. **^** Sciabarra 2004, pp. 4–5
                      172. **^** Burns 2009, p. 282.
                      173. **^** Sciabarra 2004, p. 3.
                      174. **^** Alex Chadwick (host), Nick Gillespie (contributor) (February 2, 2005). "Book Bag: Marking the Ayn Rand Centennial". _Day to Day_. National Public Radio.
                      175. **^** Gladstein 1999, p. 128.
                      176. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 122.
                      177. **^** Wozniak 2001, p. 380.
                      178. **^** Burns 2009, p. 258; Rand 2005, p. 73.
                      179. **^** Powell 1996, p. 322.
                      180. **^** Branden 1986, p. 414.
                      181. **^** Burns 2009, p. 4.
                      182. **^** Reisman, George (1998). _Capitalism: A complete understanding of the nature and value of human economic life_. Jameson Books. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-915463-73-2.
                      183. **^** Burns 2004.
                      184. **^** Doherty 2009, pp. 54.
                      185. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Benfer, Amy (July – August 2009). "And the Rand Played On". _Mother Jones_. Archived from the original on May 3, 2011. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      186. **^** Burns 2009, p. 279.
                      187. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 124; Heller 2009, p. xi; Doherty 2009, p. 51; Burns 2009, p. 283.
                      188. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 283–284; Doherty 2009, pp. 51–52; Gladstein 2009, p. 125.
                      189. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 125; Doherty 2009, pp. 54.
                      190. **^** Doherty 2009, pp. 51–52.
                      191. **^** Burns 2009, p. 283.
                      192. **^** Robin, Corey (June 7, 2010). "Garbage and Gravitas". _The Nation_. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      193. **^** O'Neill 1977, p. 3.
                      194. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gladstein 1999, p. 115.
                      195. **^** Nozick, Robert (Spring 1971). "On the Randian Argument". _The Personalist_. **52** : 282–304.
                      196. **^** Gladstein 2003, pp. 373–374, 379–381
                      197. **^** Gladstein 2009, pp. 114–122; Salmieri & Gotthelf 2005, p. 1995;  McLemee, Scott (September 1999). "The Heirs Of Ayn Rand: Has Objectivism Gone Subjective?". _Lingua Franca_. Vol. 9 no. 6. pp. 45–55. Archived from the original on May 15, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      198. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 295–296.
                      199. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 116.
                      200. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 118.
                      201. **^** Gotthelf 2000, pp. 2, 25;  Thomas, William (April 2000). "Ayn Rand Through Two Lenses". _Navigator_. **3** (4): 15–19.
                      202. **^** Seddon, Fred (July 2014). "Ayn Rand Society Philosophical Studies". _Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **14** (1): 75–79.
                      203. **^** Harvey, Benjamin (May 15, 2005). "Ayn Rand at 100: An 'ism' struts its stuff". _Rutland Herald_. Columbia News Service. Archived from the original on December 26, 2007. Retrieved  June 4, 2009.
                      204. **^** Gladstein 2003, p. 375.
                      205. **^** Gladstein 2003, pp. 384–391.
                      206. **^** Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1978, p. 203.
                      207. **^** Wheeler, Jack. "Rand and Aristotle". In Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1986, p. 96.
                      208. **^** Lewis, John David (October 20, 2001). "Ayn Rand". _The Literary Encyclopedia_. Retrieved  August 2, 2009.
                      209. **^** Sharlet, Jeff (April 9, 1999). "Ayn Rand Has Finally Caught the Attention of Scholars". _The Chronicle of Higher Education_. **45** (31): A17–A18. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      210. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Huemer, Michael (January 22, 2010). "Why Ayn Rand? Some Alternate Answers". _Cato Unbound_. Retrieved  August 18, 2012.
                      211. **^** Humer, Michael (Spring 2002). "Is Benevolent Egoism Coherent?" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **3** (2): 259–288. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 15, 2011.
                      212. **^** Murray, Charles (2010). "Who is Ayn Rand?". The Claremont Institute. Archived from the original on June 4, 2010. Retrieved December 7, 2012.
                      213. **^** Bass, Robert H. (Spring 2006). "Egoism versus Rights" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **7** (2): 329–349. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 5, 2012.
                      214. **^** Burns 2009, pp. 280–281; Gladstein 2009, pp. 19, 114.
                      215. **^** Gladstein 2009, p. 117.
                      216. **^** Gladstein 2009, pp. 116–117; Burns 2009, p. 297.
                

### Works cited[edit]

                
                                      * Badhwar, Neera; Long, Roderick T. (June 8, 2010). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Ayn Rand". _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_. Retrieved  June 16, 2010.
                      * Baker, James T. (1987). _Ayn Rand_. Twayne's United States Authors Series. Boston, Massachusetts: Twayne Publishers. ISBN 978-0-8057-7497-9. OCLC 14933003.
                      * Barry, Norman P. (1987). _On Classical Liberalism and Libertarianism_. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-00243-5. OCLC 14134854.
                      * Branden, Barbara (1986). _The Passion of Ayn Rand_. Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company. ISBN 978-0-385-19171-5. OCLC 12614728.
                      * Britting, Jeff (2004). _Ayn Rand_. Overlook Illustrated Lives series. New York: Overlook Duckworth. ISBN 978-1-58567-406-0. OCLC 56413971.
                      * Burns, Jennifer (November 2004). "Godless Capitalism: Ayn Rand and the Conservative Movement". _Modern Intellectual History_. **1** (3): 359–385. doi:10.1017/S1479244304000216.
                      * Burns, Jennifer (2009). _Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-532487-7. OCLC 313665028.
                      * Cohen, David (December 7, 2001). "A Growing Concern". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  April 15, 2011.
                      * Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas (April 1978). "Nozick On the Randian Argument". _The Personalist_. **59** : 184–205.
                      * Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas, eds. (1986) [1984]. _The Philosophic Thought of Ayn Rand_ (paperback ed.). Chicago: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-01407-9. OCLC 15669115.
                      * Doherty, Brian (2007). _Radicals for Capitalism: A Freewheeling History of the Modern American Libertarian Movement_. New York: Public Affairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-350-0. OCLC 76141517.
                      * Doherty, Brian (December 2009). "She's Back!". _Reason_. Vol. 41 no. 7. pp. 51–58. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      * Gladstein, Mimi Reisel (1999). _The New Ayn Rand Companion_. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30321-0. OCLC 40359365.
                      * Gladstein, Mimi Reisel (2000). _Atlas Shrugged: Manifesto of the Mind_. Twayne's Masterwork Studies series. New York: Twayne Publishers. ISBN 978-0-8057-1638-2. OCLC 43569158.
                      * Gladstein, Mimi Reisel (Spring 2003). "Ayn Rand Literary Criticism" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **4** (2): 373–394. JSTOR 41560226. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011.
                      * Gladstein, Mimi Reisel (2009). _Ayn Rand_. Major Conservative and Libertarian Thinkers series. New York: Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-4513-1. OCLC 319595162.
                      * Gladstein, Mimi Reisel & Sciabarra, Chris Matthew, eds. (1999). _Feminist Interpretations of Ayn Rand_. Re-reading the Canon series. University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01830-0. OCLC 38885754.
                      * Gotthelf, Allan (2000). _On Ayn Rand_. Wadsworth Philosophers Series. Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing. ISBN 978-0-534-57625-7. OCLC 43668181.
                      * Gotthelf, Allan & Salmieri, Gregory, eds. (2016). _A Companion to Ayn Rand_. Blackwell Companions to Philosophy. Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8684-1. OCLC 932124553.
                      * Heller, Anne C. (2009). _Ayn Rand and the World She Made_. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51399-9. OCLC 229027437.
                      * Kakutani, Michiko (August 10, 2015). "Review: Ayn Rand's 'Ideal' Presents a Protagonist Familiar in Her Superiority". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  August 11, 2015.
                      * Kukathas, Chandran (1998). "Rand, Ayn (1905–82)". In Craig, Edward (ed.). _Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy_. **8**. New York: Routledge. pp. 55–56. ISBN 978-0-415-07310-3. OCLC 318280731.
                      * Marcus, Jon (July 16, 2009). "Ayn Rand Revival Gathers Pace in US Universities, Despite Detractors". _Times Higher Education_. Retrieved  April 4, 2014.
                      * Mayhew, Robert, ed. (2004). _Essays on Ayn Rand's We the Living_. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0697-6. OCLC 52979186.
                      * Mayhew, Robert, ed. (2005a). _Essays on Ayn Rand's Anthem_. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1031-7. OCLC 57577415.
                      * Mayhew, Robert (2005b). _Ayn Rand and Song of Russia_. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-5276-1. OCLC 55474309.
                      * Mayhew, Robert, ed. (2006). _Essays on Ayn Rand's The Fountainhead_. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1578-7. OCLC 70707828.
                      * Mayhew, Robert, ed. (2009). _Essays on Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged_. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-2780-3. OCLC 315237945.
                      * McConnell, Scott (2010). _100 Voices: An Oral History of Ayn Rand_. New York: New American Library. ISBN 978-0-451-23130-7. OCLC 555642813.
                      * Merrill, Ronald E. (1991). _The Ideas of Ayn Rand_. La Salle, Illinois: Open Court Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8126-9157-3. OCLC 23254190.
                      * O'Neill, William F. (1977) [1971]. _With Charity Toward None: An Analysis of Ayn Rand's Philosophy_. New York: Littlefield, Adams  & Company. ISBN 978-0-8226-0179-1. OCLC 133489.
                      * Paxton, Michael (1998). _Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life (The Companion Book)_. Layton, Utah: Gibbs Smith. ISBN 978-0-87905-845-6. OCLC 38048196.
                      * Peikoff, Leonard (1991). _Objectivism: The Philosophy of Ayn Rand_. New York: E. P. Dutton. ISBN 978-0-452-01101-4. OCLC 28423965.
                      * Podritske, Marlene & Schwartz, Peter, eds. (2009). _Objectively Speaking: Ayn Rand Interviewed_. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-3195-4. OCLC 267048088.
                      * Powell, Jim (May 1996). "Rose Wilder Lane, Isabel Paterson, and Ayn Rand: Three Women Who Inspired the Modern Libertarian Movement" (PDF). _The Freeman: Ideas on Liberty_. Vol. 46 no. 5. Retrieved October 16, 2017.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1964). _The Virtue of Selfishness_. New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-451-16393-6. OCLC 28103453.
                      * Rand, Ayn (September 1971). "Brief Summary". _The Objectivist_. Vol. 10 no. 9. pp. 1–4.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1982). Peikoff, Leonard (ed.). _Philosophy: Who Needs It_ (paperback ed.). New York: Signet. ISBN 978-0-451-13249-9.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1989). Peikoff, Leonard (ed.). _The Voice of Reason_. New York: New American Library. ISBN 978-0-453-00634-7. OCLC 18048955.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1992) [1957]. _Atlas Shrugged_ (35th anniversary ed.). New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-94892-6. OCLC 60339555.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1995a) [1936]. "Foreword". _We the Living_ (60th Anniversary ed.). New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-94054-8. OCLC 32780458.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1995b). Berliner, Michael S (ed.). _Letters of Ayn Rand_. New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-93946-7. OCLC 31412028.
                      * Rand, Ayn (1997). Harriman, David (ed.). _Journals of Ayn Rand_. New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-94370-9. OCLC 36566117.
                      * Rand, Ayn (2005). Mayhew, Robert (ed.). _Ayn Rand Answers, the Best of Her Q &A_. New York: New American Library. ISBN 978-0-451-21665-6. OCLC 59148253.
                      * Salmieri, Gregory & Gotthelf, Allan (2005). "Rand, Ayn (1905–82)". In Shook, John R. (ed.). _The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers_. **4**. London: Thoemmes Continuum. pp. 1995–1999. ISBN 978-1-84371-037-0. OCLC 53388453.
                      * Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (1995). _Ayn Rand: The Russian Radical_. University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01440-1. OCLC 31133644.
                      * Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (Fall 1998). "A Renaissance in Rand Scholarship" (PDF). _Reason Papers_. **23** : 132–159. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      * Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (Fall 1999). "The Rand Transcript" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **1** (1): 1–26. JSTOR 41560109. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      * Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (Fall 2004). "The Illustrated Rand" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **6** (1): 1–20. JSTOR 41560268. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      * Seddon, Fred (2003). _Ayn Rand, Objectivists, and the History of Philosophy_. Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America. pp. 63–81. ISBN 978-0-7618-2308-7. OCLC 51969016.
                      * Walsh, George V. (Fall 2000). "Ayn Rand and the Metaphysics of Kant" (PDF). _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_. **2** (1): 69–103. JSTOR 41560132. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011.
                      * Weiss, Gary (2012). _Ayn Rand Nation: The Hidden Struggle for America's Soul_. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-59073-4. OCLC 740628885.
                      * Wozniak, Maurice D., ed. (2001). _Krause-Minkus Standard Catalog of U.S. Stamps_ (5th ed.). Krause Publications. ISBN 978-0-87349-321-5. OCLC 48663542.
                      * Younkins, Edward W., ed. (2007). _Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged: A Philosophical and Literary Companion_. Burlington, Vermont: Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-5533-6. OCLC 69792104.
                      * Weiner, Adam (December 11, 2016). "The Most Politically Dangerous Book You've Never Heard Of". _Politico_.
                      * Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (November 1, 2010). _Ayn Rand: The Russian Radical_. Penn State Press. p. 28. ISBN 0-271-04236-2.
                      * Walicki, Andrzej; Andrews-Rusiecka, Hilda (1979). _A History of Russian Thought: From the Enlightenment to Marxism_. Stanford University Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-8047-1132-6.
                

## External links[edit]

**Ayn Rand** at Wikipedia's sister projects

                
                                      * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
                      * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations from Wikiquote
                      * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
                
                      * Ayn Rand at the _Encyclopædia Britannica_
                      * Frequently Asked Questions About Ayn Rand from the Ayn Rand Institute
                      * Works by Ayn Rand at Project Gutenberg
                      * Works by or about Ayn Rand at Internet Archive
                      * Works by Ayn Rand at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/21/Speaker_Icon.svg/15px-Speaker_Icon.svg.png)
                      * Rand's papers at The Library of Congress
                      * Ayn Rand Lexicon – searchable database
                      * Hicks, Stephen R. C. "Ayn Alissa Rand (1905–1982)". _Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy_.
                      * Badhwar, Neera K.; Long, Roderick T. (October 4, 2010). "Ayn Rand". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_.
                      * Ayn Rand on IMDb
                      * Works by Ayn Rand at Open Library ![Edit this at Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-Blue_pencil.svg.png)
                      * Ayn Rand at Curlie
                      * "Writings of Ayn Rand" – from C-SPAN's _American Writers: A Journey Through History_
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Ayn Rand

* * *

Bibliography|

| Novels|

                
                                      * _We the Living_ (1936)
                      * _Anthem_ (1938)
                      * _The Fountainhead_ (1943)
                      * _Atlas Shrugged_ (1957)
                      * _Ideal_ (2015)
                

---|---  
Non-fiction books|

                
                                      * _For the New Intellectual_ (1961)
                      * _Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology_ (1979)
                      * _The Art of Fiction_ (2000)
                

Essay collections|

                
                                      * _The Virtue of Selfishness_ (1964)
                      * _Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal_ (1966)
                      * _The Romantic Manifesto_ (1969)
                      * _The New Left: The Anti-Industrial Revolution_ (1971)
                      * _Philosophy: Who Needs It_ (1982)
                

Screenplays|

                
                                      * _Red Pawn_ (1932)
                      * _Love Letters_ (1945)
                      * _You Came Along_ (1945)
                      * _The Fountainhead_ (1949)
                

Theatrical plays|

                
                                      * _Night of January 16th_ (1934)
                      * _Ideal_ (1934)
                      * _The Unconquered_ (1940)
                

Other|

                
                                      * _The Early Ayn Rand_ (1984)
                      * _Letters of Ayn Rand_ (1995)
                      * _Journals of Ayn Rand_ (1997)
                      * Objectivist periodicals
                

Philosophy|

                
                                      * Objectivism
                      * Objectivism and libertarianism
                      * Objectivism and homosexuality
                      * Objectivism's rejection of the primitive
                      * Randian hero
                

Influence|

                
                                      * _The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies_
                      * Objectivist movement
                      * List of people influenced by Ayn Rand
                      * Objectivist Party
                

Biographical depictions|

                
                                      * _Ayn Rand and the World She Made_
                      * _Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life_
                      * _Ayn Rand: The Russian Radical_
                      * _The Ayn Rand Cult_
                      * _Goddess of the Market_
                      * _Judgment Day_
                      * _The Passion of Ayn Rand_ (book)
                      * _The Passion of Ayn Rand_ (film)
                      * _Who Is Ayn Rand?_
                

Film adaptations|

                
                                      * _The Night of January 16th_ (1941)
                      * _We the Living_ (1942)
                      * _The Fountainhead_ (1949)
                      * _Gawaahi_ (1989)
                      * _Atlas Shrugged_ (film series): _Part I_ (2011), _Part II_ (2012), _Part III_ (2014)
                

Theatrical adaptations|

                
                                      * _The Unconquered_ (1940)
                      * _The Fountainhead_ (2014)
                

Characters|

                
                                      * List of _Atlas Shrugged_ characters
                      * John Galt
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Liberalism

* * *

Development|

                
                                      * Contributions to liberal theory
                      * History of liberalism
                

|

![Yellow flag

waving.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Yellow_flag_waving.svg/100px-

Yellow_flag_waving.svg.png)

Ideas|

                
                                      * Civil and political rights
                      * Democracy
                        * Liberal
                      * Egalitarianism
                      * Free market
                      * Free trade
                      * Freedom of the press
                      * Freedom of religion
                      * Freedom of speech
                      * Gender equality
                      * Harm principle
                      * Internationalism
                      * _Laissez-faire_
                      * Liberty
                      * Market economy
                      * Natural and legal rights
                        * Natural law
                      * Negative/Positive liberty
                      * Open society
                      * Permissive society
                      * Private property
                      * Rule of law
                      * Secularism
                      * Separation of church and state
                      * Social contract
                      * Welfare state
                

Schools|

                
                                      * Anarcho-capitalism
                      * Classical
                        * Libertarianism
                        * Geolibertarianism
                      * Liberal conservatism
                      * Constitutional patriotism
                        * Civic nationalism
                      * Conservative
                      * Cultural
                      * Democratic
                      * Economic
                      * Green
                      * Liberal feminism
                        * Equity feminism
                      * Liberal internationalism
                      * Liberal socialism
                      * Muscular
                      * National
                      * Neo
                      * Ordo
                      * Radical centrism
                      * Radicalism
                      * Religious
                        * Christian
                        * Islamic
                      * Secular
                      * Social
                      * Techno
                

Key figures|

                
                                      * Lord Acton
                      * Alain
                      * Juan Bautista Alberdi
                      * Jean le Rond d'Alembert
                      * Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
                      * Chu Anping
                      * Matthew Arnold
                      * Raymond Aron
                      * Prosper de Barante
                      * Frédéric Bastiat
                      * Jeremy Bentham
                      * Isaiah Berlin
                      * William Beveridge
                      * Norberto Bobbio
                      * Lujo Brentano
                      * John Bright
                      * Victor de Broglie
                      * Edmund Burke
                      * Ernst Cassirer
                      * Boris Chicherin
                      * Anders Chydenius
                      * Richard Cobden
                      * R. G. Collingwood
                      * Marquis de Condorcet
                      * Benjamin Constant
                      * Benedetto Croce
                      * Vincenzo Cuoco
                      * Ralf Dahrendorf
                      * Guido De Ruggiero
                      * Antoine Destutt de Tracy
                      * John Dewey
                      * Charles Dickens
                      * Denis Diderot
                      * Zhang Dongsun
                      * Ronald Dworkin
                      * Ralph Waldo Emerson
                      * Karl-Hermann Flach
                      * Milton Friedman
                      * John Kenneth Galbraith
                      * William Lloyd Garrison
                      * David Lloyd George
                      * William Gladstone
                      * Piero Gobetti
                      * Francisco Luís Gomes
                      * John Gray
                      * Thomas Hill Green
                      * Friedrich Hayek
                      * Auberon Herbert
                      * Thomas Hobbes
                      * Leonard Hobhouse
                      * John A. Hobson
                      * Baron d'Holbach
                      * Qin Hui
                      * Wilhelm von Humboldt
                      * Thomas Jefferson
                      * Immanuel Kant
                      * Namık Kemal
                      * John Maynard Keynes
                      * Will Kymlicka
                      * Mariano José de Larra
                      * W. E. H. Lecky
                      * John Locke
                      * Thomas Macaulay
                      * Salvador de Madariaga
                      * James Madison
                      * Harriet Martineau
                      * Minoo Masani
                      * Jules Michelet
                      * James Mill
                      * John Stuart Mill
                      * John Milton
                      * Ludwig von Mises
                      * Donald Barkly Molteno
                      * Theodor Mommsen
                      * Leo Chiozza Money
                      * Charles de Montalembert
                      * Montesquieu
                      * José María Luis Mora
                      * Janusz Korwin-Mikke
                      * Chantal Mouffe
                      * Dadabhai Naoroji
                      * Friedrich Naumann
                      * Robert Nozick
                      * Bertil Ohlin
                      * José Ortega y Gasset
                      * Thomas Paine
                      * Alan Paton
                      * Karl Popper
                      * Richard Price
                      * Joseph Priestley
                      * Guillermo Prieto
                      * François Quesnay
                      * Ignacio Ramírez
                      * Walther Rathenau
                      * John Rawls
                      * Joseph Raz
                      * Ernest Renan
                      * Charles Renouvier
                      * David Ricardo
                      * Wilhelm Röpke
                      * Richard Rorty
                      * Antonio Rosmini
                      * Carlo Rosselli
                      * Jean-Jacques Rousseau
                      * Domingo Faustino Sarmiento
                      * Jean-Baptiste Say
                      * Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
                      * Amartya Sen
                      * Shaftesbury
                      * Li Shenzhi
                      * Hu Shih
                      * Judith Shklar
                      * Algernon Sidney
                      * Emmanuel Sieyès
                      * İbrahim Şinasi
                      * Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi
                      * Adam Smith
                      * Hernando de Soto
                      * Herbert Spencer
                      * Germaine de Staël
                      * William Graham Sumner
                      * Augustin Thierry
                      * Johan Rudolph Thorbecke
                      * Henry David Thoreau
                      * Alexis de Tocqueville
                      * Ernst Troeltsch
                      * Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
                      * Abel-François Villemain
                      * Voltaire
                      * Lester Frank Ward
                      * Max Weber
                      * Mary Wollstonecraft
                      * Tao Xingzhi
                      * María Zambrano
                      * Gu Zhun
                

Regional  
variants|

                
                                      * Africa 
                        * Egypt
                        * Nigeria
                        * Senegal
                        * South Africa
                        * Tunisia
                        * Zimbabwe
                      * Asia 
                        * China
                        * Hong Kong
                        * India
                        * Iran
                        * Israel
                        * Japan
                        * South Korea
                        * Philippines
                        * Taiwan
                        * Thailand
                        * Turkey
                      * Europe
                        * Albania
                        * Armenia
                        * Austria
                        * Belgium
                        * Bulgaria
                        * Croatia
                        * Cyprus
                        * Czech lands
                        * Denmark
                        * Estonia
                        * Finland
                        * France
                        * Germany
                        * Greece
                        * Hungary
                        * Iceland
                        * Italy
                        * Latvia
                        * Lithuania
                        * Luxembourg
                        * Macedonia
                        * Moldova
                        * Montenegro
                        * Netherlands
                        * Norway
                        * Poland
                        * Portugal
                        * Romania
                        * Russia
                        * Serbia
                        * Slovakia
                        * Slovenia
                        * Spain
                        * Sweden
                        * Switzerland
                        * Ukraine
                        * United Kingdom
                      * Latin America and the Caribbean
                        * Bolivia
                        * Brazil
                        * Chile
                        * Colombia
                        * Cuba
                        * Ecuador
                        * Honduras
                        * Mexico
                        * Nicaragua
                        * Panama
                        * Paraguay
                        * Peru
                        * Uruguay
                      * North America 
                        * Canada
                        * United States
                          * Modern
                      * Oceania 
                        * Australia
                        * New Zealand
                

Organisations|

                
                                      * Liberal parties
                      * Africa Liberal Network (ALN)
                      * Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE)
                      * Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party (ALDEP)
                      * Arab Liberal Federation
                      * Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats (CALD)
                      * European Democratic Party (EDP)
                      * European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
                      * International Federation of Liberal Youth (IFLRY)
                      * Liberal International
                      * Liberal Network for Latin America (Relial)
                      * Liberal South East European Network (LIBSEEN)
                

See also|

                
                                      * Bias in academia
                      * Regressive left
                      * Conservatism
                      * Socialism
                
                      * Portal
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Social and political philosophy

* * *

Ancient  
philosophers|

                
                                      * Aristotle
                      * Chanakya
                      * Cicero
                      * Confucius
                      * Han Fei
                      * Laozi
                      * Mencius
                      * Mozi
                      * Plato
                      * Shang
                      * Socrates
                      * Sun Tzu
                      * Thucydides
                      * Valluvar
                

Medieval  
philosophers|

                
                                      * Al-Ghazali
                      * Augustine
                      * Averroes
                      * Maimonides
                      * Marsilius
                      * Muhammad
                      * Nizam al-Mulk
                      * Thomas Aquinas
                

Modern  
philosophers|

                
                                      * Bakunin
                      * Bentham
                      * Bonald
                      * Bosanquet
                      * Burke
                      * Comte
                      * Emerson
                      * Engels
                      * Erasmus
                      * Fourier
                      * Franklin
                      * Godwin
                      * Grotius
                      * Hegel
                      * Hobbes
                      * Hume
                      * Jefferson
                      * Kant
                        * political philosophy
                      * Kierkegaard
                      * Le Bon
                      * Le Play
                      * Leibniz
                      * Locke
                      * Machiavelli
                      * Maistre
                      * Malebranche
                      * Marx
                      * Mill
                      * Montesquieu
                      * Möser
                      * Nietzsche
                      * Paine
                      * Renan
                      * Rousseau
                      * Royce
                      * Sade
                      * Smith
                      * Spencer
                      * Spinoza
                      * Stirner
                      * Taine
                      * Thoreau
                      * Tocqueville
                      * Vivekananda
                      * Voltaire
                

20th–21st-century  
philosophers|

                
                                      * Ambedkar
                      * Arendt
                      * Aurobindo
                      * Aron
                      * Azurmendi
                      * Badiou
                      * Baudrillard
                      * Bauman
                      * Benoist
                      * Berlin
                      * Judith Butler
                      * Camus
                      * Chomsky
                      * De Beauvoir
                      * Debord
                      * Du Bois
                      * Durkheim
                      * Foucault
                      * Gandhi
                      * Gehlen
                      * Gentile
                      * Gramsci
                      * Habermas
                      * Hayek
                      * Heidegger
                      * Irigaray
                      * Kirk
                      * Kropotkin
                      * Lenin
                      * Luxemburg
                      * Mao
                      * Marcuse
                      * Maritain
                      * Michels
                      * Mises
                      * Negri
                      * Niebuhr
                      * Nozick
                      * Nursî
                      * Oakeshott
                      * Ortega
                      * Pareto
                      * Pettit
                      * Plamenatz
                      * Polanyi
                      * Popper
                      * Qutb
                      * Radhakrishnan
                      * Rand
                      * Rawls
                      * Rothbard
                      * Russell
                      * Santayana
                      * Sarkar
                      * Sartre
                      * Schmitt
                      * Searle
                      * Shariati
                      * Simonović
                      * Skinner
                      * Sombart
                      * Sorel
                      * Spann
                      * Spirito
                      * Strauss
                      * Sun
                      * Taylor
                      * Walzer
                      * Weber
                      * Žižek
                

Social theories|

                
                                      * Anarchism
                      * Authoritarianism
                      * Collectivism
                      * Communism
                      * Communitarianism
                      * Conflict theories
                      * Confucianism
                      * Consensus theory
                      * Conservatism
                      * Contractualism
                      * Cosmopolitanism
                      * Culturalism
                      * Fascism
                      * Feminist political theory
                      * Gandhism
                      * Individualism
                      * Islam
                      * Islamism
                      * Legalism
                      * Liberalism
                      * Libertarianism
                      * Mohism
                      * National liberalism
                      * Republicanism
                      * Social constructionism
                      * Social constructivism
                      * Social Darwinism
                      * Social determinism
                      * Socialism
                      * Utilitarianism
                

Concepts|

                
                                      * Civil disobedience
                      * Democracy
                      * Four occupations
                      * Justice
                      * Law
                      * Mandate of Heaven
                      * Peace
                      * Property
                      * Revolution
                      * Rights
                      * Social contract
                      * Society
                      * War
                      * **more...**
                

Related articles|

                
                                      * Jurisprudence
                      * Philosophy and economics
                      * Philosophy of education
                      * Philosophy of history
                      * Philosophy of love
                      * Philosophy of sex
                      * Philosophy of social science
                      * Political ethics
                      * Social epistemology
                
                      * Category
                      * Portal
                

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                
                                      * BIBSYS: 90053132
                      * BNE: XX1025985
                      * BNF: cb11921130q (data)
                      * GND: 118903012
                      * ISNI: 0000 0001 2096 6986
                      * LCCN: n50054463
                      * LNB: 000045131
                      * MusicBrainz: 95b1f209-ccf9-4b11-a9e8-a768ec82c6dd
                      * NDL: 00962497
                      * NKC: jn20010906017
                      * NLA: 35866409
                      * SELIBR: 224163
                      * SNAC: w6fq9wp7
                      * SUDOC: 027089371
                      * ULAN: 500235748
                      * VIAF: 98139134
                      * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 98139134
                

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ayn_Rand&oldid=899879477"

Categories:

                
                                      * Ayn Rand
                      * 1905 births
                      * 1982 deaths
                      * 20th-century American dramatists and playwrights
                      * 20th-century American novelists
                      * 20th-century American philosophers
                      * 20th-century American women writers
                      * 20th-century American writers
                      * 20th-century atheists
                      * Activists from New York (state)
                      * American anti-communists
                      * American anti-fascists
                      * American anti-socialists
                      * American atheists
                      * American essayists
                      * American ethicists
                      * American people of Russian-Jewish descent
                      * American political activists
                      * American political theorists
                      * American science fiction writers
                      * Screenwriters from New York (state)
                      * American women activists
                      * American women dramatists and playwrights
                      * American women novelists
                      * American women philosophers
                      * American women screenwriters
                      * American secularists
                      * American writers of Russian descent
                      * Aristotelian philosophers
                      * Atheism activists
                      * Atheist philosophers
                      * Burials at Kensico Cemetery
                      * Critics of religions
                      * Critics of Marxism
                      * Epistemologists
                      * Exophonic writers
                      * Female critics of feminism
                      * Imperial Russian atheists
                      * Imperial Russian emigrants to the United States
                      * Imperial Russian Jews
                      * Jewish American dramatists and playwrights
                      * Jewish American novelists
                      * Jewish atheists
                      * Jewish philosophers
                      * Jewish women writers
                      * Metaphysicians
                      * Objectivists
                      * People of the New Deal arts projects
                      * People with acquired American citizenship
                      * Political philosophers
                      * Prometheus Award winners
                      * Pseudonymous women writers
                      * Pseudonymous writers
                      * Russian anti-communists
                      * Russian dramatists and playwrights
                      * Russian women essayists
                      * Russian women novelists
                      * Russian women philosophers
                      * Russian science fiction writers
                      * Russian screenwriters
                      * Russian women writers
                      * Saint Petersburg State University alumni
                      * Soviet emigrants to the United States
                      * American women essayists
                      * Women science fiction and fantasy writers
                      * Writers from New York City
                      * Writers from Saint Petersburg
                      * American abortion-rights activists
                      * Atheist writers
                      * Russian atheism activists
                      * Philosophers from New York (state)
                      * Novelists from New York (state)
                      * 20th-century Russian philosophers
                      * Lung cancer survivors
                      * Old Right (United States)
                      * 20th-century essayists
                      * Jewish anti-communists
                      * Jewish anti-fascists
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Articles containing Russian-language text
                      * Articles with short description
                      * Use mdy dates from October 2017
                      * Good articles
                      * Interlanguage link template link number
                      * Articles containing Hebrew-language text
                      * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013
                      * All articles containing potentially dated statements
                      * Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links
                      * Articles with Project Gutenberg links
                      * Articles with Internet Archive links
                      * Articles with LibriVox links
                      * Articles with Open Library links
                      * Articles with Curlie links
                      * Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with LNB identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
                      * AC with 16 elements
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                      * Wikiquote
                      * Wikisource
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Afrikaans
                      * አማርኛ
                      * Ænglisc
                      * العربية
                      * Azərbaycanca
                      * تۆرکجه
                      * Bân-lâm-gú
                      * Беларуская
                      * Bikol Central
                      * Български
                      * Català
                      * Чӑвашла
                      * Čeština
                      * Cymraeg
                      * Dansk
                      * Deutsch
                      * Eesti
                      * Ελληνικά
                      * Español
                      * Esperanto
                      * فارسی
                      * Français
                      * Frysk
                      * Galego
                      * 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺
                      * 한국어
                      * Հայերեն
                      * हिन्दी
                      * Hrvatski
                      * Ido
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Íslenska
                      * Italiano
                      * עברית
                      * ქართული
                      * Кыргызча
                      * Latina
                      * Latviešu
                      * Magyar
                      * മലയാളം
                      * मराठी
                      * Bahasa Melayu
                      * Nederlands
                      * 日本語
                      * Norsk
                      * Norsk nynorsk
                      * Novial
                      * Occitan
                      * Piemontèis
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Română
                      * Русский
                      * Scots
                      * Shqip
                      * Simple English
                      * Slovenčina
                      * Slovenščina
                      * کوردی
                      * Српски / srpski
                      * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                      * Suomi
                      * Svenska
                      * Tagalog
                      * தமிழ்
                      * ไทย
                      * Türkçe
                      * Українська
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * Yorùbá
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 23:21 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

