

Skip to Article

Menu

                
                                      * Home
                      *           * News › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Hurricane Central
                        * Weather
                        * Crime & Courts
                        * Traffic, Fires & Accidents
                        * Louisiana Politics
                        * Louisiana Elections
                        * National Politics
                        * Business
                        * Environment & Coastal Watch
                        * Health & Health Care
                        * Education
                        * One Tammany
                        * Opinions
                      * Sports › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Saints
                        * Pelicans
                        * LSU Tigers
                        * Tulane Green Wave
                        * Recruiting
                        * High School Sports
                        * Outdoors
                      * Entertainment & Living › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Music
                        * Festivals
                        * Movies
                        * TV
                        * Parties & Society
                        * Home & Garden
                        * Vintage New Orleans
                        * Arts & Stage
                        * Event Calendar
                        * Comics
                        * Puzzles
                        * MardiGras.com
                      * Where NOLA Eats
                      * Latitude
                      * 300 for 300
                      * The Children of Central City
                      * A Fragile State
                      * Special Projects › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Saving the Southern Wild
                        * Our Drowning Coast
                        * Cracking the Code
                        * 300 for 300
                        * Our Lost: The human toll of murder
                        * Family Sentence
                        * The New Orleans Gun Pipeline
                        * Hurricane Katrina
                        * Data & Databases
                      * Videos › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * NOLA.com
                        * Live Cams
                      * Obits
                      * Real Estate › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Real Estate News
                        * Real Estate Transfers
                        * Homes for Sale
                        * New Homes
                        * For Rent
                        * Foreclosures
                        * Commercial
                        * Resources › ‹
                          * Back To Main Menu
                          * Home Buying
                          * Sell My Home
                          * Rental Living
                          * Home Ideas
                          * Mortgages and Loans
                          * I’m Moving
                      * Jobs › ‹
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * Latest Jobs News
                        * Career Advice
                      * Autos
                      * Rentals
                      * Classifieds
                      * Local Ads
                      * Local Business Finder
                      * Email newsletters
                      * Mobile Apps
                      * Connect with our Newsroom
                      * Contact Us
                      * Subscriptions ›
                        * Back To Main Menu
                        * The Times-Picayune
                        * Email newsletters
                        * RSS Feeds
                        * Mobile Apps
                

Back To Main Menu Close

Customize Your Weather

Set Your Location:

Enter City and State or Zip Code

Congratulations!

Your weather is set to . You can change the location at any time.

AccuWeather.com Quick Look

Change your current location »

Current

Tonight

Tomorrow

View Full Weather Report

![nola’s

Logo](https://www.nola.com/pb/resources/dist/nola/images/logos/logo_main_inverse.svg)

Subscribe

                
                                      * The Times-Picayune
                      * Email newsletters
                      * RSS Feeds
                      * Mobile Apps
                

Sign In

Close

You are signed in as

Public Profile Edit Profile Sign Out

Search

                
                                      1. National Politics
                

# What do you call a doctor who performs abortions? | Opinion

Posted Sep 19, 2018

![This March 8, 2010 file photo show Dr. Kermit Gosnell during an interview

with the Philadelphia Daily News at his attorney's office in Philadelphia.

\(AP Photo/Philadelphia Daily News, Yong Kim, File\)

AP](https://image.nola.com/home/nola-

media/width600/img/national_politics/photo/kermit-

gosnell-f7558d4fb417628e.jpg)

This March 8, 2010 file photo show Dr. Kermit Gosnell during an interview with
the Philadelphia Daily News at his attorney's office in Philadelphia. (AP
Photo/Philadelphia Daily News, Yong Kim, File) AP

By Tim Morris, Columnist

This is not a trick question. Or at least it shouldn't be.

And it doesn't matter if you are for abortion rights or against abortion
rights. It is a question of whether the media is continuing to downplay or
sanitize one of the darkest, most heinous crimes in the era of legalized
abortion.

It begins with the makers of a new film seeking to buy a sponsorship on the
National Public Radio interview show "Fresh Air."

The proposed ad simply said: "Support for this NPR program comes from the film
'Gosnell: The Trial of America's Biggest Serial Killer.' The film is the true
story of abortionist Kermit Gosnell. A story the mainstream media tried to
cover up because it reveals the truth about abortion."

Gosnell ran an abortion clinic in West Philadelphia for more than 30 years
before investigators found that he had performed hundreds of late-term
abortions in filthy, unsafe conditions, often delivering live infants that he
would kill in horrific fashion.

If it rains where you live, you need flood insurance

One sensible solution is to include flood coverage with a homeowner's policy
unless the owner opts out.

He was eventually convicted in the deaths of three of those infants. The New
York Times reported the jury's verdict: "A doctor who was responsible for
cutting the spines of babies after botched abortions was convicted Monday
(Aug. 9, 2014) of three counts of first-degree murder in a case that became a
sharp rallying cry for anti-abortion activists."

Major news outlets at the time were criticized for ignoring or underplaying
the Gosnell investigations and the crimes, which included allegations that
Pennsylvania health officials intentionally ignored what was going on in
Gosnell's clinic. Everything, in other words, that the media usually rushes to
put on their websites.

John Sullivan, the executive producer of "Gosnell," which opens in theaters
Oct. 12, had already overcome resistance in getting the movie made, so he said
he was willing to work with NPR in getting the "Fresh Air" sponsorship ad
done.

According to e-mails provided to The Daily Beast, NPR's representative
presented the proposed ad to the network's legal department, which requested
some editing including that "The word 'abortionist' will also need to be
changed to the neutral word 'doctor.'"

Sullivan suggested using the term "abortion doctor" but NPR said it would only
accept the phrase "Philadelphia doctor Kermit Gosnell" as the description.

That was not acceptable for the filmmakers. "Our movie isn't about a
podiatrist or a cardiologist or a proctologist," producer Phelim McAleer told
The Daily Beast. "It's specifically about a doctor who performs abortions."

NPR's Senior Director of Media Relations Isabel Lara told the website that,
"Sponsor credits that run on NPR are required to be value-neutral to comply
with FCC requirements and to avoid suggesting bias in NPR's journalism."

What was not neutral about the term "abortion doctor"?

The Daily Beast points out that a search of NPR stories online turn up titles
like, "'Joyce Carol Oates' New Novel Begins With an Abortion Doctor's Murder'
and 'Abortion Doctor Killer Appeals to Kansas High Court.' NPR even did a
special series called 'Training the next generation of abortion doctors.'
Heck, there was even an NPR news story about Kermit Gosnell himself, and it
was headlined, 'Convicted Philadelphia Abortion Doctor Gets Life in Prison.'"

The Kermit Gosnell story makes supporters of abortion rights squeamish and has
helped fuel the efforts of state lawmakers to put more regulations on abortion
clinics. Abortion-rights supporters have condemned Gosnell as a rogue operator
and well beyond the norm of how the overwhelming majority of abortion clinics
operate.

That doesn't warrant the media's resistance to airing the newsworthy facts.
How is describing Gosnell as an "abortion doctor" wrong, inaccurate or
objectionable?

![false](https://www.nola.com/resizer/7eCxeiuMae6As2JebKHuovzRt_w=/307x0/advancelocal-

adapter-image-uploads.s3.amazonaws.com/image.nola.com/home/nola-

media/width2048/img/opinions_impact/photo/09brlsupresidentjpg-22b40d9f0670e296.jpg)

LSU isn't lowering standards, it's raising hopes

Sometimes working hard and playing by the rules can still get you
statistically eliminated.

The grand jury report on Gosnell concluded: "This case is about a doctor who
killed babies and endangered women. What we mean is that he regularly and
illegally delivered live, viable babies in the third trimester of pregnancy --
and then murdered these newborns by severing their spinal cords with scissors.
The medical practice by which he carried out this business was a filthy fraud
in which he overdosed his patients with dangerous drugs, spread venereal
disease among them with infected instruments, perforated their wombs and
bowels -- and, on at least two occasions, caused their deaths."

Gosnell was a monster. He also was an "abortion doctor." Arguing over "value-
neutral" words is an insult to his victims.

_Tim Morris is a columnist on the Latitude team at NOLA.com | The Times-
Picayune. Latitude is a place to share opinions about the challenges facing
Louisiana. Follow @LatitudeNOLA on_ _Facebook_ _and_ _Twitter_ _. Write to Tim
at tmorris@nola.com._

View Comments

## Footer Navigation

## Disclaimer

![Advance Local

logo](https://www.nola.com/pb/resources/dist/common/images/footer-logo-

advance.svg)

Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User
Agreement and Privacy Policy

(C) 2019 NOLA Media Group. All rights reserved (About Us).  
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted,
cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of NOLA
Media Group.

Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this
site.

![](https://www.nola.com/pb/resources/dist/common/images/ps-images/ad-choices-

arrow.png) Ad Choices

![Close button for the

advertisement.](/pb/resources/dist/common/images/icons/close.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

