

X

## Notice

Your privacy is important to us. We have updated our privacy policy to better
explain how we use data on this site. Read it here

Stay Connected:

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **New Jersey Edition**

  * The New Jersey Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Articles
  * People
  * Elections
  * Subjects

![Mostly True](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-mostlytrue.png)

![Smith](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/mugs/ttsmth00.JPG)

Says there have been "well over" 54 million abortions since 1973.

\-- Chris Smith on Thursday, March 8th, 2012 in a speech on the House floor

# Chris Smith says more than 54 million abortions have been performed since

U.S. Supreme Court decided Roe v. Wade

By Erin O'Neill on Sunday, March 18th, 2012 at 7:30 a.m.

![](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/photos/smith_house.jpg)

U.S. Rep. Chris Smith (R-4th Dist.) delivers a speech on the House floor on
March 8.

U.S. Rep. Chris Smith has garnered attention for his ardent -- and sometimes
graphic -- condemnation of abortion.

The Republican congressman, who represents parts of central New Jersey, took
to the House floor on March 8 to denounce a new proposal: "after-birth
abortion."

During his speech, Smith said: "since 1973" -- when the U.S. Supreme Court
handed down its landmark decision in the Roe v. Wade case -- "well over 54
million babies have had abortion forced upon them." Now, he said, this
"perverse proposal" for "after-birth abortion," or killing a newborn in all
cases where abortion is permissible, has emerged.

PolitiFact New Jersey will leave others to debate "after-birth abortion." We
decided to look only at Smith's claim about the number of abortions.

First, let's note that some abortion rights supporters contest using words
such as babies and children in describing unborn fetuses. Jeff Sagnip, Smith's
public policy director, dismissed that argument, saying "to object to the use
of the term 'babies' in this context is out of step with common use."

And it's clear Smith was referencing the number of abortions since 1973, so
that's what we are fact-checking here.

Sagnip referred us to a report from the National Right to Life Committee, a
group that opposes abortion, that claims there have been more than 54.5
million abortions through 2011.

The committee's total is based on data collected by the Guttmacher Institute,
a research group that advocates on issues of sexual and reproductive health.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also collect data on
abortions, but states aren't required to report to the federal agency so the
numbers are incomplete in some years. And people on both sides of the abortion
debate largely consider the Guttmacher Institute the authority for this type
of data.

The institute has tracked roughly 49.3 million abortions through 2008 from
surveys of abortion providers.

The National Right to Life Committee estimates the total through 2011 by
assuming the number of abortions in 2008 -- about 1.2 million -- stayed the
same. That puts the total near 53 million, a reasonable estimate, according to
a spokeswoman for the Guttmacher Institute.

But the committee also adds 3 percent for a possible under-reporting rate,
which pushes the total above 54 million.

The Guttmacher Institute found its 1992 survey overlooked some small providers
and suggested that the number of abortions was actually between 3 percent and
4 percent more than reported. In its most recent report, the institute said:
"undercounting has likely become more pronounced over the last decade" because
of early medication abortions at facilities that don't offer surgical
abortions.

Spokeswoman Rebecca Wind said the Guttmacher Institute "acknowledges the
potential underreporting in our abortion reporting, but we do not adjust the
figures to account for underreporting. Rather, we report the actual number of
abortions that are reported to us, so we are confident in this figure. We then
acknowledge the level of potential underreporting in the reporting of those
data."

**Our ruling**

Smith said that since 1973, when the Supreme Court handed down its decision in
Roe v. Wade, there 's been "well over" 54 million abortions.

The Guttmacher Institute has tracked roughly 49.3 million abortions through
2008\. If the recent trend of about 1.2 million abortions per year holds true
through 2011, it's reasonable to assume the total is now close to 53 million.
Even by that figure, Smith is close.

The Guttmacher Institute acknowledges the potential for underreporting in its
data, but does not adjust its figures. The statistic Smith cites relies
entirely on the Guttmacher Institute data, except it adds 3 percent to adjust
for the potential underreporting -- a calculation the institute doesn't
support.

Either way, both totals through 2011 are subject to projections and estimates,
and for that reason we rate this claim Mostly True.

To comment on this ruling, go to NJ.com.

Advertisement

### About this statement:

Published: Sunday, March 18th, 2012 at 7:30 a.m.

Researched by: Erin O'Neill

Edited by: Caryn Shinske

Subjects: Abortion, Supreme Court, Women

### Sources:

Congressional Record, The Premeditated Murder of New-Born Babies Justified as
Morally Equivalent to Abortion, March 8, 2012

PolitiFact Texas, Rick Perry says there have been 50 million abortions since
Roe, Feb. 1, 2011

Interview with Rebecca Wind, spokeswoman for Guttmacher Institute, March 13,
2012

E-mail interview with Michele Jaker, executive director of Planned Parenthood
Affiliates of New Jersey, March 13, 2012

E-mail interview with Jeff Sagnip, public policy director for U.S. Rep. Chris
Smith, March 13, 2012

E-mail interview with Derrick Jones, communications director for the National
Right to Life Committee, March 14, 2012

The Journal of Medical Ethics, After-birth abortion: why should the baby
live?, Feb. 23, 2012

National Right to Life Committee, "Abortion Statistics: United States Data and
Trends," accessed March 13, 2012

Guttmacher Institute, "Abortion Incidence and Access to Services in the United
States, 2008," March 2011

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Abortion Surveillance -- United
States, 2008," Nov. 27, 2009

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "CDC's Abortion Surveillance
System FAQs," accessed March 13, 2012

Guttmacher Institute, State Facts About Abortion: New Jersey, accessed March
13, 2012

New Jersey Right to Life, Statistics, accessed March 13, 2012

U.S. Supreme Court, Roe v. Wade opinion, decided Jan. 22, 1973, accessed via
Cornell University Law School website, March 13, 2012

### How to contact us

We want to hear your suggestions and comments. Email the Truth-O-Meter with
feedback and with claims you'd like to see checked. If you send us a comment,
we'll assume you don't mind us publishing it unless you tell us otherwise.

### Browse The New Jersey Truth-O-Meter

  * See all True rulings
  * See all Mostly True rulings
  * See all Half True rulings
  * See all Mostly False rulings
  * See all False rulings
  * See all Pants on Fire rulings

Advertisement

### Subscribe

#### Keep up to date with PolitiFact New Jersey

  * Sign up for our weekly email newsletter from Editor Angie Holan 
  * Sign up for our daily email newsletter and get our latest fact-checks delivered to your inbox
  * Follow us on Twitter
  * Fan us on Facebook

Back to top

__

![](https://static.politifact.com/images/POLITIFACT_logo_rgb141x25.png)

# Offices

  * **District of Columbia**
  * 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW
  * Suite 1300B
  * Washington, DC 20036
  * **Florida**
  * 801 Third Street South
  * St. Petersburg, FL 33701
  * 727-821-9494

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Rhode Island
  * Pennsylvania
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# Stay Connected

# Fact-Check Suggestions

(C)All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2019, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **New Jersey Edition**

  * The New Jersey Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Articles
  * People
  * Elections
  * Subjects

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-23nLlPXNTk7P6.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

