

Skip to main content

NHS homepage

Menu

Search

Search the NHS website Search

Close search

Menu Close menu

                
                                      * Home 
                      * Health A-Z 
                      * Live Well 
                      * Care and support 
                      * Health news 
                      * Services near you
                
                      1. Home
                      2. Live Well
                      3. Sexual health
                

Back to Sexual health

# Sexual health

**Main navigation**

                
                                      * Sex facts
                
                        * Female sexual problems 
                        * Sexual arousal in women 
                        * Male sexual problems 
                        * Sexual arousal in men 
                        * Benefits of love and sex 
                        * Masturbation Q&A 
                        * Sexual health FAQs
                
                        * Contraception guide
                
                      * Advice and support
                
                        * Talking about sex
                          * Before sex: what to ask your partner 
                          * Where can I get sexual health advice, now? 
                          * Good sex tips 
                          * Keep the passion alive 
                          * Sex as you get older 
                          * Sex after hysterectomy 
                          * Help after rape and sexual assault 
                        * Sex and young people
                          * 15 things you should know about sex 
                          * Boys' bodies Q&A 
                          * Girls' bodies Q&A 
                          * Fun with less risk 
                          * Open your eyes to STIs 
                          * Getting contraception 
                          * Condoms: know the facts 
                          * Are you ready for sex? 
                          * Am I gay, lesbian or bisexual? 
                          * Could I be pregnant? 
                          * Boys and puberty Q&A 
                          * Girls and puberty Q&A 
                          * When sex goes wrong 
                          * Will they tell my parents?
                        * LGB sexual health
                          * Sexual health for lesbian and bisexual women 
                          * Sexual health for gay and bisexual men 
                          * HIV and AIDS: what are the risks for gay men?
                
                        * Pregnancy and baby guide
                
                      * Genital health
                
                        * Penis health
                          * 5 penis facts 
                          * Penis size 
                          * How to keep a penis clean 
                          * Penis enlargement 
                          * Penis problems 
                        * Vagina health
                          * Is my vagina normal? 
                          * Keeping your vagina clean and healthy 
                          * Vagina changes after childbirth 
                          * Vagina problems
                
                      * STIs
                
                        * STI symptoms that need checking 
                        * Sexual health FAQs 
                        * Sex activities and risk 
                        * Visiting an STI clinic 
                        * Can oral sex give you cancer?
                
                        * Contraception guide
                

## Page contents

                
                                      1. What you can get from sexual health services
                      2. Help and advice on sexual health
                      3. Further information about sexual health
                

# If I use a sexual health service will they tell my parents?

**Find out about confidential sexual health services, including contraception,
testing for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and advice on unplanned
pregnancy, even if you're under 16 years old.**

Sexual health services (contraception and pregnancy advice, or tests for STIs,
including HIV) are free and confidential.

If you're 13 to 16, you have the same rights to confidentiality as an adult
and the doctor, nurse or pharmacist won't tell your parents, or anyone else,
as long as they believe that you fully understand the information and
decisions involved.

They'll encourage you to consider telling your parents or carers, but they
won't make you.

Even if the doctor, nurse or pharmacist feels that you're not mature enough to
make a decision yourself, the consultation will still be confidential. They
won't tell anyone that you saw them, or anything about what you said.

The only time a professional might want to tell someone else is if they
believe there is a risk to your safety or welfare, such as abuse. The risk
would need to be serious, and they would usually discuss this with you first.

The situation is different for people under 13, because the law says that
people of this age can't consent (say yes) to sexual activity. If you're under
13, doctors, nurses and health workers might feel it's in your best interests
to involve other people, such as a social worker.

## What you can get from sexual health services

If the healthcare worker feels that you understand the information and can
make your own decision, you can get advice on the following:

                
                                      * contraception
                      * emergency contraception (the morning after pill or an intrauterine device [IUD]) 
                      * condoms
                      * unplanned pregnancy
                      * tests and treatments for STIs, including HIV
                

## Help and advice on sexual health

For more information about sexual health services for young people, contact:

                
                                      * Brook – the young people's sexual health charity for under-25s 
                      * FPA – provider of information on individual methods of contraception, common STIs, pregnancy choices, abortion and planning a pregnancy 
                      * The National Sexual Health Helpline – on 0300 123 7123 (a confidential helpline)
                

## Further information about sexual health

Where to get contraception

It's OK to say no to sex

When sex goes wrong

Page last reviewed: 19/10/2018  
Next review due: 19/10/2021

                
                                      * NHS homepage
                      * NHS sites
                      * About us
                      * Contact us
                      * Profile editor login
                      * Sitemap
                      * Accessibility
                      * Our policies
                      * Cookies
                      * (C) Crown Copyright
                

Check here for alerts

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

