

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Debate

Arguments and Argumentation

# Why do we debate? Is there a point to it?

UpdateCancel

airOdgdCz dhbhyw CTfFWPpogorKvDgcObRJeukbtd fotOlLfyltu
WyEjUOcWmWZJptwbJXiwrVAreXyHekactAsb

The must-play city building game of the year.

Develop and advance an empire through historical ages and into the future.

PHDWtLlPQaoyhXhNK gjiGNXnKyonZavtwDFkG yGgObaQtOP
SnTfBMtQolqwVrCgWXwPgedpRIIokIKfqemmtSvxzpjdttDiFYrPewjsXQsvx.HcFuXhoEflmlQv

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Answer Wiki

4 Answers

![Mark Coveny](https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-345804759-100-suqqhmtziahqkeqtwfwrbdwutiuckhqi.jpeg)

Mark Coveny, Owner at ForDebating.com (2018-present)

Answered 64w ago

Answered 64w ago * Author has 234 answers and 62.3k answer views

Originally Answered: Why do we need a debate?

Simple answer = Because people will always disagree.

Debate is just a more formal way to disagree. Because it has rules and
structure it takes out much of the emotion in an argument or verbal fight.
This allows us to evaluate the merits of the claims more objectively and to
come to a better decision. Given that both sides want to “win” it encourages
them to find supporting research, experts in that field, or create examples
that show the logic (or illogic of their opponents) of the position.

So we need debate to teach us how to find the strongest points for our
position. We need debate to teach us how to research topics. We need debate to
teach us how to structure a position so that it’s organized and flows and that
an audience can understand it. We need debate to teach us the tricks that
other people use against us to get emotion responses. To see the gaps in logic
they present. To learn how to evaluate the supporting information of their
claims to see if it truly supports their position.

Every time you go for a job interview, go for a raise, make a life changing
decision, argue with your significant other, evaluate a politician’s speech,
or any of the hundreds of other things that impact your life you need debate
skills. Communication is the bedrock of our society and it’s worth your time
to learn to have better skills at evaluating it.

If you are interested in practicing debating, please come to ForDebating.com
it’s a free online debate website with 1v1 and 2v2 debate which last for 2 to
6 rounds. We have free cash prize debate tournaments, a bi-weekly discussion
page, quizzes, and forums.

1.2k views * View 1 Upvoter * Answer requested by

Firman Syahpoetera

svpzolstHnYWsRMmVoVKrMGcueWUCdhh fbJyQiE lwKSAcarkqdyNu

We’re building a community of people who can predict the future.

We are looking for people who can predict the future, possibly better than
experts can. Join Us at Scry.

LwysIdeQyaHgcbrrSYykndqHVx hkVfQMAHylHoJlrcsenNTh HxaKUZbytb
wsscAOJAArlszNeyk.XtiEcukuqYlIyHorZeBQuudt

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

                
                                      * What is the point of debates?
                
                      * Who do you want to see Ben Shapiro debate?
                
                      * Why is debate important?
                
                      * What are the basic points to remember during a debate competition?
                
                      * What do people debate about?
                

View more

### Related Questions

                
                                      * When should we use "debate about" and "debate on"?
                
                      * When do people debate?
                
                      * What is the point of using facts in debate anymore?
                
                      * What is the best point in debate?
                
                      * How do I debate?
                
                      * How can I start a debate with points?
                
                      * What's the reason debates matter?
                
                      * What's the point in debating with someone?
                
                      * What are some points which will help me win my debate?
                
                      * What is the mean point of debate?
                

### Related Questions

                
                                      * What is the point of debates?
                
                      * Who do you want to see Ben Shapiro debate?
                
                      * Why is debate important?
                
                      * What are the basic points to remember during a debate competition?
                
                      * What do people debate about?
                
                      * When should we use "debate about" and "debate on"?
                
                      * When do people debate?
                
                      * What is the point of using facts in debate anymore?
                
                      * What is the best point in debate?
                
                      * How do I debate?
                

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

