

![](/templates/images/logo_print.jpg)

**Family Law Self-Help Center - Overview of Termination of Parental Rights**

Menu

                
                                      * Community Resources
                      * References & Links
                      * F.A.Q.
                      * Contact
                

_Looking for something in particular? _ Search for it here

_Looking for something in particular? _ Search for it here

                
                                      * Home
                        * References & Links
                      * Self-Help
                        * About the Self-Help Center
                        * Getting Started
                          * Court Basics
                            * How Courts Work
                            * Types of Cases
                            * Services at Your Court
                            * Basics of Court Forms and Filings
                            * Filing Fees and Waivers
                          * Lawyers and Legal Help
                            * Free and Low-Cost Legal Help
                            * Finding a Lawyer
                            * Law Libraries and Self-Help
                          * Representing Yourself In Court
                            * Risks and Tips
                            * Going to Court
                          * Researching the Law
                            * Where You Can Go and What You Can Find
                            * Starting and Ending Your Research
                        * Divorce
                          * Overview
                          * Filing for Divorce Together
                          * Filing for Divorce on Your Own
                          * Responding to a Divorce
                          * Requirements for Parents
                          * Going to Court
                          * Getting the Final Decree
                          * After the Divorce: Changing or Appealing an Order
                          * Enforcing The Order
                          * References, Resources, & Links
                          * Divorce Forms
                
                        * Custody Paternity & Child Support
                          * Overview
                          * Filing for Custody, Paternity & Child Support
                          * Responding to a Custody or Paternity Case
                          * Important Requirements: COPE Class & Mediation
                          * Going to Court
                          * Getting The Final Custody Decree
                          * After the Final Order: Changing or Appealing an Order
                          * Enforcing The Order
                          * References, Resources & Links
                        * Temporary Protective Orders
                        * Guardianship
                          * Overview
                            * Purpose and Types of a Guardianship
                            * Who Can Be a Guardian
                            * Powers and Duties of a Guardian
                            * Who Must Be Told About a Guardianship
                          * Filing for Guardianship over an Adult
                          * Filing for Guardianship over a Child
                            * Temporary Child Guardianship (With Parents' Consent)
                            * Court-Ordered Child Guardianship
                          * Objecting to a Guardianship
                          * For the Guardian: Getting Additional Court Orders
                          * Terminating a Guardianship
                          * References, Resources & Links
                          * Guardianship Forms
                        * Adoption & Termination of Parental Rights
                          * Overview of Termination of Parental Rights
                          * How to File to Terminate a Parent's Rights
                          * How to Respond to a Termination of Parental Rights Case
                          * The TPR Hearing
                          * References, Resources & Links
                        * Name Changes
                          * Overview of Name Changes
                          * Name Changes for Adults
                          * Name Changes for Children
                          * Name Changes for an Entire Family
                          * Name Change Forms
                          * Birth Certificate Corrections
                        * Other Topics
                          * Separate Maintenance
                          * Domestic Partnership
                          * Annulment
                            * Overview of Annulment
                            * Filing for an Annulment
                            * Responding to an Annulment
                            * Getting the Final Annulment Decree
                            * References, Resources & Links
                            * Annulment Forms
                          * Out-of-State Custody Orders
                          * Visitation for Non-Parents
                          * For Active Military Service Members
                          * Emancipation of a Minor
                          * Juvenile Employment
                          * Civil Law Matters
                      * Courts & Case Lookup
                        * Look Up my Case
                        * District Court
                        * Nevada Supreme Court
                      * Forms
                        * Adoption & Termination of Parental Rights Forms
                        * Name Change Forms
                        * Miscellaneous Forms
                        * Divorce Forms
                        * Custody Paternity & Child Support Forms
                        * Legal Separation Forms
                        * Annulment Forms
                        * Motions & Oppositions
                        * Guardianship Forms
                
                      * Rules & Laws
                        * District Court Rules
                        * Supreme Court Rules
                        * Nevada Statutes
                        * Other Helpful Links
                      * Classes & Programs
                        * Free Ask-A-Lawyer Programs
                        * Free Classes
                        * Family Mediation Center
                        * COPE Class
                        * Interpreters
                        * Pro Bono Programs
                        * Civil Law Self-Help
                

Select
LanguageEnglishAfrikaansAlbanianArabicArmenianAzerbaijaniBasqueBelarusianBulgarianCatalanChinese
(Simplified)Chinese
(Traditional)CroatianCzechDanishDutchEstonianFilipinoFinnishFrenchGalicianGeorgianGermanGreekHaitian
CreoleHebrewHindiHungarianIcelandicIndonesianIrishItalianJapaneseKoreanLatvianLithuanianMacedonianMalayMalteseNorwegianPersianPolishPortugueseRomanianRussianSerbianSlovakSlovenianSpanishSwahiliSwedishThaiTurkishUkrainianUrduVietnameseWelshYiddish

Home | Self-Help | Adoption & Termination of Parental Rights | Overview of
Termination of Parental Rights

# Overview of Terminating Parental Rights

**The information on this page only applies if the child lives in Nevada.** If
the child lives somewhere else, check with your local court to find out the
laws and process to terminate rights.

### What is Termination of Parental Rights?

Terminating a parent’s rights means that the person’s rights as a parent are
taken away. The person is not the child’s legal parent anymore. This means:

                
                                      * The parent-child relationship no longer exists.
                      * The parent no longer gets to raise the child.
                      * The parent usually has no right to visit or talk with the child. 
                      * The parent no longer has to pay child support. 
                      * The parent is removed from the child’s birth certificate. 
                      * The child can be adopted without the parent’s permission.
                

Terminating a parent’s rights has been called the “civil death penalty” and is
taken very seriously by judges. Judges do not terminate a parent’s rights
unless there is a very good reason. This page contains answers to the most
common questions about terminating parental rights.

Who Can Terminate a Parent’s Rights?  
Can I Give Up My Rights?  
What Are the Reasons to Terminate a Parent’s Rights?  
Where Do I File?  
I Haven’t Heard From The Other Parent In Years. Is There A Fast Way To
Terminate Their Rights?  
Do I Need An Attorney?

#### CAUTION!

The information here applies to private terminations between family members
only. If you are involved with Child Protective Services ("CPS") with the
Clark County Department of Family Services ("DFS"), the state can ask the
court to terminate parental rights in very serious cases. There may be
different rules and procedures that apply in those cases. You can learn more
about CPS and DFS by visiting their website or visiting the Child Protection
page.

### Who Can Terminate a Parent’s Rights?

A parent, guardian, or other family member can file a petition asking to
terminate a parent’s rights. If the child or the petitioner receive public
assistance (such as TANF or SNAP), it is unlikely that a judge will terminate
the parent’s rights. In that event, the Child Support office must be notified
of a termination case and may oppose the termination if public assistance is
being provided.

If CPS has been involved with a family, the Department of Family Services
(“DFS”) can file a petition asking a judge to terminate a parent’s rights.
This usually happens after DFS has been involved with the family for a year or
more to try and fix the problems. If the parent does not make progress, or if
the problems are very serious, DFS can ask the District Attorney to file a
termination of parental rights case.

### Can I Give Up My Rights?

Usually not. Judges want children to have two parents to provide emotional and
financial support. You cannot give up your parental rights to avoid dealing
with a child’s behavioral problems, and you cannot give up your parental
rights to avoid paying child support.

You may voluntarily give up your parental rights if someone else wants to
adopt the child, or if someone else has filed a petition to terminate your
rights. You will typically need to go to a court hearing to let the judge know
your wishes in person.

### What Are the Reasons to Terminate a Parent’s Rights?

In Nevada, there are several different reasons a judge can terminate a
parent’s rights:

                
                                      1. _Abandonment_. This is behavior that shows the parent intends to give up all rights to the child. Usually, this means that a parent has not contacted the child and has not provided any financial support to the child for at least 6 months without a good reason.  
                      2. _Neglect_. The parent has not properly cared for the child’s needs, including providing food, shelter, medical care, education, or any other special care needed for the child.  
                      3. _The Parent is Unfit_. An unfit parent is one who can’t or won’t provide the child with proper care, guidance, and support.  
                      4. _There is a Serious Risk of Physical, Emotional, or Mental Injury if the Child is Returned to the Parent_. The child would be in danger with the parent.  
                      5. _Token Efforts._ The parent has made minimal effort to support the child, communicate with the child, or otherwise care for the child.
                      6. _Failure of Parental Adjustment_. If CPS removed a child from the home, the parent only has so much time to correct the reasons that caused the child to be removed. If the parents do not correct those problems within a “reasonable time,” the state can petition to terminate their rights.  
                      7. _Sexual Assault_.   If the child was conceived as a result of a sexual assault and the parent was convicted for sexual assault, their rights can be terminated.
                

**No matter what, the judge also has to decide that it would be in the
children’s best interest to terminate the parent’s rights**. The person asking
to terminate the parent’s rights has to prove by “clear and convincing
evidence” that one of the grounds above exists, and that termination would be
in the child’s best interest. This is a very high standard.

### Where Do I File?

You can file for termination in the District Court of the county where the
child lives. You can also file in the county where one of the parents lives.

#### WARNING!

**If the child is an American Indian child, these matters usually must be
handled by the tribal court**. Check with the tribal court before filing any
papers to be sure you are fiilng in the correct court.

### I Haven’t Heard From The Other Parent In Years. Is There A Fast Way To

Terminate Their Rights?

No. In fact, it may take longer to terminate their rights if you don’t know
where the parent is.

If you file a case against the other parent, you have to make sure that person
is “served” in person with copies of the legal papers you filed. This allows
the parent to show up in court and defend themselves if they want.

If you do not know where the other parent is, the judge will expect you to do
everything you can possibly do to find the parent. This includes checking with
mutual friends, their family, their employer, looking for the person online or
through email, etc. If you still cannot find the other parent, you can ask the
judge’s permission to post a notice in a newspaper instead. Judges do not
allow this unless you have really tried everything you can think of to find
the other parent without any luck.

If the judge allows you to post a notice in a newspaper, you will have to
publish a notice for 4 weeks AND ALSO have the parent’s nearest known relative
living in Nevada served in person with the papers.

### Do I Need An Attorney?

Terminating someone’s parental rights is a very serious matter. It is a good
idea to have a lawyer help you since there are complicated laws and procedures
that have to be followed. You can learn where to find an attorney on the
Lawyers & Legal Help page.

If DFS filed a case asking to terminate your rights, an attorney will usually
be appointed to represent you for free. If the other parent filed a case
against you, you should seriously considering hiring an attorney to defend
you.

                
                                      * About the Self-Help Center
                      * Getting Started
                        * Court Basics
                          * How Courts Work
                          * Types of Cases
                          * Services at Your Court
                          * Basics of Court Forms and Filings
                          * Filing Fees and Waivers
                        * Lawyers and Legal Help
                          * Free and Low-Cost Legal Help
                          * Finding a Lawyer
                          * Law Libraries and Self-Help
                        * Representing Yourself In Court
                          * Risks and Tips
                          * Going to Court
                        * Researching the Law
                          * Where You Can Go and What You Can Find
                          * Starting and Ending Your Research
                      * Divorce
                        * Overview
                        * Filing for Divorce Together
                        * Filing for Divorce on Your Own
                        * Responding to a Divorce
                        * Requirements for Parents
                        * Going to Court
                        * Getting the Final Decree
                        * After the Divorce: Changing or Appealing an Order
                        * Enforcing The Order
                        * References, Resources, & Links
                        * Divorce Forms
                
                      * Custody Paternity & Child Support
                        * Overview
                        * Filing for Custody, Paternity & Child Support
                        * Responding to a Custody or Paternity Case
                        * Important Requirements: COPE Class & Mediation
                        * Going to Court
                        * Getting The Final Custody Decree
                        * After the Final Order: Changing or Appealing an Order
                        * Enforcing The Order
                        * References, Resources & Links
                      * Temporary Protective Orders
                      * Guardianship
                        * Overview
                          * Purpose and Types of a Guardianship
                          * Who Can Be a Guardian
                          * Powers and Duties of a Guardian
                          * Who Must Be Told About a Guardianship
                        * Filing for Guardianship over an Adult
                        * Filing for Guardianship over a Child
                          * Temporary Child Guardianship (With Parents' Consent)
                          * Court-Ordered Child Guardianship
                        * Objecting to a Guardianship
                        * For the Guardian: Getting Additional Court Orders
                        * Terminating a Guardianship
                        * References, Resources & Links
                        * Guardianship Forms
                      * Adoption & Termination of Parental Rights
                        * Overview of Termination of Parental Rights
                        * How to File to Terminate a Parent's Rights
                        * How to Respond to a Termination of Parental Rights Case
                        * The TPR Hearing
                        * References, Resources & Links
                      * Name Changes
                        * Overview of Name Changes
                        * Name Changes for Adults
                        * Name Changes for Children
                        * Name Changes for an Entire Family
                        * Name Change Forms
                        * Birth Certificate Corrections
                      * Other Topics
                        * Separate Maintenance
                        * Domestic Partnership
                        * Annulment
                          * Overview of Annulment
                          * Filing for an Annulment
                          * Responding to an Annulment
                          * Getting the Final Annulment Decree
                          * References, Resources & Links
                          * Annulment Forms
                        * Out-of-State Custody Orders
                        * Visitation for Non-Parents
                        * For Active Military Service Members
                        * Emancipation of a Minor
                        * Juvenile Employment
                        * Civil Law Matters
                

## Family Courts and Services Center

601 N. Pecos  
Las Vegas, NV 89155

This website was designed and is maintained by Legal Aid Center of Southern
Nevada, Inc., a private, nonprofit, 501(c) (3) organization that operates the
Family Law Self-Help Center through a contract with Clark County, Nevada. This
website is intended to provide general information, forms, and resources for
people who are representing themselves in a Clark County court without a
lawyer. The information on this website is NOT a substitute for legal advice.
Talk with a lawyer licensed in Nevada to get legal advice on your situation.

lacsn

nevada

clarkcounty

                
                                      * Self-Help
                
                      * Forms
                
                      * Classes & Programs
                
                      * Links
                
                      * Courts & Case Lookup
                
                      * Resources
                
                      * Rules & Laws
                
                      * F.A.Q.
                
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Contact
                
                      * Facebook
                
                      * Twitter
                
                      * LinkedIn
                
                      * YouTube
                

Share

All content (C) Legal Aid Center of Southern Nevada 2019

Site by PROOF Interactive

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-93RVj0Mb0lDes.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

