

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Non-living Things

Living Things

DNA

Genetics and Heredity

Biology

# Is our DNA living or non-living? Why?

UpdateCancel

aojdOJ gybPDybRce mEERhyAhXIc NOZHTCFciSRMmGMtxeOuZpHgfiIveReOcHuveyCsAx

How can a regular person afford a millionaire watch?

This company figured out a way to make millionaire 6-figure watches for just
$1499. See how below.

LlVRkCenILaaksrovnnFcYut IfjpbMiunhhosFrsfgexKlz ATaEftwnVXS
QZydXeklrBfpaXHbtKtWkiVVUmJRyeSptzjvdiaedCcbedsViDrh.WrcdTQolvWmogNes

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Answer Wiki

7 Answers

![Pooja Rai](https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-157465142-100-wabqqvknalylktkoiyazdnmcstkyyrfp.jpeg)

Pooja Rai, Faculty at Aakash Institute (2019-present)

Answered 30w ago

Answered 30w ago

Depends. We cannot completely say DNA is non-living. If it is made up of
nucleotides, sugars, phosphates and hydrogen bonds, but look around what are
humans made of elements like carbon , hydrogen and oxygen, nitrogen, iron,
sulphur etc the list is endless if you are going to the molecular level of it.
Go through evolution, how the cell came into being on this earth. it was made
by molecules, then nucleic acids made RNA and then we had the first anaerobic
heterotroph after that through evolution DNA came.

DNA we cannot clearly specify as only non-living. Consider Viruses for a
change. Why canâ€™t we call viruses non-living?

because it consist of DNA or RNA that keeps it in the category of living too
apart from non-living category. At the end we humans or all organisms are made
of molecules but only difference is we can walk, talk, feel, etc. Reproduce
too but then again DNA produce other DNA by replication (semi-conservative
method) . DNA is a reason of our being. Yes it is born from nucleic acids,
nucleic acids produced from nucleotides, phosphate, these are then form from
elements and so on.

This debate can go on without a solution. So just consider DNA as a hereditary
material and stop wondering whether it is living or non living. For further
understanding read about fibonacci numbers, golden ratio.

all living things has come from molecules (so called non-living if you see the
evolutionary aspect of it) then you can consider DNA as non living.

173 views * View 1 Upvoter * Answer requested by

Shubham Yadav

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

                
                                      * What are the differences between living and non-living matters?
                
                      * Is DNA a living or nonliving material?
                
                      * What is difference between a living and non living DNA at atomic level?
                
                      * Can a DNA always live?
                
                      * Do any non-living things contain DNA?
                

View more

### Related Questions

                
                                      * What is the difference between living and non living?
                
                      * What is non-living bacteria?
                
                      * Are fruits living or non-living?
                
                      * What are non-living things?
                
                      * How can non-living things give birth to living things? Why is there life at all? What is life itself?
                
                      * What are non-living matters?
                
                      * Agriculture: Are seeds living or non living things?
                
                      * Can a living being come from something non-living?
                
                      * What is the relationship between living and non-living things?
                
                      * Are bacteria living or non-living?
                

### Related Questions

                
                                      * What are the differences between living and non-living matters?
                
                      * Is DNA a living or nonliving material?
                
                      * What is difference between a living and non living DNA at atomic level?
                
                      * Can a DNA always live?
                
                      * Do any non-living things contain DNA?
                
                      * What is the difference between living and non living?
                
                      * What is non-living bacteria?
                
                      * Are fruits living or non-living?
                
                      * What are non-living things?
                
                      * How can non-living things give birth to living things? Why is there life at all? What is life itself?
                

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

