
                
                                      * Billionaires
                
                        * All Billionaires 
                        * World's Billionaires 
                        * Forbes 400 
                        * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
                        * China's Richest 
                        * India's Richest 
                        * Indonesia's Richest 
                        * Korea's Richest 
                        * Thailand's Richest 
                        * Japan's Richest 
                        * Australia's Richest 
                        * Taiwan's Richest 
                        * Singapore's Richest 
                        * Philippines' Richest 
                        * Hong Kong's Richest 
                        * Malaysia's Richest 
                      * Innovation
                
                        * All Innovation 
                        * AI & Big Data 
                        * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
                        * Cloud 100 2018 
                        * Consumer Tech 
                        * Cybersecurity 
                        * Enterprise & Cloud 
                        * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
                        * Games 
                        * Green Tech 
                        * Healthcare 
                        * Oracle BrandVoice 
                        * SAP BrandVoice 
                        * Science 
                        * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
                        * Sharing Economy 
                        * Social Media 
                        * Venture Capital 
                      * Leadership
                
                        * All Leadership 
                        * Careers 
                        * CMO Network 
                        * Crowe BrandVoice 
                        * Deloitte BrandVoice 
                        * Diversity & Inclusion 
                        * Education 
                        * Entrepreneurs 
                        * ForbesWomen 
                        * Franchises 
                        * Leadership Strategy 
                        * Small Business 
                        * Under 30 
                        * Workday BrandVoice 
                      * Money
                
                        * All Money 
                        * Banking & Insurance 
                        * Crypto & Blockchain 
                        * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
                        * Fintech 
                        * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
                        * Investing 
                        * Markets 
                        * Personal Finance 
                        * Retirement 
                        * Taxes 
                        * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
                        * Wealth Management 
                      * Consumer
                
                        * All Consumer 
                        * Food & Drink 
                        * Hollywood & Entertainment 
                        * Media 
                        * Real Estate 
                        * Retail 
                        * SportsMoney 
                      * Industry
                
                        * All Industry 
                        * Aerospace & Defense 
                        * Energy 
                        * Flexport BrandVoice 
                        * Manufacturing 
                        * Policy 
                        * Transportation 
                        * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
                      * Lifestyle
                
                        * All Lifestyle 
                        * Arts 
                        * Boats & Planes 
                        * Capital One BrandVoice 
                        * Cars & Bikes 
                        * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
                        * Dining & Drinking 
                        * Forbes Travel Guide 
                        * ForbesLife 
                        * Watches & Jewelry 
                        * Travel 
                        * Vices 
                      * BrandVoice
                
                        * AppDynamics 
                        * Capital One 
                        * Cole Haan 
                        * Crowe 
                        * Deloitte 
                        * ExtraHop 
                        * Flexport 
                        * Impact Partners 
                        * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
                        * Oracle 
                        * SAP 
                        * ServiceNow 
                        * Workday 
                      * Lists 
                      * Advisor
                
                        * All Advisor 
                        * Credit Cards 
                        * Personal Loans 
                        * Brokerage 
                        * Checking Accounts 
                        * Savings Accounts 
                      * More
                
                        * 30 Under 30 2019 
                        * Daily Dozen Briefing 
                        * Forbes8 
                        * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
                        * Forbes Editors' Picks 
                        * Forbes Finds 
                        * Forbes Insights: AI 
                        * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
                        * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
                        * Forbes Video 
                        * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
                        * Newsletters 
                        * Tech MD 
                        * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
                

# Tracing Consciousness In The Brains Of Infants

![John

Farrell](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fjohnfarrell%2Ffiles%2F2015%2F12%2FJohn-

Farrell_avatar_1450819170-400x400.jpg)

John Farrell

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Science I cover science and technology.

                
                                      * Share to facebook __
                      * Share to twitter __
                      * Share to linkedin __
                

The study of infant awareness has long occupied Stanislas Dehaene, professor
of experimental cognitive psychology at the College de France. Dehaene heads
the Cognitive Neuro Imaging Lab there, where he works with his wife Ghislaine
Dehaene-Lambertz and their team to monitor the signs of consciousness in
adults and children.

Children present a particular challenge.

Stanislas Dehaene, author of Consciousness and the Brain.

INSERM

When does consciousness begin in human development? Are babies conscious? And
at what age-- twelve months? Five months? Sooner? Could they already be
conscious in the womb?

This may not be as far-fetched as it seems, according to Dehaene. The cortex,
the epicenter of human consciousness, starts to form by six months gestation.
Neuroscientists suspect from studies that even within the womb, in the late
stages of pregnancy, the fetus becomes familiar with the sound of its mother's
voice and may already be learning language.

While it's impressive that a fetus responds to the sounds of its mother's
voice while still in the womb, Dehaene points out that the brain can process
language without consciousness.

But, how would you test for signs of actual consciousness?

Dehaene believes that consciousness emerges from what he calls, 'the global
neuronal workspace' in the brain. It is a workspace that generates
consciousness when the different parts of the brain engage and communicate
with each other at a high level. But there is a threshold of activity that has
to be crossed before tests can demonstrate actual conscious perception.
Beneath this threshold there is evidence of information processing--but
without the test subject showing signs of being aware of it.

While consciousness and the mind are big topics in philosophy, they tend to be
treated in abstract terms, Dehaene says, and in his view philosophers of mind
do not engage enough with the ability of neuro-imaging technology to tell us
more about how our brains work when we are conscious.

In his 2014 book, Consciousness and the Brain, Dehaene explained how his
dissatisfaction with the philosophical approach to studying subjective
consciousness was a factor in inspiring his experiments.

To pin down consciousness in the lab, you need to catch it in the act of
access to an event or process. And for Dehaene this means engaging the test
subject in a way that unambiguously reveals conscious action--for example, by
reporting or indicating that they can visually make out an image flashed on a
screen.

To do this, Dehaene utilizes a combination of Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) and electro-encephalography (EEG) to measure what he calls the
signatures of consciousness.

One technique is called masking: you flash an image in front of the subject,
follow it quickly with another image, and if the conditions are right, they
don’t see the first image, they only see the second. During the tests the
adults are monitored either by fMRI or EEG. The advantage of the former, is
more refined 3-D detail of the location of activity in the brain, while the
advantage of EEG is better recording of the brain's electrical activity in
real time.

"What we found," said Dehaene, when we spoke via Skype, "is there are two
stages: there is a stage where the brain unconsciously processes the
information, it accumulates evidence about the nature of the initial image.
And then there is a stage where the brain decides, whether there is enough
evidence to call it ‘seeing’, in a certain sense."

In other words, the brain crosses a threshold, he said, when the test
subject's exposure to the image is long enough. Very short exposure, under 300
milliseconds, reveals a base level of activity on EEG, indicating the brain is
processing the information. But the subject does not indicate awareness.

But at longer duration, between 500ms and 700ms, for example, something
dramatic occurs--multiple parts of the brain 'light up' and the test subject
indicates his or her awareness of the image, either by pressing a button or
vocally reporting so.

"So there is a second wave which is completely non-linear," Dehaene said,
"where we either get a lot of activation, stable in time, and the subjects
say, 'I saw the picture', or we get very little activation, the brain waves go
back to zero basically, and the subjects say, 'I saw nothing.'

Once he was able to establish this marker, Dehaene and his team decided to do
the same tests in infants. "And this was done in collaboration with my wife
and with Sid Koudier, and it came out as a Science paper a few years ago ("A
Neural Marker of Perceptual Consciousness in Infants", Science, April 19,
2013, Vol. 340).

This involved several experiments with newborns, ranging between five months
and twelve months of age, to measure precisely whether their brains evince the
same indications of consciousness as adults do in similar tests.

The short answer is: they do.

In infants, of course, the scientists could not count on any verbal response.
"We didn’t have reports, all we had was the brain waves, showing the evolution
of brain activity as a function of the duration of the stimulus which was in
this case a picture of a face. The face is very attractive to infants, so we
knew they would be attracted to that."

Dehaene flashed the image of a woman's face, for different durations, some
short, some longer. "And we saw exactly the same phenomena as we did in
adults: that is to say, the early brain waves are linear as a function of the
amount of evidence that you give to the brain. So for even a short duration
you get a little bit of activation; a little bit longer you get a bit more
activation. It’s a linear phenomenon. "

But as they lengthened the duration of image exposure, they saw emerge the
same non-linear phenomenon as they had seen in adults: a late slow wave on the
EEG showing a nonlinear profile (lighting up) at the expected perceptual
thresholds.

To be sure, Dehaene and his team noted the infants responded more slowly than
adults: In five-month-old infants, at around 900ms the brain activity crossed
the threshold and the child's face turned toward the image. In older infants,
of twelve months, they reacted more quickly, around 750ms. But this was still
slower than adult subjects.

"So if the face (is flashed) long enough, we see long lasting brain waves,"
said Dehaene, "and the baby can turn. And if the face is too short (in flashed
duration), we still see the early brain waves but then they go to zero, and
the baby does not turn toward the face. "

"So we think that the signatures of consciousness are there. We saw that very
clearly in twelve-month-olds. So here I think there is absolutely no
ambiguity. We also saw it in five-month-olds, but it was a more sluggish
response, if you like, so it was less easy to see.”

The slowness is not a surprise at this stage. The brains of infants are still
quite immature. The major long-distance fiber tracts that form the adult
global workspace are already present at birth, as Dehaene points out in his
book. But they are not yet electrically insulated.

"The sheaths of myelin, the fatty membrane that surrounds the axons, continue
to mature well into childhood and even adolescence. Their main role is to
provide electrical insulation and, as a result, increase the speed and
fidelity with which neuronal discharges propagate to distant sites in the
brain."

The youngest infants that Dehaene has tested so far are two-month-olds. But he
believes it quite possible that consciousness begins at birth itself. Only a
few hours after birth, according to one recent study, he said, infants exhibit
sophisticated behavior such as being able to distinguish sets of objects based
on their approximate number.

If more research bears this out, the science will have implications for
ethical questions surrounding issues such as abortion and infanticide. Indeed
the latter, Dehaene notes with some concern in his book, has already been
advocated as perfectly ethical by some philosophers such as Peter Singer of
Princeton and Michael Tooley of University of Colorado, who deny that infants
have any conscious state that merits their protection as human beings under
the law.

In Dehaene's view, this is unacceptable. The brain deserves a better
philosophy than the brute utilitarianism championed by both philosophers, and
he notes neither based their arguments on any scientific data.

But the right experiments are crucial for questions just like this, he argues.
"Although the infant mind remains a vast terra incognita, behavior, anatomy,
and brain imaging can provide much information about conscious states," he
notes toward the end of his book.

And the signatures of consciousness, he argues, can and should continue to be
studied in human babies of various ages.

_Follow me on Facebook and Twitter. Subscribe to my Vimeo Channel._

![John

Farrell](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fjohnfarrell%2Ffiles%2F2015%2F12%2FJohn-

Farrell_avatar_1450819170-400x400.jpg)

John Farrell

Contributor

I write about science, technology and how they affect the planet's hairless
primates. In particular, how they affect the philosophies of said primates.
I've written for ...

Read More

                
                                      * Print
                      * Site Feedback
                      * Tips
                      * Corrections
                      * Reprints & Permissions
                      * Terms
                      * Privacy
                      * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
                      * AdChoices
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

