

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/pup_base/logo.svg)
![Home](/themes/custom/pup_irs/images/logo-print.svg)

Search

Include Historical Content

          * Any -No

Include Historical Content

          * Any -No

Search

## Information Menu

                
                                      * Help
                      * News
                      * Language 
                        * English
                        * Español
                        * 中文
                        * 한국어
                        * Русский
                        * Tiếng Việt
                      * Charities & Nonprofits
                      * Tax Pros
                

Toggle search __

## Help Menu Mobile

                
                                      * Help
                

MENU Toggle menu

Search

Include Historical Content

          * Any -No

Include Historical Content

          * Any -No

Search

                
                                      * File
                

##

Information For...

Individuals

For you and your family

International Taxpayers

Individuals abroad and more

Business & Self Employed

EINs and other information

Government Entities

Normal

##

Filing For Individuals

How to File

When to File

Where to File

Update My Information

Normal

##

Popular

Extension to File

Get Your Tax Record

Free File

Employer Identification Number (EIN)

Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN)

Popular

                
                                      * Pay
                

##

Pay By

Bank Account (Direct Pay)

Debit or Credit Card

Payment Plan (Installment Agreement)

Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS)

Normal

##

Popular

View Your Account

Withholding Calculator

Estimated Taxes

Penalties

Popular

                
                                      * Refunds
                

![Close-up of money](/pub/image/Sized_Refunds_image_60.jpg)

Where's My Refund?

##

What to Expect

Direct Deposit

Reduced Refunds

Fix/Correct a Return

Normal

                
                                      * Credits & Deductions
                

##

Information For...

Individuals

For you and your family

Business & Self Employed

Standard mileage and other information

Normal

##

Popular

Earned Income Credit (EITC)

Child Tax Credit

Standard Deduction

Health Coverage

Retirement Savings

Popular

                
                                      * Forms & Instructions
                

##

Forms and Instructions

Form 1040

Individual Tax Return

Form 1040 Instructions

Instructions for Form 1040

Form W-9

Request for Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) and Certification

Form 4506-T

Request for Transcript of Tax Return

Normal

##

Form W-4

Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate

Form 941

Employer's Quarterly Federal Tax Return

Form W-2

Employers engaged in a trade or business who pay compensation

Form 9465

Installment Agreement Request

Normal

##

Popular For Tax Pros

Form 1040-X

Amend/Fix Return

Form 2848

Apply for Power of Attorney

Form W-7

Apply for an ITIN

Circular 230

Rules Governing Practice before IRS

Normal

## Information Menu

                
                                      * Help
                      * News
                      * Language 
                        * English
                        * Español
                        * 中文
                        * 한국어
                        * Русский
                        * Tiếng Việt
                      * Charities & Nonprofits
                      * Tax Pros
                

## Main navigation

                
                                      * File
                      * Pay
                      * Refunds
                      * Credits & Deductions
                      * Forms & Instructions
                

## Info Menu Mobile

                
                                      * Help
                      * News
                      * Language 
                        * English
                        * Español
                        * 中文
                        * 한국어
                        * Русский
                        * Tiếng Việt
                      * Charities & Nonprofits
                      * Tax Pros
                
                      1. Home
                      2. News
                      3. Charities, Churches and Politics
                

# Charities, Churches and Politics

                
                                      * English
                

### More In News

__

                
                                      * What's Hot
                      * News Releases
                      * Multimedia Center
                      * Tax Relief in Disaster Situations
                      * Tax Reform
                      * Radio PSAs
                      * Tax Scams/Consumer Alerts
                      * The Tax Gap
                      * Fact Sheets
                      * IRS Tax Tips
                      * e-News Subscriptions
                      * IRS Guidance
                      * Media Contacts
                      * IRS Statements and Announcements
                

The ban on political campaign activity by charities and churches was created
by Congress more than a half century ago. The Internal Revenue Service
administers the tax laws written by Congress and has enforcement authority
over tax-exempt organizations. Here is some background information on the
political campaign activity ban and the latest IRS enforcement statistics
regarding its administration of this congressional ban.

In 1954, Congress approved an amendment by Sen. Lyndon Johnson to prohibit
501(c)(3) organizations, which includes charities and churches, from engaging
in any political campaign activity. To the extent Congress has revisited the
ban over the years, it has in fact strengthened the ban. The most recent
change came in 1987 when Congress amended the language to clarify that the
prohibition also applies to statements opposing candidates.

Currently, the law prohibits political campaign activity by charities and
churches by defining a 501(c)(3) organization as one **"which does not
participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of
statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any
candidate for public office."**

The IRS has published Revenue Ruling 2007-41, which outlines how churches, and
all 501(c)(3) organizations, can stay within the law regarding the ban on
political activity. Also, the ban by Congress is on political campaign
activity regarding a candidate; churches and other 501(c)(3) organizations can
engage in a limited amount of lobbying (including ballot measures) and
advocate for or against issues that are in the political arena. The IRS also
has provided guidance regarding the difference between advocating for a
candidate and advocating for legislation. See political and lobbying
activities.

Each election cycle, the IRS reminds 501(c)(3) exempt organizations to be
aware of the ban on political campaign activity. The IRS published its most
recent reminder in a public news release which you can read here.

The division within the IRS responsible for overseeing churches and charities
is the Tax Exempt and Government Entitities Division. TEGE has created a Web
page entitled Charities, Churches, and Educational Organizations - Political
Campaign Intervention. It is dedicated to the IRS most recent activities
related to 501(c)(3) and political activity.

A definitive court case on the issue of free speech and political expression
is Branch Ministries Inc. versus Rossotti. In that case, the court upheld the
constitutionality of the ban on political activity. The court rejected the
plaintiff church's allegations that it was being selectively prosecuted
because of its conservative views and that its First Amendment right to free
speech was being infringed.

The court wrote: "The government has a compelling interest in maintaining the
integrity of the tax system and in not subsidizing partisan political
activity, and Section 501(c)(3) is the least restrictive means of
accomplishing that purpose."

Page Last Reviewed or Updated: 30-Jul-2018

                
                                      * Share
                        *  Facebook
                        *  Twitter
                        *  Linkedin
                        *           * Print
                

![](/themes/custom/pup_base/images/irs_horiz-01.svg)

__

__

__

__

__

![IRS Eagle](/pub/irs_horiz_logo%20%281%29.svg)

## Our Agency

                
                                      * About IRS
                      * Work at IRS
                      * Help
                      * Contact Your Local Office
                      * Tax Stats, Facts & Figures
                

## Know Your Rights

                
                                      * Taxpayer Bill of Rights
                      * Taxpayer Advocate Service
                      * Accessibility
                      * Civil Rights 
                      * Freedom of Information Act
                      * No Fear Act
                      * Privacy Policy
                

## Resolve an Issue

                
                                      * Respond to a Notice
                      * Office of Appeals
                      * Identity Theft Protection
                      * Report Phishing
                      * Tax Fraud & Abuse
                

## Other Languages

                
                                      * Español
                      * 中文
                      * 한국어
                      * Pусский
                      * Tiếng Việt
                

## Related Sites

                
                                      * U.S. Treasury
                      * Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration
                      * USA.gov
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

