

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

                
                                      * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
                      * Skip to main content
                      * Skip to navigation
                      * Resources
                      * How To
                      * About NCBI Accesskeys
                

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

                
                                      * Advanced
                      * Journal list
                      * Help
                
                      * Journal List
                      * Indian J Crit Care Med
                      * v.13(1); Jan-Mar 2009
                      * PMC2772257
                

![Logo of ijccm](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-ijccm.gif)

Indian J Crit Care Med. 2009 Jan-Mar; 13(1): 7–11.

doi: 10.4103/0972-5229.53108

PMCID: PMC2772257

PMID: 19881172

# The diagnosis of brain death

Ajay Kumar Goila and Mridula Pawar

### Ajay Kumar Goila

**From:** Department of Anesthesia, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New
Delhi-110 001, India

Find articles by Ajay Kumar Goila

### Mridula Pawar

**From:** Department of Anesthesia, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New
Delhi-110 001, India

Find articles by Mridula Pawar

Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer

**From:** Department of Anesthesia, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New
Delhi-110 001, India

**Correspondence:** Dr. Ajay Kumar Goila, E-mail: ni.ten.lnsv.fdn@ogyaja

Copyright (C) Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## Abstract

Physicians, health care workers, members of the clergy, and laypeople
throughout the world have accepted fully that a person is dead when his or her
brain is dead. Although the widespread use of mechanical ventilators and other
advanced critical care services have transformed the course of terminal
neurologic disorders. Vital functions can now be maintained artificially for a
long period of time after the brain has ceased to function. There is a need to
diagnose brain death with utmost accuracy and urgency because of an increased
awareness amongst the masses for an early diagnosis of brain death and the
requirements of organ retrieval for transplantation. Physicians need not be,
or consult with, a neurologist or neurosurgeon in order to determine brain
death. The purpose of this review article is to provide health care providers
in India with requirements for determining brain death, increase knowledge
amongst health care practitioners about the clinical evaluation of brain
death, and reduce the potential for variations in brain death determination
policies and practices amongst facilities and practitioners. Process for brain
death certification has been discussed under the following: 1. Identification
of history or physical examination findings that provide a clear etiology of
brain dysfunction. 2. Exclusion of any condition that might confound the
subsequent examination of cortical or brain stem function. 3. Performance of a
complete neurological examination including the standard apnea test and 10
minute apnea test. 4. Assessment of brainstem reflexes. 5. Clinical
observations compatible with the diagnosis of brain death. 6. Responsibilities
of physicians. 7. Notify next of kin. 8. Interval observation period. 9.
Repeat clinical assessment of brain stem reflexes. 10. Confirmatory testing as
indicated. 11. Certification and brain death documentation.

**Keywords:** Apnoea test, brain stem function, brain stem reflexes,
confounding and compatible conditions

## Introduction

In the practice of critical care, 'the care of a severely brain injured
patient ' is one of the toughest challenges for a critical care physician.
Initial therapy provided for patients with severe brain injury or insult, is
directed towards preservation and restoration of neuronal function. When this
primary treatment is unsuccessful and the patient's condition evolves to brain
death, the critical care physician has the responsibility to diagnose brain
death with certainty and to offer the patient's family the opportunity to
donate organs and / or tissues.

There is a clear difference between severe brain damage and brain death. The
physician must understand this difference, as brain death means that life
support is futile, and brain death is the principal prerequisite for the
donation of organs for transplantation.

This review focuses on the clinical determination of brain death in adults and
children, including the potential confounding factors, and provides an
overview of valid confirmatory tests

## Evolution of the criteria for brain death

Historically death was defined by the presence of putrefaction or
decapitation, failure to respond to painful stimuli, or the apparent loss of
observable cardio respiratory action. The widespread use of mechanical
ventilators that prevent respiratory arrest has transformed the course of
terminal neurologic disorders. Vital functions can now be maintained
artificially after the brain has ceased to function. In 1968, an ad hoc
committee at Harvard Medical School reexamined the definition of brain death
and defined irreversible coma, or brain death, as unresponsiveness and lack of
receptivity, the absence of movement and breathing, the absence of brain-stem
reflexes, and coma whose cause has been identified.

## Definition

Brain death is defined as the irreversible loss of all functions of the brain,
including the brainstem. The three essential findings in brain death are coma,
absence of brainstem reflexes, and apnoea. An evaluation for brain death
should be considered in patients who have suffered a massive, irreversible
brain injury of identifiable cause. A patient determined to be brain dead is
legally and clinically dead.

The diagnosis of brain death is primarily clinical. No other tests are
required if the full clinical examination, including each of two assessments
of brain stem reflexes and a single apnoea test, are conclusively performed.

## Determination of brain death

### The process for brain death certification includes

                
                                      1. Identification of history or physical examination findings that provide a clear etiology of brain dysfunction.
                

The determination of brain death requires the identification of the proximate
cause and irreversibility of coma. Severe head injury, hypertensive
intracerebral hemorrhage, aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage, hypoxic-ischemic
brain insults and fulminant hepatic failure are potential causes of
irreversible loss of brain function.

The evaluation of a potentially irreversible coma should include, as may be
appropriate to the particular case; clinical or neuro-imaging evidence of an
acute CNS catastrophe that is compatible with the clinical diagnosis of brain
death;

                
                                      2. Exclusion of any condition that might confound the subsequent examination of cortical or brain stem function. The conditions that may confound clinical diagnosis of brain death are:
                
                        1. Shock/ hypotension
                
                        2. Hypothermia -temperature < 32°C
                
                        3. Drugs known to alter neurologic, neuromuscular function and electroencephalographic testing, like anaesthetic agents, neuroparalytic drugs, methaqualone, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, high dose bretylium, amitryptiline, meprobamate, trichloroethylene, alcohols.
                
                        4. Brain stem encephalitis.
                
                        5. Guillain- Barre' syndrome.
                
                        6. Encephlopathy associated with hepatic failure, uraemia and hyperosmolar coma
                
                        7. Severe hypophosphatemia.
                
                      3. Performance of a complete neurological examination. Components of a complete neurological examination are:
                
                        1. Examination of the patient-absence of spontaneous movement, decerebrate or decorticate posturing, seizures, shivering, response to verbal stimuli, and response to noxious stimuli administered through a cranial nerve path way.
                

During the examination spinal reflexes may be present.

                
                                        2. Absent pupillary reflex to direct and consensual light; pupils need not be equal or dilated. The pupillary reflex may be selectively altered by eye trauma, cataracts, high dose dopamine, glutethamide, scopolamine, atropine, bretilium or monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
                
                        3. Absent corneal, oculocephalic, cough and gag reflexes. The corneal reflex may be altered as a result of facial weakness.
                
                        4. Absent oculovestibular reflex when tested with 20 to 50 ml. Of ice water irrigated into an external auditory canal clear of cerumen, and after elevating the patients head 30'. Labyrinthine injury or disease, anticholinergics, anticonvulsants, tricyclic antidepressants, and some sedatives may alter response.
                
                        5. Failure of the heart rate to increase by more than 5 beats per minute after 1- 2 mg. of atropine intravenously. This indicates absent function of the vagus nerve and nuclei.
                
                        6. Absent respiratory efforts in the presence of hypercarbia.
                

Generally, the apnoea test is performed after the second examination of
brainstem reflexes.

The apnoea test need only be performed once when its results are conclusive.
Before performing the apnoea test, the physician must determine that the
patient meets the following conditions:

                
                                          * Core temperature ≥ 36.5°C or 97.7°F
                
                          * Euvolemia. _Option:_ positive fluid balance in the previous 6 hours
                
                          * Normal PCO2. _Option:_ arterial PCO 2 ≥ 40 mm Hg
                
                          * Normal PO2. _Option:_ pre-oxygenation to arterial PO 2 ≥ 200 mm Hg
                

After determining that the patient meets the above prerequisites, the
physician should conduct the apnoea test as follows:

                
                                      1. Connect a pulse oximeter and disconnect the ventilator.
                
                      2. Deliver 100% O2, 6 l/min, into the trachea. _Option:_ place a cannula at the level of the carina.
                
                      3. Look closely for any respiratory movements (abdominal or chest excursions that produce adequate tidal volumes).
                
                      4. Measure arterial PO2, PCO2, and pH after approximately 8 minutes and reconnect the ventilator.
                
                      5. If respiratory movements are absent and arterial PCO2 is ≥ 60 mm Hg ( _option:_ 20 mm Hg increase in PCO 2 over a baseline normal PCO2), the apnoea test result is positive (i.e. it supports the diagnosis of brain death).
                
                      6. If respiratory movements are observed, the apnoea test result is negative (i.e. it does not support the clinical diagnosis of brain death).
                
                      7. Connect the ventilator, if during testing
                
                        * the systolic blood pressure becomes < 90 mm Hg (or below age appropriate thresholds in children less than 18 years of age)
                
                        * or the pulse oximeter indicates significant oxygen desaturation,
                
                        * or cardiac arrhythmias develop;
                

Immediately draw an arterial blood sample and analyze arterial blood gas.

                
                                      * If PCO2 is ≥ 60 mm Hg or PCO2 increase is ≥ 20 mm Hg over baseline normal PCO2, the apnoea test result is positive (it supports the clinical diagnosis of brain death).
                
                      * if PCO2 is < 60 mm Hg and PCO2 increase is < 20 mm Hg over baseline normal PCO2, the result is indeterminate and a confirmatory test can be considered.
                
                      * When appropriate a 10 min. apnoea test can be performed after preoxygenation for 10 minutes with an Fi02 of 1.0 and normalization of patients PaCO2 to 40 mmHG.
                

### Assessment of brainstem reflexes

                
                                      1. Pupils- no response to bright light Size: midposition (4 mm) to dilated (9 mm) (absent light reflex - cranial nerve II and III)
                
                      2. Ocular movement- cranial nerve VIII, III and VI
                
                        * No oculocephalic reflex (testing only when no fracture or instability of the cervical spine or skull base is apparent)
                
                        * No deviation of the eyes to irrigation in each ear with 50 ml of cold water (tympanic membranes intact; allow 1 minute after injection and at least 5 minutes between testing on each side)
                
                      3. Facial sensation and facial motor response
                
                        * No corneal reflex (cranial nerve V and VII)
                
                        * No jaw reflex (cranial nerve IX)
                
                        * No grimacing to deep pressure on nail bed, supraorbital ridge, or temporo-mandibular joint (afferent V and efferent VII)
                
                      4. Pharyngeal and tracheal reflexes (cranial nerve IX and X)
                
                        * No response after stimulation of the posterior pharynx
                
                        * No cough response to tracheobronchial suctioning
                

### Clinical observations compatible with the diagnosis of brain death:

The following manifestations are occasionally seen and should not be
misinterpreted as evidence for brainstem function:

                
                                      1. spontaneous movements of limbs other than pathologic flexion or extension response
                
                      2. respiratory-like movements (shoulder elevation and adduction, back arching, intercostal expansion without significant tidal volumes)
                
                      3. sweating, flushing, tachycardia
                
                      4. normal blood pressure without pharmacologic support or sudden increases in blood pressure
                
                      5. absence of diabetes insipidus
                
                      6. deep tendon reflexes; superficial abdominal reflexes; triple flexion response
                
                      7. Babinski reflex
                

## Responsibilities of Physicians Determining Brain Death

The diagnosis of brain death is primarily clinical. No other tests are
required if the full clinical examination, including each of two assessments
of brain stem reflexes and a single apnoea test, is conclusively performed. In
the absence of either complete clinical findings consistent with brain death,
or confirmatory tests demonstrating brain death, brain death cannot be
diagnosed and certified. These guidelines apply to patients one year of age or
older.

### Notify Next of Kin

The facility must make diligent efforts to notify the person closest to the
patient that the process for determining brain death is underway. Consent need
not be obtained but requests for reasonable accommodation based on religious
or moral objections should be noted and referred to appropriate hospital
staff. Where family members object to invasive confirmatory tests, physicians
should rely on the guidance of hospital counsel and the ethics committee.

### Interval Observation Period

After the first clinical exam, the patient should be observed for a defined
period of time for clinical manifestations that are inconsistent with the
diagnosis of brain death. Most experts agree that a 6 hour observation period
is sufficient and reasonable in adults and children over the age of 1 year.
Longer intervals are advisable in young children.

### Repeat Clinical Assessment of Brain Stem Reflexes

The examination as described above should be repeated in full and documented.
When clinical circumstances prohibit completion of any steps in the clinical
examination, these should be documented.

### Confirmatory Testing as Indicated

When the full clinical examination, including both assessments of brain stem
reflexes and the apnoea test, is conclusively performed, no additional testing
is required to determine brain death.

In some patients, skull or cervical injuries, cardiovascular instability, or
other factors may make it impossible to complete parts of the assessment
safely. In such circumstances, a confirmatory test verifying brain death is
necessary. These tests may also be used to reassure family members and medical
staff.

Any of the suggested tests may produce similar results in patients with
catastrophic brain damage who do not fulfill the clinical criteria of brain
death. The confirmatory tests are.

                
                                      * Angiography (conventional, computerized tomographic, magnetic resonance, and radionuclide): Brain death confirmed by demonstrating the absence of intracerebral filling at the level of the carotid bifurcation or Circle of Willis. The external carotid circulation is patent, and filling of the superior sagittal sinus may be delayed.
                
                      * Radionuclide angiography (CRAG) does not adequately image vasculature of the posterior fossa.
                
                      * MRI angiography can be quite challenging in an ICU patient because of magnet incompatibility with lines, ventilator tubing and other hardware.
                
                      * Cerebral arteriography: This test is often difficult to perform in a critically ill, unstable patient.
                
                      * Electroencephalography: Brain death confirmed by documenting the absence of electrical activity during at least 30 minutes of recording that adheres to the minimal technical criteria for EEG recording in suspected brain death as adopted by the American Electroencephalographic Society, including 16-channel EEG instruments. The ICU setting may result in false readings due to electronic background noise creating innumerable artifacts.
                
                      * Nuclear brain scanning: Brain death confirmed by absence of uptake of isotope in brain parenchyma and/or vasculature, depending on isotope and technique used. ("hollow skull phenomenon").
                
                      * Somatosensory evoked potentials: Brain death confirmed by bilateral absence of N20-P22 response with median nerve stimulation. The recordings should adhere to the minimal technical criteria for somatosensory evoked potential recording in suspected brain death as adopted by the American Electroencephalographic Society.
                
                      * Transcranial doppler ultrasonography: Brain death confirmed by small systolic peaks in early systole without diastolic flow, or reverberating flow, indicating very high vascular resistance associated with greatly increased intracranial pressure.
                
                      * Since as many as 10% of patients may not have temporal insonation windows because of skull thickness, the initial absence of Doppler signals cannot be interpreted as consistent with brain death.
                

## Certification of Brain Death

Brain death can be certified by a single physician privileged to make brain
death determinations. However, before a patient can become an organ donor, New
York State law requires that the time of brain death must be certified by the
physician who attends the donor at his death and one other physician, neither
of whom shall participate in the process of transplantation. This requirement
ensures that all evaluations meet accepted medical standards, and that all
participants can have confidence that brain death determination has not been
influenced by extraneous factors, including the needs of potential organ
recipients.

When two physicians are required to certify the time of death, i.e., when
organ donation is planned, both physicians should affirm that the clinical
evaluation meets accepted medical standards, and that the data fully support
the determination of brain death. Generally, both physicians should observe
the patient, review the medical record, and note whether any additional
information is required to make a definitive determination. Neither physician
should certify brain death unless all aspects of the determination have been
completed.

_Medical Record Documentation_ : All phases of the determination of brain
death should be clearly documented in the medical record; The medical record
must indicate:

                
                                      * etiology and irreversibility of coma / unresponsiveness
                
                      * absence of motor response to pain
                
                      * absence of brainstem reflexes during two separate examinations separated by at least 6 hours
                
                      * absence of respiration with pCO2 ≥ 60 mm hg
                
                      * justification for, and result of, confirmatory tests if used
                

## Withdraw cardio-respiratory support in accordance with hospital policies,

including those for organ donation

When a patient is certified as brain dead and the ventilator is to be
disconnected, the family should be treated with sensitivity and respect. If
family members wish, they may be offered the opportunity to attend while the
ventilator is disconnected. However, family members should be prepared for the
possibly disturbing clinical activity that they may witness when organ
donation is contemplated, ventilatory support will conclude in the operating
room and family attendance is not appropriate.

## Appendix:

Determination of Brain Death in Children Less Than One Year of Age

                
                                      1. General Policy Statement.
                

The brains of infants and young children have increased resistance to damage
and may recover substantial functions even after exhibiting unresponsiveness
on neurological examination for longer periods as compared to adults. When
applying neurological criteria to determine death in children younger than one
year, longer observation periods are required.

                
                                      2. The patient must not be significantly hypothermic or hypotensive for age.
                
                      3. Observation Periods According to Age.
                

The recommended observation period depends on the age of the patient and the
laboratory tests utilized. It is assumed that the child was born at full term
Between the ages of 2 months and 1 year, an interval of at least 24 hours
should be used. Between the ages of 7 days and 2 months, the minimum interval
should be 48 hours.

                
                                      1. Reliable criteria have not been established for the determination of brain death in children less than 7 days old.
                
                      2. Seven days to two months: Two examinations and electroencephalograms (EEGs) should be separated by at least 48 hours.
                
                      3. Two months to one year: Two examinations and EEGs should be separated by at least 24 hours. A repeat examination and EEG are not necessary if a concomitant radionuclide (CRAG) or other angiographic study demonstrates no visualization of cerebral arteries.
                

## Footnotes

**Source of Support:** Nil

**Conflict of Interest:** None declared.

## Bibliography

          1. Uniform Determination of Death Act, 12 Uniform Laws Annotated (U.L.A.) (West 1993 and West Supp 1997)

          2. Guidelines for the determination of death: Report of the medical consultants on the diagnosis of death to the President's commission for the study of ethical problems in medicine and biomedical and behavioral research. JAMA. 1981;246:2184–6. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          3. The Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Practice parameters: Determining brain death in adults. Neurology. 1995;45:1012–4. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          4. Florida State Statutes. Available from: http://www.leg.state.fl.us/statutes [cited in 2004]

          5. > Withholding and withdrawal of life sustaining equipment: Patient with brain death for adults and minors. Orlando regional healthcare policy #1725. Revision date 1/04. [Google Scholar]

          6. Wijdicks EF. Determining brain death in adults. Neurology. 1995;45:1003–11. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          7. Wijdicks EF. The diagnosis of brain death. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1215–21. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          8. Belsh JM, Blatt R, Schiffman PL. Apnea testing in brain death. Arch Intern Med. 1986;146:2385–8. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          9. Goudreau JL, Wijdicks EF, Emery SF. Complications during apnea testing in the determination of brain death: Predisposing factors. Neurology. 2000;55:1045–8. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          10. Sapsosnik G, Rizzo G, Vega A, Sabbatiello R, Deluca JL. Problems associated with the apnea test in the diagnosis of brain death. Neurol India. 2004;52:342–5. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

          11. Willatts SM, Drummond G. Brainstem death and ventilator trigger settings. Anesthesia. 2000;55:676–7. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

* * *

Articles from Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine : Peer-reviewed,
Official Publication of Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine are provided
here courtesy of **Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishing (P) Ltd.**

## Formats:

                
                                      * Article
                

|

                
                                      * PubReader
                

|

                
                                      * ePub (beta)
                

|

                
                                      * Printer Friendly
                

|

                
                                      * Citation
                

## Share

                
                                      * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
                      * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
                      * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+
                

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=ijccm&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC2772257/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

