

![TIME](data:image/png;base64,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)

## Time.com

MY ACCOUNT SIGN IN SIGN OUT SUBSCRIBE SUBSCRIBE

Home U.S. Politics World Business Tech Health TIME Health Entertainment
Science Newsfeed Living Sports History The TIME Vault Magazine Ideas TIME Labs

Photography Videos The Goods Shop TIME Press Room TIME Guide to Happiness

The 100 Most Influential People American Voices The Breakdown Finding Home The
Influencers Looking Forward Next Generation Leaders Person of the Year Top of
the World

Subscribe Newsletters Feedback Privacy Policy Your California Privacy Rights
Terms of Use Ad Choices ![Ad

Choices](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAwAAAANCAMAAACq939wAAAAM1BMVEUAAAD///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////+3leKCAAAAEHRSTlMAECAwQFBgcICPn6+/z9/vIxqCigAAAFZJREFUCB0FwQECwiAMBLCw4axS4f7/WhMn3wtAknwGIL/ZOTVAmmdnP5D2ZNbJnqTda7hW8pX2zs21E2mVOSrZU1plnewHaZWcGpDT1TWAJC8Aa90A/nKrBC08aQTRAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

RSS TIME Apps TIME for Kids Advertising Reprints and Permissions Site Map Help
Customer Service (C) 2019 TIME USA, LLC. All rights reserved.

Subscribe

Sign InSubscribe

![Family Matters](http://timewellness.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/banner-

familymatters.png?w=714)

### Pediatric Genetics

# Scientists Decode an Unborn Baby's DNA. Is It Cause for Celebration — or

Alarm?

Researchers at the University of Washington have sequenced the entire genome
of a fetus. The scientific advance could help detect certain diseases in the
womb, but some experts worry that the trove of genetic information may prove
more scary and overwhelming than useful.

By Bonnie Rochman @brochmanJune 06, 2012

                
                                      * Share
                        *             *             *             *             *             * ![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/pidgets/pin_it_button.png)
                      * Read Later
                        * ![](https://d1xnn692s7u6t6.cloudfront.net/white-15.png)Send to Kindle
                
                        *             * ![57012113](https://timewellness.files.wordpress.com/2012/06/57012113.jpg?w=480&h=320&crop=1)
                

JGI / Getty Images

### Related

                
                                      * New Testing Could Help Spot Genetic Disorders in a Fetus  _HealthNewsDaily_
                      * Using Parents' Blood to Decode the Genome of a Fetus _MIT Technology Review_
                      * Baby Genome Mapped in Womb _ABC News_
                      * Blood Test May Spot Genetic Disease in Fetuses _WebMD_
                
                      * Email
                      * Print
                      * Share
                        * Facebook
                        * Twitter
                        * Tumblr
                        * LinkedIn
                        * StumbleUpon
                        * Reddit
                        * Digg
                        * Mixx
                        * Delicious
                        * Google+
                

Follow @TIMEHealth

Suspended in the blood of a pregnant woman — along with some added information
from a dad-to-be’s saliva — lurks enough fetal DNA to map out an unborn baby’s
entire genetic blueprint.

It may sound like something conjured by Jules Verne, but it happened at the
University of Washington: a professor and his graduate student used DNA
samples from the parents of a baby boy who was still in utero and
reconstructed his entire genetic makeup from A to Z.

The account, published Wednesday in _Science Translational Medicine_ , takes
prenatal testing to new heights, promising a motherlode of genetic information
about a child who had not even been born — along with a corresponding trove of
data that even experts don’t yet know how to interpret.

Jacob Kitzman, lead author and a graduate student in the department of genome
sciences at the University of Washington (UW), was excited but cautious about
his team’s achievement. “There have been a lot of steps toward this, but this
is the first time capturing the whole genome,” says Kitzman. “The fact that
this technology is now on the path to becoming clinically feasible is a good
opportunity for a broader discussion of the implications.”

Figuring out how to communicate the vast cache of information uncovered by
genome sequencing remains controversial, since much of it still isn’t
clinically useful. But although researchers don’t understand the significance
of the entirety of the information revealed through whole-genome sequencing,
they do know that certain genes are responsible for Mendelian, or more simple,
single-gene disorders — that includes more than 3,000 conditions such as
cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease and some muscular dystrophies that affect
1% of pregnancies. Prenatal sequencing would allow parents to learn before
delivery if their child has one of these diseases, many of which are
debilitating or fatal. While genetic screening of parents before pregnancy can
also identify carriers, and an increasing number of prenatal DNA-based tests
can determine early in pregnancy whether developing babies have specific
conditions such as Down syndrome, whole-genome sequencing is the most
sophisticated way to examine a person’s entire genetic code.

( **MORE:** Down Syndrome: With Breakthroughs in Testing, a Choice Becomes
Tougher)

Prenatal genome sequencing could potentially replace more invasive procedures
such as amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling to detect recessive
Mendelian disorders — on average, we all carry 20 to 30 recessive genes — but
it is not yet precise enough to take the place of these tests when looking for
other chromosomal conditions. Nor is it a foolproof gauge of risk for many
other “complex” diseases — a category that includes most cancers and common
conditions such as diabetes and heart disease — because they’re influenced by
multiple genes and environmental factors. “Great,” says Thomas Murray,
president of the Hastings Center bioethics institute, “we can sequence the
genome of a fetus. What the hell does it tell us? Much less than most people
probably believe.”

Kitzman concurs. “It’s a really big challenge for the field, figuring out how
to communicate to clinicians not only the results but the uncertainty that
goes along with those results,” he says. “There’s no easy answer.”

In this particular situation, Kitzman and Jay Shendure, an associate professor
of genome sciences at UW, sidestepped the thorny issue of assessing disease
risk and sharing that information with parents because the expectant couple
was anonymous. Kitzman doesn’t know their identity, only that they consented
to have their biological samples used for genome sequencing. Their son was
born healthy and full-term.

From a blood sample the mother gave at 18 weeks of pregnancy, researchers
homed in on fetal DNA floating in her plasma; the father contributed a saliva
sample. Researchers sequenced the parents’ genomes, learning which genetic
variants each had; all parents have a 50/50 chance of passing along a variant
to their child. There can be millions of variants from genome to genome,
although most have no clinical significance. But a tiny proportion of these
variants, or markers, result in devastating diseases when they fall within a
gene that scientists know is connected to a genetic disorder.

( **MORE:** Genetic Testing for Kids: Is It a Good Idea?)

Using the parents’ DNA sequences and their unique variants, researchers pieced
together a reconstruction of what they believed the fetus’ genome looked like,
including 39 “de novo” mutations, which were unique to the baby and not
inherited from either parent. Children inherit most, but not all, of their
genetic variants from their parents; some arise spontaneously. That, plus the
fact that the mother’s blood sample contained a lot of her DNA and just a bit
of her baby’s made it tricky to sort out with absolute certainty which DNA
belonged to her and which to her child.

After the baby was born, they used his umbilical cord blood — which contained
only his DNA — to sequence his genome more precisely. They found that the
prenatal reconstruction was more than 98% accurate when compared to the actual
postnatal sequence, although it missed five de novo mutations.

The genome of a second baby was sequenced with maternal blood drawn much
earlier in pregnancy, at eight weeks, when less fetal DNA was circulating.
That sequence was 92% accurate.

Now that infant genomes have been charted, it’s fairly certain that the next
phase will involve companies seeking to commercialize the technology and
market a single comprehensive prenatal screen for thousands of disorders.
What’s less certain is how parents will respond. Although the price of genome
sequencing has plummeted from billions of dollars when the first sequence was
completed a decade ago to $4,000 today, that’s still a lot of money for a
procedure that insurance doesn’t cover. And the sheer data dump may prove
overwhelming. “It really comes down to providing more information for
parents,” says Kitzman.

**MORE:** Do All Women Need Genetic Testing Before Pregnancy?

### Bonnie Rochman @brochman

Bonnie Rochman writes about pregnancy, fertility, parenting — the ups and
downs of being a kid and having one — for TIME.

### SubscribePopular Among Subscribers

![](http://img.timeinc.net/time/daily/2008/0806/a_postcard_tokyo_0617.jpg)

#### Japan's Booming Sex Niche: Elder Porn

![](http://img.timeinc.net/time/daily/2014/1402/wkids_0303.jpg)

#### Young Kids, Old Bodies

![](http://img.timeinc.net/time/daily/2013/1310/int_cover_1028.jpg)

#### Benedict Cumberbatch Talks Secrets, Leaks, and Sherlock

![](http://img.timeinc.net/time/daily/2014/1402/cover_0310.jpg)

#### Obama's Trauma Team

Get all access to digital and printSubscribe

                
                                      * Most Popular
                      * From Health & Family
                
                      1. 5 Things You Should Know About Chicken Pox and Shingles
                      2. Penis Size: It May Be Written in the Length of His Fingers
                      3. A 6-Year-Old Boy Becomes a Girl: Do Schools Need New Rules for Transgender Students?
                      4. 13 Reasons Tea Is Good for You
                      5. It's True. You Can Get Throat Cancer From Oral Sex
                

From Time.com

### Connect With TIME

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * Home
                      * U.S.
                      * Politics
                      * World
                      * Business
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Science
                      * Entertainment
                      * Newsfeed
                      * Living
                      * Ideas
                      * Parents
                      * Sports
                      * History
                      * The TIME Vault
                      * Magazine
                      * Subscribe
                      * Give a Gift
                      * The Goods
                      * Shop TIME
                      * Press Room
                      * Newsletters
                      * Customer Service
                      * Site Map
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Your California Privacy Rights
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Advertising
                      * Ad Choices ![Ad Choices](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAwAAAANCAMAAACq939wAAAAM1BMVEUAAAD///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////+3leKCAAAAEHRSTlMAECAwQFBgcICPn6+/z9/vIxqCigAAAFZJREFUCB0FwQECwiAMBLCw4axS4f7/WhMn3wtAknwGIL/ZOTVAmmdnP5D2ZNbJnqTda7hW8pX2zs21E2mVOSrZU1plnewHaZWcGpDT1TWAJC8Aa90A/nKrBC08aQTRAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)
                      * Careers
                

(C) 2019 TIME USA, LLC. All rights reserved.

![](http://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

