

Fox News

                
                                      * U.S.
                      * World
                      * Opinion
                      * Politics
                      * Entertainment
                      * Business
                      * Lifestyle
                      * TV
                      * Fox Nation
                      * Listen
                      * More
                

Expand / Collapse search

Login

Watch TV

☰

Hot Topics

###### U.S.

                
                                      * Crime
                      * Military
                      * Education
                      * Terror
                      * Immigration
                      * Economy
                      * Personal Freedoms
                      * Fox News Investigates
                

###### World

                
                                      * U.N.
                      * Conflicts
                      * Terrorism
                      * Disasters
                      * Global Economy
                      * Environment
                      * Religion
                      * Scandals
                

###### Opinion

###### Politics

                
                                      * Executive
                      * Senate
                      * House
                      * Judiciary
                      * Foreign policy
                      * Polls
                      * Elections
                

###### Entertainment

                
                                      * Celebrity News
                      * Movies
                      * TV News
                      * Music News
                      * Style News
                      * Entertainment Video
                

###### Business

                
                                      * Markets
                      * Politics
                      * Technology
                      * Features
                      * Business Leaders
                

###### Lifestyle

                
                                      * Food + Drink
                      * Cars + Trucks
                      * Travel + Outdoors
                      * House + Home
                      * Fitness + Well-being
                      * Style + Beauty
                      * Family
                

###### Science

                
                                      * Archaeology
                      * Air & Space
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Wild Nature
                      * Natural Science
                      * Dinosaurs
                

###### Tech

                
                                      * Security
                      * Innovation
                      * Drones
                      * Computers
                      * Video Games
                      * Military Tech
                

###### Health

                
                                      * Healthy Living
                      * Medical Research
                      * Mental Health
                      * Cancer
                      * Heart Health
                      * Children's Health
                

###### TV

                
                                      * Shows
                      * Personalities
                      * Watch Live
                      * Full Episodes
                      * Show Clips
                      * News Clips
                

###### About

                
                                      * Careers
                      * College Students
                      * Fox Around the World
                      * Advertise With Us
                      * Ad Choices
                      * Media Relations
                      * Compliance
                

###### Other

                
                                      * Fox Nation
                      * Fox News Shop
                      * Fox News Go
                      * Fox News Radio
                      * Fox News Insider
                      * Newsletters
                      * Alerts
                      * Podcasts
                      * Apps & Products
                

Fox News

                
                                      * Terms of Use
                      * Updated Privacy Policy(What's Changed)
                      * Closed Captioning Policy
                      * Help
                      * Contact Us
                

This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
©2019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20
minutes.

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Google+
                      * Instagram
                      * RSS
                      * Email
                

ADVERTISEMENT

HEALTH

**Published** June 8, 2017

# Study finds teen pregnancy rates drop as government funding of sex ed

decreases

By Jennifer G. Hickey, | Fox News

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Flipboard
                      * Print
                      * Email
                

close

![Calif. parents outraged over high school's sex ed

class](https://a57.foxnews.com/a57.foxnews.com/media2.foxnews.com/thumbnails/i/121114/640/360/931/524/ff_classroom_121114.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
Video

#### Calif. parents outraged over high school's sex ed class

Parents concerned about Planned Parenthood's methods

The reigning orthodoxy among public health officials is that the more
government spends on sex education the fewer teen pregnancies there will be.
Now, however, British researchers have found empirical evidence that appears
to demonstrate the exact opposite.

In findings published in the Journal of Health Economics, Nottingham
University Business School Professor David Paton and Liam Wright, a research
assistant at the University of Sheffield, found budget cuts to sex education
classes may have contributed to lower rates of teenage pregnancy in England.

Paton's study compared changes in the rate of teen pregnancy with the change
in the annual funding of teenage pregnancy services for 149 English local
authorities between 2008 and 2014.

To their surprise, the researchers found that after sex education budgets were
slashed, teen pregnancy rates fell by 42.6 percent.

"There are arguments to suggest that the impact [of budget cutbacks] on
teenage pregnancy may be not as bad as feared," conclude Wright and Patom in
the study.

For teens under 18 years of age, the conception rate in Britain declined by
nearly 50 percent between 2007 and 2015. While the United States compiles data
on the number of births, the United Kingdom counts conceptions, including
those which end in abortion. They do not factor in conceptions that end in
miscarriages.

![](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2018/09/640/320/sex_education_istock.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)

Like their U.S. cohorts, British sex education advocates attributed the
decline to increased government investment through the 1999 Teenage Pregnancy
Strategy, which boosted funding to initiatives that expanded access to birth
control and sex education courses.

"If the programs which were cut had been successful in delaying sex, this
would likely have fed through to pregnancy rates. So our findings suggest that
they were not doing so and, by implication, that cutting some of these
programs led to a reduction in teen sexual activity," Paton tells Fox News.

Paton makes clear their research does not argue that budget cuts reduce teen
pregnancies. The key lesson for policymakers, he says, is that it would be
more productive to focus on the underlying causes (poverty and levels of
education) of teen pregnancy, rather than on sex-prevention programs and
providing minors access to birth control.

The publication of Paton's study comes at a time when the debate over U.S.
funding for prevention programs is heating up after the Trump administration
released its budget, which eliminates the Teenage Pregnancy Prevention
program. That program received $101 million from the government in the 12
months ending Sept. 30.

According to its budget justification, the Department of Health and Human
Services argues that the teenage pregnancy rate "has declined significantly
over recent years, but it does not appear this program has been a major driver
in that reduction."

Paton's findings have garnered little media attention while a study co-
authored by Dr. Julie DeCesare of the University of Florida's OB-GYN residency
program has been widely seized upon by proponents of more government funding
for sex education.

The researchers analyzed county-by-county teen birth rate data and found
"clusters" of cities that saw a slower rate of decline in teen pregnancies.

Three of the top 10 teen birth rate clusters were in Texas, which commentators
attributed to a lack of access to sex education and birth control.

> The researchers found that after sex education budgets were slashed, teen
pregnancy rates fell by 42.6 percent.

However, DeCesare said her study simply identified the areas where the
clusters were present and did not - as many journalists reported -- identify a
cause for the higher-than-expected birth rates. She tells Fox News the
findings should prompt a discussion in the communities about how best to
reduce teen births.

Paton says his study is a reminder that well-intended programs can have
opposite effects and reflects results from earlier studies.

In a 2013 study, Paton and his colleague Sourafel Girma examined the impact of
parental consent requirements on pregnancy rates in Texas. After the state
passed a mandate in 2003 requiring parental consent for state-funded birth
control for minors, many predicted it would lead to an increase in teen
pregnancies. Instead, they found there was a decrease in attendance at family
planning clinics but no increase in underage pregnancies.

Bill Albert, spokesman for the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned
Pregnancy, agrees multiple factors have contributed to the historic decline in
teenage births in the U.S., but argues comprehensive sex education should
continue to receive federal support.

"I think it is reasonable to conclude that [sex education and access to birth
control] has had a positive effect and if those investments stopped, it is
reasonable to assume that it might have a negative effect," says Albert.

In the United States, the teen birthrate peaked in 1991, but saw a significant
decline in the subsequent years.

"My feeling is why mess with success?" he adds.

ADVERTISEMENT

#### Trending in Health

                
                                      * ![White meat can raise cholesterol as much as red meat, new study shows](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/04/270/152/raw-chicken-iStock.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
                

##### White meat can raise cholesterol as much as red meat, new study shows

                
                                      * ![Toddler diagnosed with leukemia days after dad finishes treatment](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/06/270/152/like-father-lik-360670.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
                

##### Toddler diagnosed with leukemia days after dad finishes treatment

                
                                      * ![Marcia Cross says anal cancer likely linked to husband's throat cancer](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/03/270/152/Marcia-Cross-getty.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
                

##### Marcia Cross says anal cancer likely linked to husband's throat cancer

                
                                      * ![Gonorrhea, pneumonia bacteria found in dirty bed sheets after just 1 week, tests show](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/06/270/152/dirty_sheets_istock.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
                

##### Gonorrhea, pneumonia bacteria found in dirty bed sheets after just 1

week, tests show

###### U.S.

                
                                      * Crime
                      * Military
                      * Education
                      * Terror
                      * Immigration
                      * Economy
                      * Personal Freedoms
                      * Fox News Investigates
                

###### World

                
                                      * U.N.
                      * Conflicts
                      * Terrorism
                      * Disasters
                      * Global Economy
                      * Environment
                      * Religion
                      * Scandals
                

###### Opinion

###### Politics

                
                                      * Executive
                      * Senate
                      * House
                      * Judiciary
                      * Foreign policy
                      * Polls
                      * Elections
                

###### Entertainment

                
                                      * Celebrity News
                      * Movies
                      * TV News
                      * Music News
                      * Style News
                      * Entertainment Video
                

###### Business

                
                                      * Markets
                      * Politics
                      * Technology
                      * Features
                      * Business Leaders
                

###### Lifestyle

                
                                      * Food + Drink
                      * Cars + Trucks
                      * Travel + Outdoors
                      * House + Home
                      * Fitness + Well-being
                      * Style + Beauty
                      * Family
                

###### Science

                
                                      * Archaeology
                      * Air & Space
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Wild Nature
                      * Natural Science
                      * Dinosaurs
                

###### Tech

                
                                      * Security
                      * Innovation
                      * Drones
                      * Computers
                      * Video Games
                      * Military Tech
                

###### Health

                
                                      * Healthy Living
                      * Medical Research
                      * Mental Health
                      * Cancer
                      * Heart Health
                      * Children's Health
                

###### TV

                
                                      * Shows
                      * Personalities
                      * Watch Live
                      * Full Episodes
                      * Show Clips
                      * News Clips
                

###### About

                
                                      * Careers
                      * College Students
                      * Fox Around the World
                      * Advertise With Us
                      * Ad Choices
                      * Media Relations
                      * Compliance
                

###### Other

                
                                      * Fox Nation
                      * Fox News Shop
                      * Fox News Go
                      * Fox News Radio
                      * Fox News Insider
                      * Newsletters
                      * Alerts
                      * Podcasts
                      * Apps & Products
                
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Flipboard
                      * Google+
                      * Instagram
                      * RSS
                      * Email
                

Fox News

                
                                      * Terms of Use
                      * Updated Privacy Policy(What's Changed)
                      * Closed Captioning Policy
                      * Help
                      * Contact Us
                

This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
©2019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20
minutes.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

