

__NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please
upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE »

**Sections** Home __Search Skip to content Skip to navigation View mobile
version

## The New York Times

###### Archives|Women Fault Soviet System For Abortion

__Search

Subscribe Now Log In __0 __Settings

__Close search

## Site Search Navigation

Search NYTimes.com

__Clear this text input

Go

https://nyti.ms/29ydyB5

                
                                      1. Loading...
                

See next articles

See previous articles

## Site Navigation

## Site Mobile Navigation

Advertisement

### Archives | 1989

# Women Fault Soviet System For Abortion

By ANN COOPER and SPECIAL TO THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 28, 1989

Continue reading the main story Share This Page

Continue reading the main story

About the Archive

This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print archive,
before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve these articles as
they originally appeared, The Times does not alter, edit or update them.

Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other
problems. Please send reports of such problems to
archive_feedback@nytimes.com.

![The article as it originally

appeared.](https://s1.nyt.com/timesmachine/pages/1/1989/02/28/001789_360W.png)

__

##### View page in TimesMachine

February 28, 1989, Page 00003Buy Reprints The New York Times Archives

The 29-year-old woman was nervous as she arranged the hospital appointment for
her fifth abortion recently, remembering the nightmarish pain when she ended
an earlier pregnancy.

''I asked them to give me an injection, but they didn't pay any attention to
me,'' said the woman, Nadezhda V. Lobikinova, who is a nurse. ''They ended up
having to do the abortion twice. It was very painful.''

Abortion - widely accepted here, and performed in assembly-line conditions -
has suddenly become the target of a lively and unusually frank debate.

Unlike the abortion debate in the West, which has focused on the rights of the
unborn and the woman's right to choose, the Soviet debate is on women's health
care - the right to adequate supplies of reliable contraceptives, to sanitary
conditions, anesthetics and the respect of medical workers. 'Stone Age
Equipment'

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Abortion statistics are sketchy in many countries, but abortion may be more
common here than anywhere else in the world. By official count, 6.4 million
legal abortions were performed in 1987, almost 1 million more than the number
of Soviet babies born in the same period. The data show almost one of every 10
Soviet women of childbearing age had an abortion. By comparison, the rate in
the United States was about 1 in 36, according to the Alan Guttmacher
Institute, a nonprofit research center in New York.

Continue reading the main story

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Some Soviet health researchers believe the real number of abortions may be far
higher - as much as double the official figure. Many women readily pay $75 to
$150 for an illegal abortion, often performed after hours in a state hospital
or outpatient clinic.

A paid abortion has two advantages over the state's free operations: a woman
is given enough anesthetic, and she avoids the required hospital stay,
typically three days long.

''Our medicine is very cruel - it has a stone heart and Stone Age equipment,''
said a Moscow woman who recalled her own abortion, performed by rude medical
workers with an ineffective dose of painkiller. 'Cruelest Abortion System'

As debate about social problems has burst onto the pages of popular
periodicals here, a few women have dared to publish their outraged criticisms.

The Soviet Union has ''the world's cruelest abortion system,'' charged a
commentator in New Times magazine. ''The main thing is to queue up in time and
not shudder when you climb onto the obstetrical execution block.''

The most graphic account appeared last month in the weekly Moscow News, under
the headline ''I Don't Want to Be Sorry I'm a Woman.''

The author, Yekaterina Nikolayeva, condemned the ''conveyor line'' atmosphere
at the clinic where she had an abortion. When she entered the operating room,
a doctor yelled at her for staring at his blood-stained rubber gloves.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

''Hurry up, you,'' he said. ''I'm sick and tired of your stupidity.''

The author quoted another doctor scolding a frightened patient: ''You should
have had second thoughts before. You're all fond of sweets, but you're not
willing to pay the price.'' Abortion Rate 'Not Normal'

The Moscow News account dismayed Aleksandra P. Biryukova, the highest ranking
woman in the Soviet Government, who ordered a Health Ministry investigation
and called the high Soviet abortion rate ''not normal.''

''We must change this radically over the next year and a half to two years, by
developing the contraceptive industry,'' she said at a recent news conference
in Moscow.

## Newsletter Sign Up

Continue reading the main story

###

Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

Sign Up

You will receive emails containing news content, updates and promotions from
The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time.

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York
Times's products and services.

### Thank you for subscribing.

### An error has occurred. Please try again later.

### You are already subscribed to this email.

View all New York Times newsletters.

                
                                      * See Sample
                      * Manage Email Preferences
                      * Not you?
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Opt out or contact us anytime
                      * Opt out or contact us anytime
                

Mrs. Biryukova's call for change will not be easily accomplished, though.
Despite their bitter complaints, many Soviet women still see abortion, which
has been legal here since 1955, as their simplest birth control option.

''My mother had 3 children and 13 abortions,'' a young Moscow woman said. ''My
father refused to use condoms, and there was nothing else she could do.''

Abortion is available to all women in the first trimester of pregnancy. In the
second trimester, abortions can be performed for medical reasons, or for
''social reasons,'' like rape or divorce.

The Moscow News reported in January that 600 to 700 women die each year as a
result of abortions in the Russian Republic alone, which has slightly more
than half the national population. Soviet officials also say the high abortion
rate has contributed to high rates of infertility and premature births.
Promise of More Contraceptives

The Health Ministry has promised to increase production of intrauterine
devices and condoms, and to import more birth control pills, which are not
manufactured in the Soviet Union.

But family planning programs are almost nonexistent, and there is little basic
educational material that could overcome widespread beliefs that
contraceptives are unreliable, dangerous or too difficult to obtain.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

''The diaphragm? I know that they exist, but I don't know anything about them,
and few women use them,'' said the nurse, Mrs. Lobikinova, in a recent
interview at Women's Clinic Number 9 in Moscow.

Yakov G. Zhukovsky, the chief doctor at the clinic, said that many Soviet
women flatly reject birth control pills.

''The first pills sold here had high doses of hormones that caused many side
effects,'' he said. ''Those pills have been taken out of production. But the
attitude toward today's pills remains the same.''

Dr. Zhukovsky said Soviet women have abortions not so much because there are
not alternatives, but because they know so little about their options.

Women rely on friends rather than their doctors for birth control advice, said
Irina A. Zhuravskaya, an editor at Rabotnitsa, a magazine directed at women.
''Women usually see a doctor only after they get pregnant,'' she said.

The Government offers financial incentives designed to encourage women to have
more children. These originally were intended to increase low birth rates
among Russian and Slavic women, and there is some statistical evidence that
the incentives are beginning to work. But there has been no organized effort
to discourage abortion, and rates remain high in the Russian Republic.

Still, there is no national debate here about the morality of abortion.

''We are basically an atheist society,'' said Svetlana I. Markovich, an
obstetrician-gynecologist at the Family and Marriage Clinic in Moscow. ''Of
course it would be better to prevent pregnancy rather than to have an
abortion. But I can't think of abortion as murder, because at the stage when
abortions are permitted, this is not a person.''

A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 1989, on Page
A00003 of the National edition with the headline: Women Fault Soviet System
For Abortion. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story

##

                
                                      *           *           *           * ## What's Next
                

Loading...

Go to Home Page »

## Site Index The New York Times

## Site Index Navigation

### News

                
                                      * World
                      * U.S.
                      * Politics
                      * N.Y.
                      * Business
                      * Tech
                      * Science
                      * Health
                      * Sports
                      * Education
                      * Obituaries
                      * Today's Paper
                      * Corrections
                

### Opinion

                
                                      * Today's Opinion
                      * Op-Ed Columnists
                      * Editorials
                      * Op-Ed Contributors
                      * Letters
                      * Sunday Review
                      * Video: Opinion
                

### Arts

                
                                      * Today's Arts
                      * Art & Design
                      * Books
                      * Dance
                      * Movies
                      * Music
                      * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                      * Television
                      * Theater
                      * Video: Arts
                

### Living

                
                                      * Automobiles
                      * Crossword
                      * Food
                      * Education
                      * Fashion & Style
                      * Health
                      * Jobs
                      * Magazine
                      * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                      * Real Estate
                      * T Magazine
                      * Travel
                      * Weddings & Celebrations
                

### Listings & More

                
                                      * Reader Center
                      * Classifieds
                      * Tools & Services
                      * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                      * Multimedia
                      * Photography
                      * Video
                      * NYT Store
                      * Times Journeys
                      * Subscribe
                      * Manage My Account
                      * NYTCo
                

### Subscribe

                
                                      * Subscribe
                      * __Home Delivery
                      * __Digital Subscriptions
                      * __Crossword
                      * Email Newsletters
                      * Gift Subscriptions
                      * Group Subscriptions
                      * Education Rate
                      * Mobile Applications
                      * Replica Edition
                

## Site Information Navigation

                
                                      * (C) 2019 The New York Times Company
                      * Home
                      * Search
                      * Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
                      * Contact Us
                      * Work With Us
                      * Advertise
                      * Your Ad Choices
                      * Privacy
                      * Terms of Service
                      * Terms of Sale
                

## Site Information Navigation

                
                                      * Site Map
                      * Help
                      * Site Feedback
                      * Subscriptions
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

