

__Member Login

__

                
                                      * __Ovulation Calendar
                      * __Pregnancy Calculator
                      * __Baby Names
                

__Member Login

American Pregnancy Association ![American Pregnancy Association

Logo](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/themes/apa/library/img/logo_horiz.png)

_Follow Your Pregnancy Week-By-Week_  
Subscribe to our **free** week-by-week email newsletter

__Enroll Now

Toggle navigation

                
                                      *  Trying To Conceive 
                        *  Getting Pregnant
                        *  Infertility
                        *  Adoption
                        *  Planning and Preparing
                        *  Prenatal Testing
                        *  Preventing Pregnancy
                      *  Your Pregnancy 
                        *  Your Developing Baby
                        *  Pregnancy Wellness
                        *  Multiples Pregnancy
                        *  Week by Week
                        *  Naturally
                      *  Pregnancy Concerns 
                        *  Unplanned Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Complications
                        *  Birth Defects & Disorders
                        *  Is it Safe While Pregnant
                        *  Medications & Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Loss
                      *  Birth & Beyond 
                        *  Labor and Birth
                        *  Birth & Beyond
                        *  Breastfeeding
                        *  Women's Health
                      *  About 
                        * Blog
                        *  Discussion
                        *  About APA
                        *  Online Advertising
                        *  Medical Advisory Committee
                        *  Corporate Sponsor Info
                        *  Corporate Sponsors
                        * Delivering Excellence
                        *  Fertility Shop
                      * (800) 672-2296
                      * Live Chat
                      * English
                        * Espa√±ol
                

Donate

# Possible Physical Side Effects After Abortion

Home / Unplanned Pregnancy / Possible Physical Side Effects After Abortion

![Image of woman coping with the physical side effects after her
abortion](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2012/04/shutterstock_56296516.jpg)

The physical side effects after an abortion can vary from woman to woman and
there are potential side effects and risks that you should be aware of.

It is important to talk to a health professional as well as the doctor who
will perform your abortion about possible side effects.

Your period should return about **4-6 weeks after the abortion,** and you can
get pregnant again soon after the abortion.

If your doctor has prescribed antibiotics, it is important to take them as
directed in order to help prevent infection.

For information about abortion, you may call the APA toll-free helpline at
1-800-672-2296, or search locally by zip code below.

**Find a Abortion Alternative in your area**

## Anticipated physical side effects following an abortion

The following is a list of side effects that are frequently experienced after
an abortion. It is possible to experience these side effects for as long as 2
to 4 weeks following the procedure.

                
                                      * Abdominal pain and cramping
                      * Nausea
                      * Vomiting
                      * Diarrhea
                      * Spotting and bleeding
                

![Image of woman who's experiencing cramping after her
abortion](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2012/04/shutterstock_65088301.jpg)

## Potential and more serious complications following an abortion

Although serious complications occur in fewer than **1 out of 100** first
trimester abortions and approximately **1 out of every 50 late term**
abortions, it is important to be aware of the following risks:

                
                                      * Heavy or persistent bleeding
                      * Infection or sepsis
                      * Damage to the cervix
                      * Scarring of the uterine lining
                      * Perforation of the uterus
                      * Damage to other organs
                      * Death
                

It is important to understand that these risks are rare and that some of these
risks are associated with child birth. What matters is that you are aware that
these risks exist as you strive to make an informed decision about your
pregnancy.

![Image of woman with a severe fever after her

abortion](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2012/04/shutterstock_36857032.jpg)

## Severe abortion physical side effects

**If you have had an abortion, call your doctor and seek medical attention if
your side effects become severe or if you experience any of the following:**

                
                                      * Severe abdominal and back pain that prohibits you from standing up
                      * Bleeding that is heavier than a normal menstrual period
                      * Foul-smelling discharge
                      * Fever above 100.4 F
                      * Continuing symptoms of pregnancy
                

**Find a Abortion Alternative in your area**

Last updated: September 3, 2016 at 1:37 am

* * *

Compiled using information from the following sources:

          1. MedlinePlus [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); [updated 2006 Feb 24]. Abortion; [updated 2006 Feb 21; reviewed 2006 Feb 21; cited 2006 Feb 24].

https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/abortion.html

2.Current Obstetric & Gynecologic Diagnosis & Treatment-Ninth Ed_. DeCherney,
Alan H., et al, Ch. 33.

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

223 Shares

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

223 Shares

Tags: Abortion

__Search

Find Healthcare Providers That Can Help You Through Your Pregnancy.

Type Of Provider

Acupuncturist Adoption Professional Birth Center Childbirth Educator
Chiropractor Counselor Doula Family Law General Practitioner Genetic Counselor
Holistic Healthcare Specialist Homeopath Hospital Infertility Specialist
Lactation Consultant Life Insurance Massage Therapist Maternity Home Medicaid
Office Midwife Nutritionist Ob-Gyn Pediatrician Pharmacy Physical Therapist
Pregnancy Center Support Group WIC Center Yoga or Fitness Instructor

Zip Code

Radius 1 mile 5 miles 10 miles 15 miles 20 miles 30 miles 50 miles 100 miles

### Education Supported By

                
                                      * ![Amareta](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/amereta.gif)
                      * ![DNA Diagnostic Center](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ddc.png)
                      * ![Dream Belly](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/dream-belly.png)
                      * ![eHealthcare Solutions](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ehealthcare-solutions.png)
                      * ![Fairhaven Health](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/fairhaven-health.png)
                      * ![IsoLove](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/isolove.jpg)
                      * ![Milkies](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/milkies.png)
                      * ![My Fetal Life](https://americanpregnancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/MyFetalLife-image-for-APA.png)
                      * ![Nordic Naturals](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/nordic-naturals.png)
                      * ![Safe Catch](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/safe-catch.png)
                      * ![Viacord](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/viacord.png)
                

#### Helpful Information

                
                                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * Corporate Sponsors
                

#### Planning

                
                                      * Adoption
                      * Birth & Beyond
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Labor and Birth
                

#### Pregnancy

                
                                      * Planning and Preparing
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Pregnancy Concerns
                      * Your Pregnancy
                

#### Connect

                
                                      * ____
                      * ____
                

* * *

__Contact Us Here __Donate to APA

(C) 2019 American Pregnancy Association. | Web Design by AXZM

__

The information on this site is not intended or implied to be a substitute for
professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. All content, including
text, graphics, images, and information, contained on or available through
this website is for general information purposes only. The purpose of this is
to help with education and create better conversations between patients and
their healthcare providers.

Unplanned Pregnancy Abortion editor

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

