

X

## Notice

Your privacy is important to us. We have updated our privacy policy to better
explain how we use data on this site. Read it here

Stay Connected:

                
                                      * Editions 
                        * National
                        * PunditFact
                        * Health Check
                        * Facebook Hoaxes
                        * States 
                          * California
                          * Florida
                          * Illinois
                          * Missouri
                          * New Hampshire
                          * New York
                          * North Carolina
                          * Pennsylvania
                          * Texas
                          * Virginia
                          * West Virginia
                          * Vermont
                          * Wisconsin
                      * Truth-O-MeterTM
                        * All
                        * By subject
                        * True
                        * Mostly True
                        * Half True
                        * Mostly False
                        * False
                        * Pants on Fire!
                        * No Flip
                        * Half Flip
                        * Full Flop
                      * People 
                        * Donald Trump
                        * Mike Pence
                        * Barack Obama
                        * Chain E-mails
                        * Other people and groups
                      * Promises 
                        * Trump-O-Meter 
                          * All
                          * Top 25 Promises
                          * By subject
                          * Not yet rated
                          * In the Works
                          * Stalled
                          * Promise Kept
                          * Compromise
                          * Promise Broken
                        * Obameter 
                          * All
                          * Top 25 Promises
                          * By subject
                          * Promise Kept
                          * Compromise
                          * Promise Broken
                      * Pants On Fire
                      * About Us 
                        * Our Process
                        * Our Staff
                        * Who Pays for Politifact
                        * Suggest a Fact Check
                      * Donate
                

![False](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-false.png)

![Santorum](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/mugs/Rick_Santorum_2.jpg)

"A third of all the young people in America are not in America today because
of abortion, because one in three pregnancies end in abortion."

-- Rick Santorum on Tuesday, March 29th, 2011 in a radio interview

# Rick Santorum says one of every three pregnancies ends in an abortion

By Louis Jacobson on Thursday, March 31st, 2011 at 5:02 p.m.

In a March 29, 2011, interview with WEZS Radio in Laconia, N.H., former U.S.
Sen. Rick Santorum, R-Pa. -- a possible 2012 presidential candidate --
discussed a possible link between the financial predicament of Social Security
and abortion.

Santorum, a strong opponent of abortion during his time in the Senate, argued
that abortion has so depleted the ranks of younger Americans that the costs of
Social Security benefits are having to be shouldered by fewer working-age
Americans.

"The Social Security system in my opinion is a flawed design, period,"
Santorum said in response to a question from a caller. "But having said that,
the design would work a lot better if we had stable demographic trends. The
reason Social Security is in big trouble is we don't have enough workers to
support the retirees. Well, a third of all the young people in America are not
in America today because of abortion, because one in three pregnancies end in
abortion."

Several readers asked us to check Santorum's claim about the number of
abortions.

To do this, we delved into statistics compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We chose 2003 as our
representative year, since it was the most recent year for which we were able
to obtain all of the relevant data.

We set out to determine the number of known pregnancies in 2003. We say
"known" because some pregnancies end due to natural causes at a very early
stage, often before the woman even realizes she is pregnant. CDC only offers
statistics for fetal deaths beginning at a fetal age of 20 weeks, so that's
the parameter we'll use in our calculations.

To calculate the number of known pregnancies, we added together three figures:
the number of live births, the number of fetal deaths (these include natural
miscarriages and stillbirths), and the number of abortions. Here's the data
for 2003:

Live births: 4,090,007  
Fetal deaths: 25,653  
Abortions: 1,250,000

Total known pregnancies: 5,365,660

So abortions account for 23.2 percent of all known pregnancies. That's less
than a quarter of all pregnancies, rather than the one-third Santorum said.

The Guttmacher Institute, an independent research organization that analyzes
data on population growth and reproductive health, has come up with a number
very close to what PolitiFact found, spokeswoman Rebecca Wind said. The
institute found that 22.4 percent of pregnancies resulted in an abortion in
2008. (The institute did not factor fetal deaths into its calculation.)

But Santorum isn't just off-base about the number of abortions. He also makes
a flawed assumption about the impact of abortions on U.S. population trends,
Wind said.

"It is simply wrong" to assume that every abortion reduces the U.S. population
by one person, she said, since many women obtain abortions to postpone
childbearing -- not to prevent it altogether.

A 2005 Guttmacher study of more than 1,200 women who had undergone an abortion
found that a little under half cited the desire not to have additional
children as a reason for having their abortion. This means that a substantial
minority -- and possibly as many as 53 percent -- expected to have children
after the abortion. This pattern was particularly strong among younger women
in the study (less than a quarter of those 19 or younger said they were done
with childbearing) and among those who had no children at the time of the
abortion (only 3 percent said they were done with childbearing).

We provided Santorum's office with our calculations and asked for a response.
A spokeswoman did not counter our findings, but offered a brief statement that
said "the prolife community has been astounded at the increasing percentages
in the pregnancies that result in abortion." The statement also made
additional claims about abortion rates among certain demographic groups, but
they did not address the wording that Santorum had used in the radio
interview.

So we find Santorum is significantly overstating the frequency of abortions
when he claims that "one in three pregnancies end in abortion" -- it's
actually in the 22 percent to 23 percent range. That's less than one in four.
And the effect on population would be even lower if women who had abortions
had children later in life. We can't know exactly how that would affect the
numbers, but it would send the estimate even lower. We rate Santorum's
statement False.

_**UPDATE, April 1, 2011:** After we published this item, a reader pointed out
that the statement we quoted from Santorum's office was incorrect. While a
spokeswoman had told us that "the prolife community has been astounded at the
increasing percentages in the pregnancies that result in abortion," the reader
pointed us to statistics from the Guttmacher Institute that show the rate of
abortions declining over time. From a 1981 peak of 29.3 abortions per 1,000
women aged 15-44, the rate has fallen, gradually but steadily, to 19.6 in 2008
-- a decline of about one-third. According to Census Bureau data, the raw
number of abortions has also fallen consistently, from a peak of 1,609,000 in
1990 to 1,242,000 in 2006._

Advertisement

### About this statement:

Published: Thursday, March 31st, 2011 at 5:02 p.m.

Researched by: Louis Jacobson

Edited by: Bill Adair

Subjects: Abortion, Health Care, Social Security

### Sources:

Rick Santorum, interview with WEZSRadio in Laconia, N.H., March 29, 2011

Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States (Table 78: Live
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Divorces, 1960-2007), accessed March 30, 2011

Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States (Table 99: Abortions
-- Number and Rate by Race, 1990-2006), accessed March 30, 2011

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Fetal and Perinatal Mortality,
United States, 2003," Feb. 21, 2007

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Worktable 23F. Deaths by 10-year
age groups: United States and each State, 2003," Oct. 7, 2005

Guttmacher Institute, "Abortion Incidence and Access to Services in the United
States, 2008," March 2011

Guttmacher Institute, "Reasons U.S. Women Have Abortions: Quantitative and
Qualitative Perspectives" including Table 5, Sept. 2005

The Hill, "Santorum blames 'abortion culture,'" March 29, 2011

E-mail interview with Tom W. Smith, senior fellow at the National Opinion
Research Center at the University of Chicago, March 30, 2011

E-mail interview with Rebecca Wind, spokeswoman for the Alan Guttmacher
Institute, March 31, 2011

E-mail interview with Virginia Davis, spokeswoman for Rick Santorum, March 31,
2011

### How to contact us

Email comments and suggestions for fact-checks to _[email protected]_ or find
us on _Facebook_ ,and _Twitter_. (If you send us a comment, we'll assume you
don't mind us publishing it unless you tell us otherwise.)

### Browse The Truth-O-Meter TM

                
                                      * See our fact-checks of President Donald Trump
                      * See our latest Pants-On-Fire rulings
                      * Search fact-checks by subject
                      * Search fact-checks by person
                      * View recent articles
                

### Support independent fact-checking

In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.

![](

//static.politifact.com/politifact/photos/truth_squad_logo_cmyk.jpg)

Advertisement

### Subscribe

#### Keep up to date with PolitiFact

                
                                      * Sign up for our weekly email newsletter from Editor Angie Holan 
                      * Sign up for our daily email newsletter and get our latest fact-checks delivered to your inbox
                      * Follow us on Twitter
                      * Fan us on Facebook
                

Back to top

__

![](https://static.politifact.com/images/POLITIFACT_logo_rgb141x25.png)

# Offices

                
                                      * **District of Columbia**
                      * 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW
                      * Suite 1300B
                      * Washington, DC 20036
                      * **Florida**
                      * 801 Third Street South
                      * St. Petersburg, FL 33701
                      * 727-821-9494
                

# State Editions

                
                                      * Arizona
                      * California
                      * Colorado
                      * Florida
                      * Georgia
                      * Iowa
                      * Illinois
                      * Missouri
                      * Nevada
                      * New Hampshire
                      * New York
                      * North Carolina
                      * Ohio
                      * Rhode Island
                      * Pennsylvania
                      * Texas
                      * Virginia
                      * Wisconsin
                

# Special Editions

                
                                      * National
                      * Global News Project
                      * PunditFact
                

# Policy

                
                                      * Privacy
                      * Terms & Conditions
                      * Copyright
                

# Advertise With Us

                
                                      * Media Kit
                      * Market info
                      * Rates & Specs
                

# About Us

                
                                      * As Seen On
                      * Staff
                      * Process
                      * Funding
                

# State Editions

                
                                      * Arizona
                      * California
                      * Colorado
                      * Florida
                      * Georgia
                      * Iowa
                      * Illinois
                      * Missouri
                      * Nevada
                      * New Hampshire
                      * New York
                      * North Carolina
                      * Ohio
                      * Pennsylvania
                      * Rhode Island
                      * Texas
                      * Virginia
                      * Wisconsin
                

# Special Editions

                
                                      * National
                      * Global News Project
                      * PunditFact
                

# Policy

                
                                      * Privacy
                      * Terms & Conditions
                      * Copyright
                

# Advertise With Us

                
                                      * Media Kit
                      * Market info
                      * Rates & Specs
                

# About Us

                
                                      * As Seen On
                      * Staff
                      * Process
                      * Funding
                

# Stay Connected

# Fact-Check Suggestions

(C)All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2019, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization

                
                                      * Editions 
                        * National
                        * PunditFact
                        * Health Check
                        * Facebook Hoaxes
                        * States 
                          * California
                          * Florida
                          * Illinois
                          * Missouri
                          * New Hampshire
                          * New York
                          * North Carolina
                          * Pennsylvania
                          * Texas
                          * Virginia
                          * West Virginia
                          * Vermont
                          * Wisconsin
                      * Truth-O-MeterTM
                        * All
                        * By subject
                        * True
                        * Mostly True
                        * Half True
                        * Mostly False
                        * False
                        * Pants on Fire!
                        * No Flip
                        * Half Flip
                        * Full Flop
                      * People 
                        * Donald Trump
                        * Mike Pence
                        * Barack Obama
                        * Chain E-mails
                        * Other people and groups
                      * Promises 
                        * Trump-O-Meter 
                          * All
                          * Top 25 Promises
                          * By subject
                          * Not yet rated
                          * In the Works
                          * Stalled
                          * Promise Kept
                          * Compromise
                          * Promise Broken
                        * Obameter 
                          * All
                          * Top 25 Promises
                          * By subject
                          * Promise Kept
                          * Compromise
                          * Promise Broken
                      * Pants On Fire
                      * About Us 
                        * Our Process
                        * Our Staff
                        * Who Pays for Politifact
                        * Suggest a Fact Check
                      * Donate
                

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-23nLlPXNTk7P6.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

