

Jump to main content

An official website of the United States government.

We've made some changes to EPA.gov. If the information you are looking for is
not here, you may be able to find it on the EPA Web Archive or the January 19,
2017 Web Snapshot.

![](https://www.epa.gov/sites/all/themes/epa/logo.png)

# US EPA

United States Environmental Protection Agency

Search Search

## Main menu

                
                                      * Environmental Topics
                        * Air
                        * Bed Bugs
                        * Chemicals and Toxics
                        * Environmental Information by Location
                        * Greener Living
                        * Health
                        * Land, Waste, and Cleanup
                        * Lead
                        * Mold
                        * Pesticides
                        * Radon
                        * Science
                        * Water
                        * A-Z Index
                      * Laws & Regulations
                        * By Business Sector
                        * By Topic
                        * Compliance
                        * Enforcement
                        * Laws and Executive Orders
                        * Policy and Guidance
                        * Regulations
                      * About EPA
                        * EPA Administrator
                        * Current Leadership
                        * Organization Chart
                        * Staff Directory
                        * Planning, Budget and Results
                        * Jobs and Internships
                        * Headquarters Offices
                        * Regional Offices
                        * Labs and Research Centers
                

## Greenhouse Gas Emissions

Contact Us

Share

                
                                      *           *           *           * # Understanding Global Warming Potentials
                

Greenhouse gases (GHGs) warm the Earth by absorbing energy and slowing the
rate at which the energy escapes to space; they act like a blanket insulating
the Earth. Different GHGs can have different effects on the Earth's warming.
Two key ways in which these gases differ from each other are their ability to
absorb energy (their "radiative efficiency"), and how long they stay in the
atmosphere (also known as their "lifetime").

The Global Warming Potential (GWP) was developed to allow comparisons of the
global warming impacts of different gases. Specifically, it is a measure of
how much energy the emissions of 1 ton of a gas will absorb over a given
period of time, relative to the emissions of 1 ton of carbon dioxide (CO2).
The larger the GWP, the more that a given gas warms the Earth compared to CO2
over that time period. The time period usually used for GWPs is 100 years.
GWPs provide a common unit of measure, which allows analysts to add up
emissions estimates of different gases (e.g., to compile a national GHG
inventory), and allows policymakers to compare emissions reduction
opportunities across sectors and gases.

                
                                      * CO2, by definition, has a GWP of 1 regardless of the time period used, because it is the gas being used as the reference. CO2 remains in the climate system for a very long time: CO2 emissions cause increases in atmospheric concentrations of CO2 that will last thousands of years.
                      * Methane (CH4) is estimated to have a GWP of 28–36 over 100 years (Learn why EPA's U.S. Inventory of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks uses a different value.). CH4 emitted today lasts about a decade on average, which is much less time than CO2. But CH4 also absorbs much more energy than CO2. The net effect of the shorter lifetime and higher energy absorption is reflected in the GWP. The CH4 GWP also accounts for some indirect effects, such as the fact that CH4 is a precursor to ozone, and ozone is itself a GHG.
                      * Nitrous Oxide (N2O) has a GWP 265–298 times that of CO2 for a 100-year timescale. N2O emitted today remains in the atmosphere for more than 100 years, on average.
                      * Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) are sometimes called high-GWP gases because, for a given amount of mass, they trap substantially more heat than CO2. (The GWPs for these gases can be in the thousands or tens of thousands.)
                

Top of Page

##

Frequently Asked Questions

### Why do GWPs change over time?

> EPA and other organizations will update the GWP values they use
occasionally. This change can be due to updated scientific estimates of the
energy absorption or lifetime of the gases or to changing atmospheric
concentrations of GHGs that result in a change in the energy absorption of 1
additional ton of a gas relative to another.

### Why are GWPs presented as ranges?

> In the most recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), multiple methods of calculating GWPs were presented based on how to
account for the influence of future warming on the carbon cycle. For this Web
page, we are presenting the range of the lowest to the highest values listed
by the IPCC.

### What GWP estimates does EPA use for GHG emissions accounting, such as the

_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks_ (Inventory) and the
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program?

> The EPA considers the GWP estimates presented in the most recent IPCC
scientific assessment to reflect the state of the science. In science
communications, the EPA will refer to the most recent GWPs. The GWPs listed
above are from the IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report, published in 2014.

>

> The EPA's _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks_ (Inventory)
complies with international GHG reporting standards under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). UNFCCC guidelines now require
the use of the GWP values for the IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report (AR4),
published in 2007. The Inventory also presents emissions by mass, so that CO2
equivalents can be calculated using any GWPs, and emission totals using more
recent IPCC values are presented in the annexes of the Inventory report for
informational purposes.

>

> Data collected by EPA's Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program is used in the
Inventory, so the Reporting Program generally uses GWP values from the AR4.
The Reporting Program collects data about some industrial gases that do not
have GWPs listed in the AR4; for these gases, the Reporting Program uses GWP
values from other sources, such as the Fifth Assessment Report.

>

> EPA's CH4 reduction voluntary programs also use CH4 GWPs from the AR4 report
for calculating CH4 emissions reductions through energy recovery projects, for
consistency with the national emissions presented in the Inventory.

### Are there alternatives to the 100-year GWP for comparing GHGs?

> The United States primarily uses the 100-year GWP as a measure of the
relative impact of different GHGs. However, the scientific community has
developed a number of other metrics that could be used for comparing one GHG
to another. These metrics may differ based on timeframe, the climate endpoint
measured, or the method of calculation.

>

> For example, the 20-year GWP is sometimes used as an alternative to the
100-year GWP. Just like the 100-year GWP is based on the energy absorbed by a
gas over 100 years, the 20-year GWP is based on the energy absorbed over 20
years. This 20-year GWP prioritizes gases with shorter lifetimes, because it
does not consider impacts that happen more than 20 years after the emissions
occur. Because all GWPs are calculated relative to CO2, GWPs based on a
shorter timeframe will be larger for gases with lifetimes shorter than that of
CO2, and smaller for gases with lifetimes longer than CO2. For example, for
CH4, which has a short lifetime, the 100-year GWP of 28–36 is much less than
the 20-year GWP of 84–87. For CF4, with a lifetime of 50,000 years, the
100-year GWP of 6630–7350 is larger than the 20-year GWP of 4880–4950.

>

> Another alternate metric is the Global Temperature Potential (GTP). While
the GWP is a measure of the heat absorbed over a given time period due to
emissions of a gas, the GTP is a measure of the temperature change at the end
of that time period (again, relative to CO2).The calculation of the GTP is
more complicated than that for the GWP, as it requires modeling how much the
climate system responds to increased concentrations of GHGs (the climate
sensitivity) and how quickly the system responds (based in part on how the
ocean absorbs heat).

Top of Page

Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

## Greenhouse Gas Emissions

                
                                      * Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                        * Overview of Greenhouse Gases
                        * Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                        * Global Emissions
                        * National Emissions
                        * Facility-Level Emissions
                        * Carbon Footprint Calculator
                        * GHG Equivalencies Calculator
                

Discover.

                
                                      * Accessibility
                      * EPA Administrator
                      * Budget & Performance
                      * Contracting
                      * Grants
                      * January 19, 2017 Web Snapshot
                      * No FEAR Act Data
                      * Privacy
                      * Privacy and Security Notice
                

Connect.

                
                                      * Data.gov
                      * Inspector General
                      * Jobs
                      * Newsroom
                      * Open Government
                      * Regulations.gov
                      * Subscribe
                      * USA.gov
                      * White House
                

Ask.

                
                                      * Contact EPA
                      * Hotlines
                      * FOIA Requests
                      * Frequent Questions
                

Follow.

                
                                      * EPA's Facebook
                      * EPA's Twitter
                      * EPA's YouTube
                      * EPA's Flickr
                      * EPA's Instagram
                

Last updated on February 14, 2017

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

