

Skip to main content

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/logo.png)

                
                                      * Home
                      * News & Features
                      * Maps & Data
                      * Teaching Climate
                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * FAQs
                      * Site Map
                      * What's New?
                      * El Niño & La Niña
                

## Climate news, stories, images, & video (ClimateWatch Magazine)

                
                                      * News
                      * How the Climate System Works
                      * Climate Change & Global Warming
                      * Natural Climate Patterns
                      * Climate Impacts
                      * Observing & Predicting
                      * Policy & Planning
                      * Extreme Events
                
                      * Home
                      * News & Features
                      * Climate Q&A
                      * Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human activities?
                

## Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human activities?

Author:

Michon Scott

Rebecca Lindsey

June 15, 2016

![](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/icon_print.png)

_Para leer en Español, hagaclic aquí._

Human activities emit 60 or more times the amount of carbon dioxide released
by volcanoes each year. Large, violent eruptions may match the rate of human
emissions for the few hours that they last, but they are too rare and fleeting
to rival humanity’s annual emissions. In fact, several individual U.S. states
emit more carbon dioxide in a year than all the volcanoes on the planet
combined do.

![Volcanic v. human emissions of

CO2](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/Comic_Q%26A_Volcanoes_PurpleSmall3_620.png)

On the scale of carbon dioxide emissions, human sources far outweigh
volcanoes. NOAA Climate.gov cartoon by Emily Greenhalgh.

### Human activities

Human activities—mostly burning of coal and other fossil fuels, but also
cement production, deforestation and other landscape changes—emitted roughly
40 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide in 2015. Since the start of the
Industrial Revolution, more than 2,000 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide
have been added to the atmosphere by human activities according to the Global
Carbon Project.

![Volcanic versus anthropogenic CO2

emissions](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/volcano-v-

fossilfuels-1750-2013-620.png)

Since the start of the Industrial Revolution, human emissions of carbon
dioxide from fossil fuels and cement production (green line) have risen to
more than 35 billion metric tons per year, while volcanoes (purple line)
produce less than 1 billion metric tons annually. NOAA Climate.gov graph,
based on data from the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC) at
the DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Burton _et al._ , 2013.

### Volcanoes

Volcanoes emit carbon dioxide in two ways: during eruptions and through
underground magma. Carbon dioxide from underground magma is released through
vents, porous rocks and soils, and water that feeds volcanic lakes and hot
springs. Estimates of global carbon dioxide emissions from volcanoes have to
take both erupted and non-erupted sources into account.

![Mount Merapi

degassing](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/MtMerapi_degassing_620px.jpg)

Much of the carbon dioxide released by volcanoes is emitted by degassing of
subterranean magma when the volcano is not erupting. In this photo, volcanic
gases and steam rise from Mount Merapi, Indonesia, on May 20, 2012. Creative
Commons license by Jimmy McIntyre.

In a 2011 peer-reviewed paper, U.S. Geologic Survey scientist Terry Gerlach
summarized five previous estimates of global volcanic carbon dioxide emission
rates that had been published between 1991 and 1998. Those estimates
incorporated studies reaching back to the 1970s, and they were based on a wide
variety of measurements, such as direct sampling and satellite remote sensing.
The global estimates fell within a range of about 0.3 ± 0.15 billion metric
tons of carbon dioxide per year, implying that human carbon dioxide emissions
were more than 90 times greater than global volcanic carbon dioxide emissions.

![Mount Saint Helens

erupting](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/MtStHelens_erupting_1980_USGS_620px_alt2.jpg)

On May 18, 1980, Mount Saint Helens experienced an explosive eruption, sending
a column of ash, steam, and gases up to 60,000 feet above sea level. For about
nine hours, carbon dioxide emissions from the volcano may have matched human
emissions, but such massive eruptions are rare and fleeting. U.S. Geological
Survey photo by Robert Krimmel.

In 2013, another group of scientists—Michael Burton, Georgina Sawyer, and
Domenico Granieri—published an updated estimate using more data on carbon
dioxide emissions from subsurface magma that had become available in the years
since the last global estimate. While acknowledging a large range of
variability in the estimates, the authors concluded that the best overall
estimate was about 0.6 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide per year.

While higher than Gerlach's estimate, the figure is still just a fraction of
carbon dioxide output from human activities. Gerlach remarked via email,
“Taken at face value, their result implies that anthropogenic CO2 exceeds
global volcanic CO2 by at least a factor of 60 times.”

Occasionally, eruptions are powerful enough to release carbon dioxide at a
rate that matches or even exceeds the global rate of human emissions for a few
hours. For example, Gerlach estimated that the eruptions of Mount St. Helens
(1980) and Pinatubo (1991) both released carbon dioxide on a scale similar to
human output for about nine hours. Human emissions of carbon dioxide continue
day after day, month after month, year after year.

### Today versus the past

Volcanic activity today may pale in comparison to the carbon dioxide emissions
we are generating by burning fossil fuels for energy, but over the course of
geologic time, volcanoes _have_ occasionally contributed to global warming by
producing significant amounts of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.

For example, some geologists hypothesize that 250 million years ago, an
extensive flood of lava poured continually from the ground in Siberia perhaps
hundreds of thousands of years. This large-scale, long-lasting eruption likely
raised global temperatures enough to cause one of the worst extinction events
in our planet's history. Current volcanic activity doesn't occur on the same
massive scale.

### Climate cooling

Today, rather than warming global climate, volcanic eruptions often have the
opposite effect. That's because carbon dioxide isn't the only thing that
volcanoes inject into the atmosphere. Even small eruptions often produce
volcanic ash and aerosol particles.

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/STS043-22-12_pinatubo_ash_limb_620.jpg)

Taken by astronauts from the Space Shuttle in early August 1991, this photo of
the Earth's limb shows the double layer of volcanic aerosol particles
(interpretation from Self et al., 1999) that spread through the stratosphere
following the catastrophic eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. Encircling the globe at
altitudes even higher than the tops of thunderstorm clouds, the particles
reflected so much incoming sunlight that global surface temperatures cooled
off for two years. Photo courtesy NASA JSC's Gateway to Astronaut Photography
of the Earth.

Whether from small or large eruptions, volcanic aerosols reflect sunlight back
into space, cooling global climate. The 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora
produced enough ash and aerosols to cancel summer in Europe and North America
in 1816.

### References

Boden, T.A., Marland, G., Andres, R.J. (2015). Global, Regional, and National
Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions, Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A.

Burton, M.R., Sawyer, G.M., Granieri, D. (2013). Deep carbon emissions from
volcanoes. _Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry_ , 75, 323–354.

Cook, J. (2015). Do volcanoes emit more CO2 than humans? Skeptical Science.
Accessed May 11, 2016.

Gerlach, T. (2011). Volcanic versus anthropogenic carbon dioxide. _EOS_ ,
92(24), 201–202.

Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. (2007, February 20). Which produces more CO2,
volcanic or human activity? U.S. Geological Survey. Accessed May 11, 2016.

Houghton, R.A., van der Werf, G.R., DeFries, R.S., Hansen, M.C., House, J.I.,
Le Quéré, C., Pongratz, J., Ramankutty, N. (2012). Chapter G2 Carbon emissions
from land use and land-cover change, _Biogeosciences_ , 9, 5125-514.

IPCC. (2014). Summary for Policymakers. In: _Climate Change 2014_ : Mitigation
of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R.
Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I.
Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C.
von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Le Quéré, et al. (2015). Global Carbon Budget 2015, _Earth Syst. Sci. Data_ ,
7, 349–396, doi:10.5194/essd-7-349-2015, 2015.

Oskin, B. (2013, December 12). Earth's Greatest Killer Finally Caught.
LiveScience.

Ridley, D. A., Solomon, S., Barnes, J. E., Burlakov, V. D. (2015). Total
volcanic stratospheric aerosol optical depths and implications for global
climate change. _Geophysical Research Letters_ , 41, 7763–7769.

Self, S., Zhao, J-X., Holasek, R., Torres, R., and King, A. (1999). The
Atmospheric Impact of the 1991 Mount Pinatubo Eruption. [Online] U.S.
Geological Survey Website. http://pubs.usgs.gov/pinatubo/self/ Accessed June
16, 2016.

University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. (2012). Mount Tambora and the
Year Without a Summer. Accessed May 11, 2016.

Understanding Evolution. Volcanic activity and mass extinction. Accessed May
12, 2016.

U.S. Energy Information Administration. Total Energy. Accessed May 11, 2016.

Rating:

Select ratingGive Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human
activities? 1/5Give Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human
activities? 2/5Give Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human
activities? 3/5Give Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human
activities? 4/5Give Which emits more carbon dioxide: volcanoes or human
activities? 5/5

Average: 4.1 (49 votes)

Share This:

Topics:

Volcanic Eruptions

Greenhouse Gas Emissions

Category:

How the Climate System Works

Climate Change & Global Warming

Department:

Climate Q&A

Reviewer:

Terrence Gerlach

Related

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/climateqa_hottest_comic_480.png?itok=GY9iKeuC)

## What's the hottest Earth's ever been?

August 12, 2014

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/Comic_RollerCoaster_610.jpg?itok=gFQJUO8l)

## What’s the hottest Earth has been “lately”?

September 17, 2014

## You Might Like

![volcán](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/volcanos_and_CO2_rotator_480_alt1_0.jpg?itok=NE35yC1U)

## ¿Qué emite más dióxido de carbono? ¿Los volcanes o la actividad humana?

June 15, 2016

![Vertical profile of Atlantic Ocean

carbon](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/N%26F_HumanCO2andAtlanticOceanRotator_480x320.jpg?itok=iEzpsPNf)

## Cruises cut a slice through the Atlantic's carbon pie

June 5, 2018

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/SotC2017_07_AtmosphericCO2_graph_480x320.jpg?itok=f9-NOe5P)

## 2017 State of the climate: Atmospheric carbon dioxide

August 1, 2018

![Insect damage on fossil

leaf](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/insect-damage-fossil-480.png?itok=5eMqKmZ8)

## Models and fossils face off over one of the hottest periods in Earth's

history

November 13, 2017

![climate.gov](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/footer-logo.jpg)

                
                                      * Home
                      * News & Features
                      * Maps & Data
                      * Teaching Climate
                
                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * FAQs
                      * Site Map
                      * What's New?
                

Follow Climate.gov

![Follow us on twitter](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/twitter-foot.png)

![Follow us on Facebook](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/facebook-foot.png)

![Follow us on Instagram](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/instagram-

foot.png)

![Subscription link to sign up for Climate.gov's weekly update

newsletter](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/button_subscribe_sm.png)

2014 Webby Award winning website

![Webby Award](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/webby_green.png) ![Webby

Award](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/webby_govt.png)

Click each award to learn more

                
                                      * Information Quality
                      * NOAA Freedom of Information Act 
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Disclaimer
                      * USA.gov
                      * ready.gov
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

