

Open main menu

![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Search

# United States energy independence

                
                                      * Read in another language 
                      * Watch this page 
                      * Edit
                

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/52/U.S._trade_in_crude_oil%2C_petroleum_products%2C_natural_gas%2C_and_coal_%282000-2017%29_%2844637262144%29.png/220px-U.S._trade_in_crude_oil%2C_petroleum_products%2C_natural_gas%2C_and_coal_%282000-2017%29_%2844637262144%29.png)

US energy product trade, 2000–2017

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/US_Net_Energy_Imports.png/220px-

US_Net_Energy_Imports.png)

Trend of net energy imports into the United States, 1985–2013

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/US_oil_imports_by_country.jpeg/220px-

US_oil_imports_by_country.jpeg)

Sources of crude oil imports, 1985–2015

**US energy independence** relates to the goal of reducing the United States
imports of petroleum and other foreign sources of energy. Energy independence
is espoused by those who want to leave the US unaffected by global energy
supply disruptions, and to restrict reliance upon politically unstable states
for its energy security. Energy independence is highly concerned with oil, the
source of the country's principal transport fuels.

In total energy consumption, the US was between 86% and 91% self-sufficient in
2016.[1] In May 2011, the country became a net exporter of refined petroleum
products.[2] As of 2014, the United States was the world's third-largest
producer of crude oil, after Saudi Arabia and Russia,[3] and second-largest
exporter of refined products, after Russia.[4]

As of March 2015, 85% of crude oil imports came from (in decreasing volume):
Canada, Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Venezuela, and Colombia.[5] Nineteen percent of
imported oil comes from the Middle East.[6] The fraction of crude oil consumed
in the US that was imported went from 35% immediately before the 1973 oil
crisis, peaked at 60% in 2005, and then returned to 35% by 2013[7] thanks to
increased domestic production[8] from the shale oil boom.[9] Beginning in the
1970s, exports of crude oil were illegal without a permit; in 2013, the United
States physically exported a relatively small amount of oil, and only to
Canada.[10] The ban was repealed in 2015.[11]

Greater energy self-sufficiency, it was claimed, would prevent major supply
disruptions like the 1973 oil crisis and the 1979 energy crisis from
recurring. Proponents argue that the potential for political unrest in major
oil suppliers, such as Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, and Nigeria, is abundant, and
often causes great fluctuations in crude oil prices (especially in the short
term).

Large individual US pipelines and other fuel infrastructure and extraction
projects are controversial issues in US politics.

## Contents

##

Historical trendEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/US_Net_Gas_Imports.svg/220px-

US_Net_Gas_Imports.svg.png)

Trend of US net imports (imports minus exports) of natural gas, 1973–2017
(data from US EIA)

In the early 20th century the United States became a major oil supplier to the
world. World War II prompted a Synthetic Liquid Fuels Program but it did not
go beyond research. In mid-century the country shifted from being a major
exporter to a net importer. An import quota imposed in 1959 limited imports to
a fraction of domestic production until 1973.[12] After the 1973 oil crisis,
the United States Department of Energy and Synthetic Fuels Corporation were
created to address the problem of fuel import dependency.

The US's dependence on foreign oil rose from 26 percent to 47 percent between
1985 and 1989.[13] According to the Washington & Jefferson College Energy
Index, by 2012, American energy independence had decreased by 22% since the
Presidency of Harry Truman.[14] The US's imports of foreign oil fell to 36
percent in 2013, down from a high of 60 percent in 2006.[15]

Many proponents of energy independence look to the United States' untapped
domestic oil reserves, either known or potential. Those who favor increasing
domestic oil production often suggest removing many of the limitations on oil
exploration in the Gulf of Mexico, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (see
Arctic Refuge drilling controversy) and the outer continental shelf. Foreign
dependence is not the only factor in North American energy politics, however;
environmental concerns around land and water pollution and greenhouse gases
are also matters of controversy.

##

ApproachesEdit

Main articles: Energy conservation, Energy development, and Mitigation of peak
oil

Some proponents of US energy independence promote wider use of alternatives
such as ethanol fuel, methanol, biodiesel, plug-in hybrids and other
alternative propulsion. A 2013 report published by the Fuel Freedom Foundation
said that without a shift to domestic feedstocks for fuel, such as natural gas
and biomass, the US would not be able to achieve energy independence.[16] As
of 2014, the United States imposes an import tariff of 54 cents a gallon on
ethanol fuel (there is no such import tariff on oil or methanol fuel). Ethanol
fuel in Brazil is produced from sugarcane, which yields much more fuel per
acre than the corn used for ethanol production in the United States.

In the United States, oil is primarily consumed as fuel for cars, buses,
trucks and airplanes (in the form of gasoline, diesel and jet fuel). Two
thirds of US oil consumption is due to the transportation sector. A national
strategy designed to shift all transportation to a combined use of alternative
fuels and plug-in hybrids is predicted[17] to make the US independent of
petroleum (oil).

### North American energy independenceEdit

Oil imports are most problematic in domestic politics and energy security when
they come from countries that are openly hostile to US foreign policy and
interests (Iran, Venezuela, and formerly Iraq), are former or potential future
rivals (Russia) or have questionable human rights practices (Saudi Arabia).
Sometimes an alternative ' _North American energy independence_ is proposed, [
_by whom?_ ] by which North America as a unit should be energy independent,
but in which the US could still import energy from Canada and Mexico, which
are less problematic allies and more tightly economically integrated.

A related, less absolute, policy may be called _North American energy
security_. In 2012 in an editorial to Canadian newspaper _The Globe and Mail_
Mexican president elect Enrique Peña Nieto, called North American energy
security a "common goal" of Canada and Mexico.[18]

The benefits are argued to be similar to US energy independence—the reduction
of North America's energy dependence on unstable regions such as the Middle
East and South America and accepting supplies from the reliable North American
Free Trade Area, reducing exposure to terrorism abroad; lower balance of trade
and foreign exchange stresses on the US economy in an era when suppliers may
begin to price oil in euros; the development of renewable energy sources to
displace fossil fuels; and the promotion of energy conservation technology
exportable to energy-poor nations.

### Programs to limit US energy interests by Canada and MexicoEdit

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( December 2014)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

* * *

In Canada and Mexico there is also the concern not to have energy policy
dictated by the United States, as well as tension over US ownership of energy
companies.

In 1937 Mexico passed a constitutional amendment to nationalize its oil
industry, which led to the creation of Pemex, the national oil company. There
have been several proposals to privatize Pemex since, but they have never come
to fruition as many Mexicans fear foreign control of this strategic industry.

The 1957 Canadian election was fought partially in response to the 1956
Pipeline Debate which concerned whether or not the government should allow a
US-owned company to build a trans-Canadian gas pipeline and whether the route
should be entirely within Canada or partly through the United States. The
right-leaning Progressive Conservatives and leftist Co-operative Commonwealth
Federation opposition parties opposed American involvement in the pipeline
while the Liberal government supported it. The Liberals were defeated in the
1957 election.

In 1973 Canada created its own state energy company Petro-Canada. It began
operations in 1976, though it bought assets from private companies rather than
seizing them as in many other countries. In 1980 the National Energy Program
was launched to create oil self-sufficiency within Canada. It attempted to use
tax incentives to discourage oil exports (mostly from Western Canada,
primarily the province of Alberta) to the US, and redirect these towards to
the oil importing provinces of Eastern Canada. The Foreign Investment Review
Agency was also created to screen foreign (mostly US) takeovers of Canadian
companies. These policies were bitterly opposed by the provincial government
of Alberta, and were repealed and reversed during the Conservative government
of 1984–1993 which sought closer economic ties with the US, including the
Canada–US Free Trade Agreement of 1988.

##

DebateEdit

In a 2012 poll of energy experts by _Foreign Policy_ magazine, almost two-
thirds of respondents said energy independence was not a sensible goal.[19]

Highlighting the difficulty of separating domestic and foreign oil sources,
journalist Robert Bryce stated in 2008 that "the trends of energy
interdependence are growing and are inexorable" and branded the idea of being
able to choose where your oil came from as "hogwash".

The structure of the argument of critics is arranged as follows:

                
                                      1. Energy independence will not decrease US involvement in the Middle East. 
                        1. Interests in the Persian Gulf, including the protection of worldwide energy security upon which the global economy is dependent, will remain a US priority.[20]
                        2. Terrorism will not decline in the Middle East if the US ceases to buy oil, because terrorism is not funded by oil money.[20]
                        3. Although vast oil supplies are found in an unstable region subject to difficult geopolitics,[21] these geopolitics will continue to be fueled by other large consumers of oil, such as China, whether or not the US achieves energy independence. US energy independence will not cause a US pull-out from the Middle East, it will not decrease terrorism, and it will not foster stability or reform in the region.
                      2. Renewable energy sources can be extremely inefficient, as in the case of corn-based biofuels, which requires massive government subsidies and also enormous amounts of water and chemicals to grow, and causes significant air pollution when burned.[20] Other renewables, namely wind and solar power, are expensive and intermittent, and lack the infrastructure and technology needed to properly store the energy they harness from the environment: 
                        1. Natural gas was not a viable portion of US energy as of 2008, since we may have peaked in domestic reserves: US imports of natural gas from Canada tripled since 1973.[20]
                          1. However, US gross natural gas production set new all-time record highs each year from 2007 through 2013, due in part to new methods to extract Shale gas. Despite record withdrawals, the volume of US proved reserves still in the ground also stands at an all-time high, according to reserve data for the end of 2011. US net imports of natural gas peaked in 2007, then declined rapidly, and in 2013 were 60 percent below 2007.[22]
                        2. In the absence of breeder reactors or fusion reactors, nuclear power plants aren't a solution to energy independence either, since uranium must be imported: currently, 80% of US uranium is imported, mainly from Russia and Canada.[23]
                        3. Although the US enjoys massive coal reserves able to power the country at current rates of energy consumption for 200 years,[20] the hope that the country could use this resource as a liquid to fuel the transportation sector is unlikely. Although currently the US remains a net coal exporter of lower-quality coal, a large and, as of 2008, increasing portion of coal is being imported due to the cheaper, high-quality, low-sulfur foreign coal needed by power plants coping with air-quality regulations.[20]
                          1. However, from 2007 to 2011, US coal imports fell by 64%, and coal exports rose by 81%. As of 2011, coal exports from the US were eight times the tonnage of imports, and the US was the world's fourth-largest exporter of coal.[24]
                        4. US oil reserves cannot be relied upon: US oil production in 2008 had been steadily declining since 1970.[20]
                          1. From that point, US oil production rose rapidly during 2009–2013; US crude oil production for 2013 was 49% higher than that of 2008.[25]
                        5. Energy-efficient electrical and electronic devices require rare earth elements which mostly come from Inner Mongolia,[26] and lithium, which mostly comes from the Salar de Uyuni in Bolivia.[27]
                

### Benefits of oil dependenceEdit

Roger Howard[28] has argued[29] in _The Wall Street Journal_ that oil
dependence has significant benefits for the US and other oil-importing
nations. First, the world's major oil exporters are highly dependent on their
oil revenues, and fear rapid drops in the price of oil, such as occurred in
late 2008 and in 2014/2015. Second, this fear restrains destructive actions by
exporters: Howard cites the example of Russia's 2008 invasion of Georgia.
Russia's stock market plunged, and "within a week capital outflow reached a
massive $16 billion, suddenly squeezing domestic credit while the ruble
collapsed in value." He also gives the example of Libya, where Muammar al-
Gaddafi gave up his nuclear weapon program in exchange for the US lifting its
economic sanctions, which had prevented Libya from increasing its oil
production.

In his 2006 State of the Union Address, George W. Bush used the phrase
_addicted to oil_ , a phrase widely discussed in the media.[30][31][32]

### Energy resilience and AERSEdit

Andy Grove argues that energy independence is a flawed and infeasible
objective, particularly in a network of integrated global exchange. He
suggests instead that the objective should be energy resilience: resilience
goes hand in hand with adaptability, and it also is reflected in important
market ideas like substitutability. Resilience is one of the best features of
market processes; the information transmission function of prices means that
individual buyers and sellers can adapt to changes in supply and demand
conditions in a decentralized way. His suggestion for how to increase the
resilience of the US energy economy is to shift use from petroleum to
electricity (electrification), that can be produced using multiple sources of
energy, including renewables.[33]

In 2008 former vice president Al Gore challenged the United States to commit
to producing all electricity from renewable sources (AERS) like solar and wind
power in 10 years.[34][35] Both the Center for Resource Solutions and current
president Barack Obama have publicly stated they support Al Gore's AERS
goal.[36]

Canada is the worlds second largest producer of hydroelectricity (after China)
and exported three billion dollars worth of electricity to the US in 2015,
mostly from the major hydro-producing provinces of Québec, Ontario, Manitoba
and British Columbia.[37]

Further information: Renewable energy commercialization

### Obama administrationEdit

Former US President Barack Obama repeatedly stated that the US had begun
"freeing ourselves from foreign oil" including during his 2012 reelection
speech.[38][39] Canadian observers noted that his usage of "foreign" did not
include Canada. Yet in November 2015, Obama rejected the proposal to build the
Keystone XL pipeline from Alberta to the Gulf Coast because of domestic
environmental concerns over water quality as well as the general antipathy of
the environmental movement to pipeline building, and the production practices
in the source (the Athabasca oil sands).[40]

### Trump administrationEdit

In March 2017, US President Donald J. Trump announced the granting of a permit
for construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, calling it "the first of many
infrastructure projects" that he intended to approve in order to put more
Americans to work. The permitting came two months after Trump, only days into
his presidency, signed an executive order aimed at reviving the Keystone XL
and Dakota Access pipelines.[41]

In May 2017, President Trump promised "complete" independence from foreign
sources of oil.[42]

During his administration's _Energy Week_ celebration of June 2017, President
Trump announced that he was formally seeking a review of US energy policies,
in order to help the Nuclear power industry prosper. Trump also announced that
the Interior Department would be kicking off the formal process to expand
areas available for offshore drilling of oil and natural gas. He vowed to
create "American energy dominance".[43]

In May 2018, it was reported that US liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports had
quadrupled. The value of US LNG exports was estimated to reach nearly $5
billion in 2018 and $12 billion in 2019.[44]

In early December 2018, it was reported that the US had turned into a net
exporter of oil "last week", thus breaking nearly 75 continuous years of
dependence on foreign oil. Reportedly, the US sold overseas a net of 211,000
barrels a day of crude and refined products such as gasoline and diesel. This,
compared to net imports of about three million barrels a day on average
previously during 2018 and the prior annual peak of more than 12 million
barrels a day during 2005, as confirmed by the US Energy Information
Administration.[45]

In March 2019, crude oil prices regained momentum after reports showed an
unexpected drop in US fuel supplies. The American Petroleum Institute reported
domestic crude inventories declined 2.58 million barrels the previous week.
The US Energy Information Administration was due to report on the official
numbers on domestic supply and demand. However, James Williams, president at
WTRG Economics in London, Arkansas said, "These are clearly bullish numbers,
and if reinforced it will be more bullish".[46]

##

See alsoEdit

                
                                      * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ad/Wind-turbine-icon.svg/28px-Wind-turbine-icon.svg.png) Renewable energy portal
                      * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Crystal_energy.svg/29px-Crystal_energy.svg.png) Energy portal
                
                      * Autarky
                      * Carter Doctrine
                      * Electric car
                      * Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007
                      * Ethanol fuel in the United States
                      * Peak oil
                      * Pickens Plan
                      * Securing America's Energy Independence Act of 2007
                      * Solar power in the United States
                      * Sustainable energy
                      * Wind engineering
                      * Zero emission
                

##

ReferencesEdit

                
                                      1. **^** Energy Information Administration (May 19, 2017). "U.S. Energy Facts Explained". Retrieved November 30, 2017.
                      2. **^** Energy Information Administration (March 12, 2015). "How much of the oil produced in the United States is consumed in the United States?". Retrieved May 30, 2015.
                      3. **^** CIA. "The World Factbook – COUNTRY COMPARISON :: CRUDE OIL – PRODUCTION". Retrieved May 31, 2015.
                      4. **^** "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". _www.cia.gov_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      5. **^** "Petroleum and other Liquids – Company Level Imports". Energy Information Administration. Retrieved  May 31, 2015.
                      6. **^** Daniel Yergin. "Energy Independence". _Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved  September 27, 2008.
                      7. **^** Yergin, Daniel. "Congratulations, America. You're (Almost) Energy Independent". _POLITICO Magazine_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      8. **^** "U.S. Field Production of Crude Oil (Thousand Barrels)". _www.eia.gov_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      9. **^** Actual net imports also peaked in 2005, regardless of changes in demand: http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRNTUS2&f=A
                      10. **^** "The Case for Allowing U.S. Crude Oil Exports". _Council on Foreign Relations_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      11. **^** "America lifts its ban on oil exports". December 18, 2015. Retrieved  February 6, 2019 – via The Economist.
                      12. **^** "OPEC". _Econlib_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      13. **^** Abelson, Philip H. (October 26, 1990). "Transportation Fuels". _Science_. **250** (4980): 485. doi:10.1126/science.250.4980.485. PMID 17751464.
                      14. **^** Luna, Taryn (April 30, 2012). "W&J College index details U.S. energy consumption". _Pittsburgh Post-Gazette_. Retrieved  December 16, 2012.
                      15. **^** Thomas L. Friedman (August 24, 2013). "Foreign Policy by Whisper and Nudge". _The New York Times_.
                      16. **^** Aronoff and Taft (2014). "Is Energy Independence Really Possible In The United States?"
                      17. **^** "The Silver Bullet: Plug-in Biofuel Hybrids". _PluginCars.com_. February 19, 2010. Retrieved  April 1, 2017.
                      18. **^** Peña Nieto, Enrique (November 27, 2012). "For Mexico and Canada, there's room to grow". _The Globe and Mail_. Retrieved  January 27, 2017.
                      19. **^** Yergin, Daniel; "How is Energy Remaking the World?" _Foreign Policy_ July/August 2012 pg. 61
                      20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Bryce, Robert. Gusher of Lies: The Dangerous Delusions of "Energy Independence". New York, NY: PublicAffairs, 2008.
                      21. **^** "Balestrini, Santiago. "The Nuclear Option for Long-Term Energy Independence: Report for the 2006/2007 Sam Nunn Security Program Energy Policy Exercise". Pp. 1–26. December 16, 2008" (PDF). _janosburg.net_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      22. **^** US Energy Information Administration, Natural gas data, accessed March 21, 2014.
                      23. **^** Yamanaka, Megumi. "US demand for uranium seen rising sharply", International Herald Tribune. April 16, 2007. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/04/15/bloomberg/bxcom.php. December 16, 2008
                      24. **^** US Energy Information Administration Coal overview, September 27, 2012.
                      25. **^** US Energy Information Administration, Crude oil production, accessed March 21, 2014.
                      26. **^** Farago, Robert (July 23, 2009). "The Truth About Rare Earths and Hybrids". _International Business Times_.
                      27. **^** Mills, Mark (May 5, 2008). "Go Long on Lithium". _Forbes_.
                      28. **^** author of _The Oil Hunters: Exploration and Espionage in the Middle East_ , 2008, Hambledon Continuum, London / New York, ISBN 978-1-84725-232-6
                      29. **^** _An Ode to Oil_, Wall Street Journal, 11/29/08
                      30. **^** "The State of the Union: A Look Between the Lines". _NPR.org_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      31. **^** "MSN - Outlook, Office, Skype, Bing, Breaking News, and Latest Videos". _MSN_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      32. **^** Bush in a lighter shade of green, BBC News
                      33. **^** Lynne Kiesling. "Andy Grove: Energy resilience, not energy independence". _www.knowledgeproblem.com_. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved  September 27, 2008.
                      34. **^** Jasmin Melvin; Deborah Zabarenko. "Planet Ark : Gore: Make All US Electricity From Renewable Sources". _Reuters_. Retrieved  September 27, 2008.
                      35. **^** Ucilia Wang. "Al Gore Sets Energy Goal". _greentechmedia.com_. Retrieved  September 27, 2008.
                      36. **^** "Center for Resource Solutions Supports Al Gore's 100% Renewable Energy Goal". _www.resource-solutions.org_. Archived from the original on January 5, 2009. Retrieved  September 27, 2008.
                      37. **^** "HTTP 404 - File not found - HTTP 404 - Fichier non trouvé". _www.neb.gc.ca_. Retrieved  February 6, 2019.
                      38. **^** Rosenthal, Elisabeth (November 12, 2012). "Report Sees U.S. as Top Oil Producer, Overtaking Saudi Arabia, in 5 Years". Retrieved February 6, 2019 – via NYTimes.com.
                      39. **^** https://calgaryherald.com/business/Obama+could+dally+Keystone+decision/7516081/story.html
                      40. **^** Koring, Paul (November 6, 2015). "Obama rejects TransCanada's Keystone XL pipeline". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on January 20, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
                      41. **^** Brady Dennis and Steven Mufson, _The Washington Post_ , As Trump administration grants approval for Keystone XL pipeline, an old fight is reignited, March 24, 2017
                      42. **^** Matt Egan, _CNN Business_ , U.S. energy independence looks 'tantalizingly close', First published August 9, 2016
                      43. **^** Timothy Cama | _The Hill_ , Trump vows to create 'American energy dominance', https://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/340135-trump-rolls-out-actions-to-boost-nuclear-fossil-fuels, June 29, 2017
                      44. **^** "U.S. natural gas production and consumption increase in nearly all AEO2018 cases - Today in Energy - U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)". _www.eia.gov_. Retrieved  March 19, 2019.
                      45. **^** Javier Blas, _Bloomberg_ , "The U.S. Just Became a Net Oil Exporter for the First Time in 75 Years", December 6, 2018
                      46. **^** Oil Gains as Industry Report Shows Unexpected Cut in U.S. Supply, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-11/oil-firmer-on-tightening-supply-from-saudi-arabia-venezuela, Alex Nussbaum and Ben Foldy | _Bloomberg_ , March 11, 2019
                

##

External linksEdit

                
                                      * Herberg, Mikkal (2014). _Energy Security and the Asia-Pacific: Course Reader_. United States: The National Bureau of Asian Research.
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_energy_independence&oldid=897947382"

Last edited on 20 May 2019, at 11:18

## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

                
                                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy
                      * Desktop
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

