

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

                
                                      *           *           * Log In or Sign Up
                      * Log In
                      * Sign Up
                
                      * Tech 
                      * Reviews 
                      * Science 
                      * Creators 
                      * Entertainment 
                      * Video 
                      * Features 
                      * Podcasts 
                      * Newsletters 
                      * Store 
                      * More
                
                      * Tech
                
                        * Video
                        * Amazon
                        * Apple
                        * Facebook
                        * Google
                
                        * Microsoft
                        * Samsung
                        * Tesla
                        * AI
                        * Cars
                
                        * Cybersecurity
                        * Mobile
                        * Policy
                        * Privacy
                        * Scooters
                
                        * All Tech
                      * Reviews
                
                        * Phones
                        * Laptops
                        * Headphones
                        * Cameras
                
                        * Tablets
                        * Smartwatches
                        * Speakers
                        * Drones
                
                        * Accessories
                        * This is my Next
                        * How-to
                        * Good Deals
                
                        * More from Verge Guidebook
                      * Science
                
                        * Video
                        * Space
                        * NASA
                        * SpaceX
                
                        * Health
                        * Energy
                        * Environment
                
                        * All Science
                      * Creators
                
                        * YouTube
                        * Instagram
                        * Adobe
                
                        * Kickstarter
                        * Tumblr
                        * Art Club
                
                        * Cameras
                        * Photography
                        * What’s in your bag?
                
                        * All Creators
                      * Entertainment
                
                        * Film
                        * TV
                        * Games
                
                        * Fortnite
                        * Game of Thrones
                        * Books
                
                        * Comics
                        * Music
                
                        * All Entertainment
                      * Video 
                      * Features 
                      * Podcasts 
                      * Newsletters 
                      * Store
                

✕

                
                                      * Science
                      * Environment
                

# Here’s what vanishing sea ice in the Arctic means for you

New, 4 comments

‘The Arctic is a natural freezer’

By Alessandra Potenza@ale_potenza May 10, 2018, 2:03pm EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Here’s what vanishing sea ice in the Arctic means for you

share tweet Linkedin Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/7Ydg76kmDuHWLlIBmM3O0KVIvKs=/0x0:1440x1080/1200x800/filters:focal\(605x425:835x655\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/59693839/dscn2763_large1.0.jpg) _Sea ice
floating north of Greenland._ Photo by Robbie Russell / NASA

As the world’s temperatures go up, the Arctic keeps losing its ice. This
winter, the area covered by sea ice was the second smallest on record — after
last year. And many experts believe that this summer, the Arctic ice cap will
shrink to record lows. Why should I care, you ask?

“The Arctic is a natural freezer,” says Michael Mann, a climatologist and
director of the Earth System Science Center at Pennsylvania State University,
in an email to _The Verge_. “Just like you’d be concerned if all of the ice in
your freezer melted, so should you be concerned about the loss of Arctic sea
ice.”

" “The Arctic is a natural freezer.”"

The changes that are happening in the Arctic don’t just affect the Arctic. Our
planet is an interconnected system, and the vanishing ice is already having
ripple effects down south. Among them: faster global warming, rising sea
levels, and possibly more extreme natural disasters. (Plus, the polar bears
will suffer.) Scientists are still trying to figure many things out, but
pretty much everyone agrees that a melting Arctic isn’t a good thing.

“This whole climate change is a big can of worms,” says Ignatius Rigor,
coordinator of the International Arctic Buoy Program at the University of
Washington. “It’s pretty scary because we’re starting to realize more and more
how big of an impact we’re having on the planet.”

So here are some ways that the vanishing Arctic ice is affecting the rest of
the world — you included.

### **The albedo effect**

The albedo effect is just a fancy expression for a very simple concept: white
surfaces like ice and snow reflect about 80 percent of the Sun’s energy back
into space. That allows us to keep cool. But if those white spots disappear,
the darker ocean and land will absorb 90 percent of that heat, accelerating
global warming. “If you have a black car, it gets hotter in the summer than if
you have a white car,” says Peter Wadhams, professor of ocean physics at the
University of Cambridge.

The albedo effect due to vanishing sea ice is already responsible for about 25
percent of global warming, according to Jennifer Francis, a research professor
at Rutgers University’s School of Environment and Biological Sciences. So
we’re all getting hotter because sea ice is shrinking, and the Arctic is
warming up twice as fast as the rest of the world. That, in and of itself, can
lead to even more problems.

### **Sea level rise**

Sea ice floats, so when it melts, it does not raise sea levels. But warmer
temperatures in the Arctic are causing another type of ice to disappear as
well: land-based ice in Greenland. If _that_ ice melts, it causes sea levels
to go up. Scientists estimate that if the entire Greenland ice sheet — which
is roughly three times the size of Texas — melted, sea levels would soar 20
feet.

" “Certain cities will have to be abandoned.”"

The seas are already rising, and so far, Greenland has contributed to only 4
to 5 percent of that rise, says Francis. But melt rates are accelerating, and
that poses a serious threat to anyone living on the coast. In the US, that’s
about 40 percent of the population. Residents in Florida, New Jersey, and
Maryland are already experiencing more flooding. And the situation isn’t going
to get better.

“Certain cities will have to be abandoned,” Wadhams says. Rigor agrees: “Our
coastal towns aren’t really built for this.”

In Alaska, there’s also another problem tied to vanishing sea ice. The ice
protects coastal towns from big waves, Rigor says. Just this winter, as ice in
the Bering Sea shrunk to record levels, huge waves pummeled the town of
Diomede, engulfing homes. Erosion is also forcing the 400-plus residents of
Newtok, Alaska, to relocate.

### **More extreme weather**

There’s another way that a warming Arctic might hit close to home: many
scientists believe that it might affect extreme weather events in North
America and Europe. Earlier this year, for instance, research showed that when
the Arctic is unusually warm, extreme winter weather is two to four times more
likely in the eastern US.

That may be happening because a warming Arctic disrupts the jet stream, “a
river of fast-moving wind high over our heads” that “basically controls and
creates all the weather that we experience,” Francis says. The difference in
temperature between the Arctic and the mid latitudes, where we live and it’s
warmer, is one of the driving forces of the jet stream. But as the vanishing
ice is causing the Arctic to warm twice as fast as the rest of the world, that
temperature difference is diminishing. And that’s weakening the winds in the
jet stream, Francis says. A weaker jet stream also has more waves, and that
means more extreme weather that lingers for longer.

"“a river of fast-moving wind high over our heads”"

Francis says we’ve already seen this jet stream disruption in action this
winter, as the eastern US experienced record-breaking freezing temperatures, a
“bomb cyclone,” and three nor’easters in just 11 days. But others say there’s
still “a lot of debate in the scientific community” on whether or not a
warming Arctic is to blame, according to Julienne Stroeve, professor of polar
observation and modelling at University College London.

More research is looking into this. And it’s not just about the US or Europe.
A study in 2017 showed that there’s a link between shrinking Arctic ice and a
build-up of smog in China.

### **Thawing permafrost**

Rising temperatures in the Arctic are also causing frozen ground, called
permafrost, to thaw in Alaska, Canada, and Siberia. That’s concerning because
permafrost traps huge amounts of carbon — at least as much carbon as it’s in
the atmosphere right now, Francis says. If the permafrost warms up, it can
start releasing this carbon in the form of two powerful heat-trapping
greenhouse gases, methane and carbon dioxide, making global warming worse.

One study published in _Nature Geoscience_ in 2012 estimated that thawed
permafrost could contribute up to 3 degrees Fahrenheit (1.7 degrees Celsius)
of warming by 2300. That may not seem like much, but most scientists believe
that we need to keep warming well below 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit (2 degrees
Celsius) if we want to stave off the worst effects of climate change. And the
greenhouse gas leak from the permafrost is independent from all the carbon
dioxide we keep pumping into the atmosphere by burning fossil fuel. Those CO2
concentrations aren’t going down.

Wadhams says that offshore permafrost also poses a danger: the frozen,
underwater sediments in the Arctic are rich in methane, and if those layers
start melting, we could see “a very sudden, big burst of warming that would be
disastrous,” he says. But Francis says that offshore permafrost is much less
of a concern right now since the ocean waters deep down are still _very_ cold.
“We got other things that are much bigger to worry about right now,” she says.

" the ice is also becoming thinner"

### **What’s next?**

Since the 1980s, the area covered by Arctic sea ice in the summer has shrunk
by about 40 percent, according to NASA. The ice is also becoming thinner. It’s
really hard to predict when we could see ice-free summers in the Arctic, but
it could be as soon as in 20 to 40 years, Francis says. (In the winter, the
North Pole has six months of darkness, so it’s likely that the ice will stay
during that time of the year for a long time.) It all depends on how warm our
planet gets — and to limit that, we need to reduce the amount of greenhouse
gases that enter the atmosphere.

The likely solution, according to Wadhams, is the development of “carbon
capture” technology that can remove CO2 from the air. Some projects are doing
this already, but they’re not large scale enough to really make a difference.
But if we devote enough research dollars to the problem, Wadhams is confident
that we will find a solution. Francis agrees: once emitted, CO2 stays in the
air for 100 to 200 years, so “all of the emissions that have occurred are
going to affect us for a long time, unless we can figure out a way to remove
them from the atmosphere.”

Wadhams adds: “In the end, that’s the only thing that will save us from global
warming.”

## Next Up In Science

### ![Good Deals](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/53621321/Good_Deals_v4.0.png)

                
                                      1. Samsung’s curved TVs cost hundreds of dollars less today, plus other deals Also see a well-above-average electric scooter and Nest’s Learning Thermostat E
                      2. New Fortnite edition purple Xbox One S will go on sale on June 7th The bundle, which includes the game, is $250 for a limited time
                      3. Google’s Nest Hub smart display is still $50 off at eBay A few other Memorial Day deals are still happening
                      4. Nintendo’s Super Famicom Classic is cheaper than the SNES Classic today Newegg has stock of the Japanese retro mini-console
                      5. Chromebooks with Intel processors and PC accessories are cheaper today Plus, there are a few remaining Memorial Day deals
                

More in Good Deals

Verge3.0_Logomark_Color_1

### Command Line

Command Line delivers daily updates from the near-future.

email address... Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy.

This Article has a component height of 34. The sidebar size is long.

#### Loading comments...

Chorus

                
                                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Cookie Policy
                      * GDPR Commitment
                      * Communications Preferences
                      * Contact
                      * Tip Us
                      * Community Guidelines
                      * About
                      * Ethics Statement
                

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

