

Skip to content

![artdiamondblog.com](https://artdiamondblog.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/cropped-HP3D5006CropSmall-2.jpg)

artdiamondblog.com

Art Diamond's web log

Menu

                
                                      * About Diamond
                      * About Blog
                      * Openness to C. D. Book
                

![artdiamondblog.com](https://artdiamondblog.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/cropped-Openness-to-Creative-Destruction.png)

# Global Warming Ranked at Bottom of World Priorities by Economists and

Ambassadors

![LomborgBjorn.gif](http://media.artdiamondblog.com/images2/LomborgBjorn.gif)
Bjorn Lomborg. Source of image: online version of WSJ article cited below.

> (p. A10) Bjorn Lomborg busted -- and that is the only word for it -- onto
the world scene in 2001 with the publication of his book "The Skeptical
Environmentalist." A one-time Greenpeace enthusiast, he'd originally planned
to disprove those who said the environment was getting better. He failed. And
to his credit, his book said so, supplying a damning critique of today's
environmental pessimism. Carefully researched, it offered endless statistics
-- from official sources such as the U.N. -- showing that from biodiversity to
global warming, there simply were no apocalypses in the offing. "Our history
shows that we solve more problems than we create," he tells me. For his
efforts, Mr. Lomborg was labeled a heretic by environmental groups -- whose
fundraising depends on scaring the jeepers out of the public -- and became
more hated by these alarmists than even (if possible) President Bush.

>

> Yet the experience left Mr. Lomborg with a taste for challenging
conventional wisdom. In 2004, he invited eight of the world's top economists
-- including four Nobel Laureates -- to Copenhagen, where they were asked to
evaluate the world's problems, think of the costs and efficiencies attached to
solving each, and then produce a prioritized list of those most deserving of
money. The well-publicized results (and let it be said here that Mr. Lomborg
is no slouch when it comes to promoting himself and his work) were stunning.
While the economists were from varying political stripes, they largely agreed.
The numbers were just so compelling: $1 spent preventing HIV/AIDS would result
in about $40 of social benefits, so the economists put it at the top of the
list (followed by malnutrition, free trade and malaria). In contrast, $1 spent
to abate global warming would result in only about two cents to 25 cents worth
of good; so that project dropped to the bottom.

>

> "Most people, average people, when faced with these clear choices, _would_
pick the $40-of-good project over others -- that's _rational_ ," says Mr.
Lomborg. "The problem is that most people are simply presented with a menu of
projects, with no prices and no quantities. What the Copenhagen Consensus was
trying to do was put the slices and prices on a menu. And then require people
to make choices."

>

> Easier said than done. As Mr. Lomborg explains, "It's fine to ask economists
to prioritize, but economists don't run the world." . . .

>

> So all the more credit to Mr. Lomborg, who several weeks ago got his first
big shot at reprogramming world leaders. His organization, the Copenhagen
Consensus Center, held a new version of the exercise in Georgetown. In
attendance were eight U.N. ambassadors, including John Bolton. (China and
India signed on, though no Europeans.) They were presented with global
projects, the merits of each of which were passionately argued by experts in
those fields. Then they were asked: If you had an extra $50 billion, how would
you prioritize your spending?

>

> Mr. Lomborg grins and says that before the event he briefed the ambassadors:
"Several of them looked down the list and said 'Wait, I want to put a No. 1 by
each of these projects, they are all so important.' And I had to say, 'Yeah,
uh, that's exactly the point of this exercise -- to make you not do that.'" So
rank they did. And perhaps no surprise, their final list looked very similar
to that of the wise economists. At the top were better health care, cleaner
water, more schools and improved nutrition. At the bottom was . . . global
warming.

For the full interview, see:

KIMBERLEY A. STRASSEL. "The Weekend Interview with Bjorn Lomborg; Get Your
Priorities Right." _The Wall Street Journal_ (Sat., July 8, 2006): A10.

(Note: first ellipsis is added; the second ellipsis is in the original.)

![](http://media.artdiamondblog.com/images2/SkepticalEnvironmentalistBK-

thumb.jpg) Source of book image: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/customer-
reviews/0521010683/ref=cm_cr_dp_2_1/104-0101568-2686373?ie=UTF8&customer-
reviews.sort%5Fby=-SubmissionDate&n=283155

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3e92a58fabc74149086f6a2cf2f257ed?s=49&d=mm&r=g)Author
Art DiamondPosted on July 11, 2006Categories Books, Economics,
Energy/Environment, Global Warming, Government, Health

## Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

## Post navigation

Previous Previous post: Foreign Aid Is Harmful to African Countries: More on
Why Africa is Poor

Next Next post: Test That Showed No Life on Mars, Now Also Shows No Life on
Earth, Either

Search for: Search

## Related Links

"Wilbur Wright Circles Manhattan": brief musings on Wilbur Wright, flight, and
my _Openness to Creative Destruction_ book.

**Art Diamond's personal website artdiamond.com**

**Art Diamond's academic website at UNO**

![Web Analytics](https://c.statcounter.com/3477266/0/0038ccf8/0/)

The StatCounter number above reports the number of "page loads" since the
counter was installed late on 2/26/08. Page loads are defined on the site as
"The number of times your page has been visited."

View My Stats

## Recent Posts

                
                                      * Wages Depend More on Nonemployment Than on Narrower "Unemployment"
                      * Where Worker Pool Is Large, Employers Demand College Degrees for More Jobs
                      * Google Is Vulnerable to Competition
                      * Openness to Creative Destruction Released Today
                      * Largest U.S. Firm Now Has 3% of U.S. Market Capitalization; In 1930s through 1990s the Largest U.S. Firm Had About 6%
                

## Recent Comments

                
                                      * PaulS on "Machines Are Not Capable of Creativity"
                      * PaulS on Youths Reject Construction Jobs
                      * PaulS on Congestion Pricing Rises Again, as Crises Loom
                      * PaulS on Price "Gouging" Encourages Demanders to Conserve and Suppliers to Supply
                      * PaulS on "Hurricane Superstar" Had No Use For Global Warming
                

## Archives

                
                                      * June 2019
                      * May 2019
                      * April 2019
                      * March 2019
                      * February 2019
                      * January 2019
                      * December 2018
                      * November 2018
                      * October 2018
                      * September 2018
                      * August 2018
                      * July 2018
                      * June 2018
                      * May 2018
                      * April 2018
                      * March 2018
                      * February 2018
                      * January 2018
                      * December 2017
                      * November 2017
                      * October 2017
                      * September 2017
                      * August 2017
                      * July 2017
                      * June 2017
                      * May 2017
                      * April 2017
                      * March 2017
                      * February 2017
                      * January 2017
                      * December 2016
                      * November 2016
                      * October 2016
                      * September 2016
                      * August 2016
                      * July 2016
                      * June 2016
                      * May 2016
                      * April 2016
                      * March 2016
                      * February 2016
                      * January 2016
                      * December 2015
                      * November 2015
                      * October 2015
                      * September 2015
                      * August 2015
                      * July 2015
                      * June 2015
                      * May 2015
                      * April 2015
                      * March 2015
                      * February 2015
                      * January 2015
                      * December 2014
                      * November 2014
                      * October 2014
                      * September 2014
                      * August 2014
                      * July 2014
                      * June 2014
                      * May 2014
                      * April 2014
                      * March 2014
                      * February 2014
                      * January 2014
                      * December 2013
                      * November 2013
                      * October 2013
                      * September 2013
                      * August 2013
                      * July 2013
                      * June 2013
                      * May 2013
                      * April 2013
                      * March 2013
                      * February 2013
                      * January 2013
                      * December 2012
                      * November 2012
                      * October 2012
                      * September 2012
                      * August 2012
                      * July 2012
                      * June 2012
                      * May 2012
                      * April 2012
                      * March 2012
                      * February 2012
                      * January 2012
                      * December 2011
                      * November 2011
                      * October 2011
                      * September 2011
                      * August 2011
                      * July 2011
                      * June 2011
                      * May 2011
                      * April 2011
                      * March 2011
                      * February 2011
                      * January 2011
                      * December 2010
                      * November 2010
                      * October 2010
                      * September 2010
                      * August 2010
                      * July 2010
                      * June 2010
                      * May 2010
                      * April 2010
                      * March 2010
                      * February 2010
                      * January 2010
                      * December 2009
                      * November 2009
                      * October 2009
                      * September 2009
                      * August 2009
                      * July 2009
                      * June 2009
                      * May 2009
                      * April 2009
                      * March 2009
                      * February 2009
                      * January 2009
                      * December 2008
                      * November 2008
                      * October 2008
                      * September 2008
                      * August 2008
                      * July 2008
                      * June 2008
                      * May 2008
                      * April 2008
                      * March 2008
                      * February 2008
                      * January 2008
                      * December 2007
                      * November 2007
                      * October 2007
                      * September 2007
                      * August 2007
                      * July 2007
                      * June 2007
                      * May 2007
                      * April 2007
                      * March 2007
                      * February 2007
                      * January 2007
                      * December 2006
                      * November 2006
                      * October 2006
                      * September 2006
                      * August 2006
                      * July 2006
                      * June 2006
                      * May 2006
                      * April 2006
                      * March 2006
                      * February 2006
                      * January 2006
                      * December 2005
                      * November 2005
                      * October 2005
                      * September 2005
                      * August 2005
                      * July 2005
                

## Categories

                
                                      * Aesthetics
                      * Africa
                      * Aging
                      * Antitrust
                      * Archaeology
                      * Argentina
                      * Bangladesh
                      * Becker, Gary
                      * Bibliometrics
                      * Blogs
                      * Books
                      * Brazil
                      * Britain
                      * Buchanan, James M.
                      * California
                      * Capitalism
                      * China
                      * Christensen, Clayton
                      * Churchill
                      * Coffee
                      * Communism
                      * Creative Destruction
                      * Cuba
                      * Czech Republic
                      * Dachshund (Willy)
                      * Denmark
                      * Disney
                      * Economic Crisis
                      * Economic Growth
                      * Economics
                      * Economics of Science
                      * Economics of Technology
                      * Education
                      * Egypt
                      * Energy/Environment
                      * Entrepreneurship
                      * Estonia
                      * Evolution
                      * France
                      * Free Markets
                      * Free Speech
                      * Friedman, Milton
                      * Germany
                      * Gilder, George
                      * Global Warming
                      * Government
                      * Greece
                      * Gun Control
                      * Harry Potter
                      * Hayek, F.A.
                      * Health
                      * History
                      * Houston
                      * Hurricane Katrina
                      * Incentives
                      * India
                      * Indians
                      * Iraq
                      * Ireland
                      * Israel
                      * Italy
                      * Japan
                      * Journalism
                      * Labor Economics
                      * Leapfrog
                      * Management
                      * Methodology
                      * Mexico
                      * Montessori
                      * Movies
                      * Nebraska
                      * New York City
                      * Nuclear Power
                      * Openness to C. D. Book
                      * Patents
                      * Philanthropy
                      * Philosophy
                      * Property Rights
                      * Psychology
                      * Public Choice
                      * Rand, Ayn
                      * Reagan
                      * Regulations
                      * Religion
                      * Rogge, Ben
                      * Russia
                      * Schumpeter
                      * Science
                      * Smith, Adam
                      * Socialism
                      * Stigler, George
                      * Sweden
                      * Technology
                      * Television
                      * Texas
                      * Theater
                      * Uncategorized
                      * Unions
                      * Venezuela
                      * Video
                      * Wal-Mart
                

## Meta

                
                                      * Log in
                      * Entries RSS
                      * Comments RSS
                      * WordPress.org
                
                      * About Diamond
                      * About Blog
                      * Openness to C. D. Book
                

artdiamondblog.com Proudly powered by WordPress

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

