

![Phys.org](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/logo-

header.png)

Topics

                
                                      * Week's top
                      * Latest news
                      * Unread news
                      * Subscribe
                

### Science X Account

__

__

Remember me

Sign In

Click here to sign in with or

Forget Password?

Not a member? **Sign up**

Learn more

                
                                      * Nanotechnology
                      * Physics
                      * Earth
                      * Astronomy & Space
                      * Technology
                      * Chemistry
                      * Biology
                      * Other Sciences
                
                      *           * share this!
                
                      * 5.7K
                
                      * 372
                
                      * Share
                
                      * Email
                
                      1. Home
                      2. Earth
                      3. Earth Sciences
                
                      *           *           * * * *
                

October 12, 2015

# Sea level rise will swallow Miami, New Orleans, study finds

![The coast line of Miami Beach and the City of Miami which a new study warns

will sink below rising

seas](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2015/thecoastline.jpg)
The coast line of Miami Beach and the City of Miami which a new study warns
will sink below rising seas

Say goodbye to Miami and New Orleans. No matter what we do to curb global
warming, these and other beloved US cities will sink below rising seas,
according to a study Monday.

But making extreme carbon cuts and moving to renewable energy could save
millions of people living in iconic coastal areas of the United States, said
the findings in the October 12 edition of the _Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences_ , a peer-reviewed US journal.

Scientists have already established that if we do nothing to reduce our
burning of fossil fuel up to the year 2100, the planet will face sea level
rise of 14-32 feet (4.3-9.9 meters), said lead author Ben Strauss, vice
president for sea level and climate impacts at Climate Central.

The big uncertainty is the issue of when.

"Some of this could happen as early as next century," Strauss told AFP.

"But it might also take many centuries," he added.

"Just think of a pile of ice in a warm room. You know it is going to melt, but
it is harder to say how quickly."

To bring this issue home for people in the United States, the study pinpoints
at-risk land where more than 20 million people reside.

The authors projected business-as-usual carbon emissions, in addition to the
complication of the melting West Antarctic ice sheet, a process some experts
fear is irreversible.

They also considered what might happen if the world were to make a big
turnaround, reaching peak carbon emissions by 2020.

This radical scenario would have to occur far earlier than the current aim of
some world powers to peak by 2050, said Strauss.

An online tool at choices.climatecentral.org allows users to see the impacts
on various US cities. A global version is expected in the next month, Strauss
said.

![A woman jogs along a levee along the Mississippi River with the city skyline

in the distance on May 16, 2015 in New Orleans,

Lou](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2015/awomanjogsal.jpg)
A woman jogs along a levee along the Mississippi River with the city skyline
in the distance on May 16, 2015 in New Orleans, Louisiana

**Too late?**

The tool shows which US cities may face "lock-in dates beyond which the
cumulative effects of carbon emissions likely commit them to long-term sea-
level rise that could submerge land under more than half of the city's
population," said the study.

"Norfolk, Virginia, for example, faces a lock-in date of 2045 under a scenario
of unabated carbon emissions."

For cities like Miami and New Orleans, the limits are already exceeded.

"In our analysis, a lot of cities have futures that depend on our carbon
choices but some appear to be already lost," Strauss said.

"And it is hard to imagine how we could defend Miami in the long run."

Miami's low elevation and porous limestone foundation mean that sea walls and
levees will not help, he said.

The state of Florida has the most number of big cities at risk from sea level
rise, holding 40 percent or more of the US population living on potentially
affected land.

After Florida, the next three most affected states are California, Louisiana
and New York.

![A man surfs near the Virginia Beach Fishing Pier, which suffered damage from

Hurricane Irene, on August 28, 2011 in Virginia

Bea](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2015/amansurfsnea.jpg)
A man surfs near the Virginia Beach Fishing Pier, which suffered damage from
Hurricane Irene, on August 28, 2011 in Virginia Beach, Virginia

One beloved American city, New Orleans, home to jazz music and some of the
nation's most beloved cuisine, is already sinking.

"New Orleans is a really sad story," Strauss said.

"It is a lot worse looking than Miami."

New York is also in peril, and under a worst-case scenario, the city could be
consigned to an un-livable future by the year 2085, according to the study.

But strong action—the kind that would reduce carbon emissions in the year 2050
to levels that more closely resemble those seen in 1950—could make a
difference.

A total of 14 cities with more than 100,000 residents could avoid locking in
this century, including Jacksonville, Florida; Chesapeake, Norfolk, and
Virginia Beach in Virginia; and Sacramento and Stockton in California.

"We were really trying to show what the consequences of our carbon choices are
going to be," said Strauss, whose study was co-authored by the Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research in Germany and edited by renowned NASA
climate scientist and author James Hansen.

According to earth scientist Michael Mann, a well-known author on climate
change, the latest findings are a "useful contribution to the literature."

The study provides a "better quantification of the detrimental impacts of the
magnitude of sea level rise we may commit to in the decades ahead if we
continue with business-as-usual policies of fossil fuel burning," said Mann,
who was not involved in the research.

* * *

Explore further

Burning remaining fossil fuel could cause 60-meter sea level rise

* * *

**More information:** Carbon choices determine US cities committed to futures
below sea level, _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ ,
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1511186112

**Journal information:** Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

© 2015 AFP

**Citation** : Sea level rise will swallow Miami, New Orleans, study finds
(2015, October 12) retrieved 6 June 2019 from
https://phys.org/news/2015-10-sea-swallow-miami-orleans.html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the
purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the
written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

6342 shares

                
                                      * Facebook
                
                      * Twitter
                
                      * Email
                

Feedback to editors

                
                                      * Featured
                      * Last Comments
                      * Popular
                

#### Polarization-encryption based data storage in 3-D Janus plasmonic helical

nanoapertures

12 hours ago

0

#### Researchers find a way to produce free-standing films of perovskite

oxides

12 hours ago

0

#### Student gives possible explanation for female mating preferences that

decrease male survival chances

12 hours ago

0

#### Study shows penguins attract seabirds when they corral fish

Jun 05, 2019

0

#### Researchers discover bacterial diversity in Justinianic Plague

Jun 05, 2019

0

* * *

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Could climate change make Siberia habitable for humans?

2 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Planck finds no new evidence for cosmic anomalies

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Under the surface: Understanding the (ultra-small) structure of silicon

nanocrystals

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Google's challenge to game consoles to kick off in November

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### The deep learning dive: how cells regulate division

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Argentine fossils take oak and beech family history far into Southern

Hemisphere

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Unusual Japanese plant inspires recalculation of equation used to model

leaf arrangement patterns

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Is sex primarily a strategy against transmissible cancer?

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Decoding Beethoven's music style using data science

7 hours ago

* * *

### Relevant PhysicsForums posts

#### Early moment detection that marks the start of massive tremor events

Jun 04, 2019

#### New study about the rise in global sea levels

May 29, 2019

#### My Project on the Effects Copper Sulfate on Plant Growth (thank you PF

for your help)

May 27, 2019

#### M8.0 central Peru coming in NOW

May 26, 2019

#### Walker Lane geologic trough - E. California, W. Nevada

May 22, 2019

#### Mysterious Ringing of the Earth

May 22, 2019

More from Earth Sciences

* * *

##

                
                                      * ## Related Stories
                

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Burning remaining fossil fuel could cause 60-meter sea level rise

Sep 11, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### New study projects that melting of Antarctic ice shelves will intensify

Oct 12, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Global sea levels have risen six meters or more with just slight global

warming

Jul 09, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Ice sheets may be more resilient than thought

Sep 03, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### All eyes on the oceans—James Hansen and sea level rise

Sep 01, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Rising seas will affect major US coastal cities by 2100

Feb 15, 2011

                
                                      * ## Recommended for you
                

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Magnetism discovered in the Earth's mantle

14 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Glacial sediments greased the gears of plate tectonics

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Building blocks of the Earth: Research team re-calculates distribution

of volatile elements

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### How deep-ocean vents fuel massive phytoplankton blooms

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Kelp DNA records destructive power of ancient earthquake

Jun 05, 2019

## User comments

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

This has nothing to do with carbon.

The planet has been doing the same old things for eons.

You goons ought to know by now this kind of thing happens from time to time.

Miami?

There is a coral reef on land in Florida several meters above the present-day
sea level. The water used to be that high there long, long ago. It happens.

There's another, extinct coral reef several hundred feet deeper than the
modern reefs, caused by the fact the water used to be shallower at some
time...a couple hundred feet shallower...

For God's sake stop blaming man for global warming, climate change, sea level
rise, etc.

it's been happening since the planet existed.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

It looks like they are assuming all of Greenland and about 5% of Antarctica
will eventually melt completely.

Look how much more farm land there is going to be. More resources to tap. Gold
to mine, as well as other metals and minerals. It'll be an economic boom, like
the California gold rush! Every manner of useful metal used in construction
and technology will suddenly have new supply lines!

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 12, 2015

With all the landlocked ice melt in Greenland & Antarctica that has supposedly
been occurring since about 1998, isn't odd we've seen no sea level rise?

We read all kinds of stories about presently occurring landlocked ice melt,
but have yet to record a change in ocean levels which should occur & be
measurable almost immediately.

Hey, AGW nerds, no fair quoting recent record ocean level rise during the high
tides of the recent SuperMoon.

Oh, New Orleans sinking is the result of rising ocean levels? You simply don't
know the history of that marvelous piece of bungling by the Army Corps of
Engineers et al.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

The U.S. Navy was considering developing a large floating platform, about ten
times the total size of an aircraft carrier, for use as a mobile staging area
and base. the purpose was to reduce American dependence on Allies port/airport
space and air space for middle east operations. I think the program is
currently delayed.

However, we could adapt this plan to make floating, modular cities to replace
NOLA and Miami.

the top deck and the outriggers would be covered in solar thermal collectors,
powering massive boilers to generate all the heat and electricity the city
needs. People would live in lower and middle decks. Other decks could be used
for manufacturing, growing low-light plants or mushrooms or something, etc. So
you would have an economy and a place to live and such, and these things are
so big they are safe even from a category 5 hurricane.

Corrosion/long term? The Navy has something "they" don't want you to know
about which can prevent most of this...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

> Oh, New Orleans sinking is the result of rising ocean levels? You simply
don't know the history of that marvelous piece of bungling by the Army Corps
of Engineers et al.

New Orleans was build in a dry lake bed a couple hundred years before the Army
Corps existed, and changed hands a few times from the Spanish to the french to
the U.S.

The region is sinking due primarily to compaction from natural sedimentation
from the Mississippi river delta, upon which New Orleans and all of southern
Louisiana sits.

Exploratory drilling has at times encountered dead Cypress buried under 5000ft
of sand and clay in S.E. Louisiana....That's how much sediment the Mississippi
River has deposited here over the years, and the organic material is still
rotting and compacting, as is the soil itself.

It'll never finish, of course.

At least 2/3rds of the "sea level rise" in Louisiana is actually due to
Subsidence.

NEw Orleanian victim culture blames it on oil companies.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 12, 2015

The only thing getting swallowed, is this crap, by the AGW Chicken Littles.

0

Report Block

* * *

**plasmasrevenge**

Oct 12, 2015

What is the price that these climate scientists might pay for being wrong?

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 12, 2015

That's an awful lot of words for "lalalala, I'm not listening"

0

Report Block

* * *

**Antonaccio**

Oct 12, 2015

Wow, you people swarm these articles very quickly.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 12, 2015

> The only thing getting swallowed, is this crap, by the AGW Chicken Littles.

What about New Orleans. People like you should not have the right to vote.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 12, 2015

> Oh, New Orleans sinking is the result of rising ocean levels? You simply
don't know the history of that marvelous piece of bungling by the Army Corps
of Engineers et al.

>

> New Orleans was build in a dry lake bed a couple hundred years before the
Army Corps existed, and changed hands a few times from the Spanish to the
french to the U.S.

.........Thnx, I just couldn't recall who all the earlier contributing
culprits were which is why I included the phrase "et al".

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 12, 2015

> > The only thing getting swallowed, is this crap, by the AGW Chicken
Littles.

>

> What about New Orleans. People like you should not have the right to vote.

Bangkok wil become uninhabitable and low-lying areas of Asia such as
Bangladesh will be wiped off the map. I'm sure these sociopaths don't care
about them either.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

I mean, think about it. You're the leader of a Spanish expedition to the Gulf
Coast, and you get here in Louisiana, and you are like, "Hmmm, I wonder where
is a good, safe place to establish a port town?"

Then his crew proceeds to find the worst possible piece of land in the entire
Gulf Coast and starts building.

Well, they couldn't have known what a hurricane was and how bad a decision
that was...nothing like that happened anywhere near Spain. I wonder what went
through the minds of the colonists the first time they experienced a major
hurricane, with no satellite or radar warning or anything?

Day before:  
"That's odd. It's a perfectly clear day today. Lovely day to go to the beach."

The Day:  
"God have mercy on us!"

They say it was the same at Galveston in 1900, you could hear people in the
water crying to God for mercy.

I have often wondered why most of their prayers weren't answered.  
Well, depends on perspective right? Die and go to heaven and all...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

> Wow, you people swarm these articles very quickly.

There is a constant stream of rubbish from the far left on nearly every issue.

Someone rational and level headed, with moderate views regarding things like
economics and environmental concerns has to oppose this stuff. That would be
me.

Contrary to what you might think, I do care about the environment. I used to
write satire about how human progress destroyed precious things.

But you people think everything is a freaking "once in cosmic history" crisis.

It's happened before (Coral reef on land in Florida) it'll happen again. I
imagine the corals may even re-colonize the same reef made from the remains of
their ancient ancestors and flourish once again.

In this case, Nature calls.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

Now, Dummycrats, answer this question.

Why is our President making a 150 Billion Dollar deal with Iran, but when it
comes to spending money on mitigation and prevention of flood disasters and
other weather and geologic disasters in repeat locations, etc, you can never
get more than what amounts to peanuts out of the Federal Government.

Now remember, Dummycrats, the Iranians aren't our friends. They aren't even
acquaintances. They hate our guts. And Obama lifted the oil export ban on Iran
so they can pump more oil to China, who has the worst emissions standards of
the major consumers of fossil fuels.

Now if I was a Dummycrat, I'd be pretty pissed at Obama right about now. Look
at all that good things he could have done right here in America for 150
billion.

Now Retardigans are mad at Obama too, but that's only because they will lose
money on their oil contracts, since Obama isn't lifting the export ban on
American oil (more on that in a future post).

0

Report Block

* * *

**cantdrive85**

Oct 12, 2015

> > > The only thing getting swallowed, is this crap, by the AGW Chicken
Littles.

>>

>> What about New Orleans. People like you should not have the right to vote.

>

> Bangkok wil become uninhabitable and low-lying areas of Asia such as
Bangladesh will be wiped off the map. I'm sure these sociopaths don't care
about them either.

What a moron, wow!

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 12, 2015

"Why is our President making a 150 Billion Dollar deal with Iran, but when it
comes to spending money on mitigation and prevention of flood disasters and
other weather and geologic disasters in repeat locations, etc, you can never
get more than what amounts to peanuts out of the Federal Government."

* * *

I refuse to believe you do not know the difference between reducing economic
sanctions so other nations can trade internationally again, and a handout. You
are purposefully doing it. That deal costs us nothing. NOTHING. We are NOT
sending them money!

That deal with Iran makes money for us, because we can trade with them again.
Take off your political blinders.

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 12, 2015

Dear Returners: we don't care about your domestic politics. Get a life.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

Climate mitigation?

For 150 billion, Dummycrats could have installed 15,000 of the most advanced
10 megawatts wind turbines, for a total of 150 gigawatts of clean energy which
pays for itself in just a few years, and is totally free thereafter.

Look how stupid you guys are, Dummycrats. Look how sad and pathetic and
foolish you are. you guys can't win for losing. You're so stupid, you give
away all your money to people who hate your guys, instead of spending it on
the programs you claim you want everyone to fund.

Idiots.

Idiots.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

> That deal with Iran makes money for us, because we can trade with them
again. Take off your political blinders.  
>

No it doesn't. No it doesn't.

It helps other nations compete against us by allowing Iran to sell oil to
those nations again, lowering their oil prices.

If Dummycrats were smart, we'd put a 10% direct tax on Iranian oil exports,
that way we make money off all the money they are going to be making from the
stuff.

Instead, the Dummycrats help China and Iran and North Korea (the oil from Iran
will be funneled through China to North Korea).

Why are Dummycrats in love with helping muslims and dictators?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 12, 2015

By the way, lifting the ban on Iran hurts Louisiana and Texas directly because
a significant portion of our economy is in the energy sector, especially oil.

So, Dummycrats, Obama's deal hurts the U.S. where it hurts worst, at the
freaking gas pump. Whih hurts trucking and shipping cost, hurts you on the
drive to work, hurts you hen the price gets passed along to you again at the
grocery store due to the increase logistics cost, etc.

Dummycrats, I gotta say you guys are clueless.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 12, 2015

http://climate.na...left.gif  
Here you go Chicken Littles.  
Ask yourself why sea level rose faster between 1940-1960, when temperatures
were dropping and then slowed from 1970 when the AGW Cult claims man made
GloBULL warming was in full swing.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 12, 2015

Returners, please grow up. We are not sending them money! Are you scared into
irrationality?

And lower gas prices save the consumer. It helps trucking and shipping costs
because fuel is cheaper.

If you hate Iran so much, go fight them yourself. I learned my lessons in the
1960's.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 12, 2015

From Returners who appears to be contradicting himself:

> By the way, lifting the ban on Iran hurts Louisiana and Texas directly
because a significant portion of our economy is in the energy sector,
especially oil.

>

> So, Dummycrats, Obama's deal hurts the U.S. where it hurts worst, at the
freaking gas pump. Whih hurts trucking and shipping cost, hurts you on the
drive to work, hurts you hen the price gets passed along to you again at the
grocery store due to the increase logistics cost, etc.

But he just said:

> It helps other nations compete against us by allowing Iran to sell oil to
those nations again, lowering their oil prices.

So, which is it? Does it lower oil prices or increase the cost of gas at our
pumps? My understanding is that it will be able to sell more oil into a
glutted market and the price will go down. That seems to have been Returners
first position. I expect him to contradict himself (because his is
inconsistent) but not in sequential posts.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 12, 2015

Anti said:

>
http://climate.nasa.gov/system/internal_resources/details/original/15_seaLevel_left.gif  
>  Here you go Chicken Littles.  
>  Ask yourself why sea level rose faster between 1940-1960, when temperatures
were dropping and then slowed from 1970 when the AGW Cult claims man made
GloBULL warming was in full swing.

So, Anti, you disagree with Returners, Benni, excelentjim, cantdrive and the
others who say that the sea level is not rising, you just contend it is rising
slower now. Of course you have shown a chart that stops in the 1990s. Here is
a more recent observation:

https://en.wikipe...vel_rise

It is good to see you changing your tune about sea level and admitting it is
rising. I hope the link I gave you helps you better understand the pace of the
rise.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 12, 2015

Thermo, it's also "good" to see you keeping your donkey blinders on so you
can't see the truth.  
Now take them off for a second and tell me if the chart you linked -
https://en.wikipe...013.png, disagrees with what I said previously.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 12, 2015

> Thermo, it's also "good" to see you keeping your donkey blinders on so you
can't see the truth.  
>  Now take them off for a second and tell me if the chart you linked -
https://en.wikipe...013.png, disagrees with what I said previously.  
>

No, they are both similar. I was agreeing with you on the fact that sea level
is rising and has continued to rise. However, I disagree with your observation
that it has slowed down. I note that your graph stops in the mid-1990s while
the graphs in the article I linked go up to the present. The graph you link to
seems to stop about the time the satellite measurements started.

I agree the sea level is rising.

I disagree that it has slowed down.

I was pleased to be able to agree with you for a change.

0

Report Block

* * *

**dan42day**

Oct 12, 2015

Wouldn't it be great if the people of the world learned to stop building
cities in areas that are not only vulnerable to small changes in climate, but
also great natural resources that would be best used as recreational and
protected wildlife preserves?

I'm not saying that we should continue pumping CO2 and other pollutants into
the air, but the fact that a lot of cities have been build in areas that are
vulnerable to the kinds of climate and other geological changes that have been
seen to naturally occur is not the most compelling reason to stop.

Frankly, I don't give a damn if Miami, New York, New Orleans, and a hundred
other coastal cities have to be moved off the coast. That just leaves more
high quality room for small fishing villages and wildlife preserves.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Eddy Courant**

Oct 12, 2015

But it could take centuries.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Rockguy**

Oct 12, 2015

It is premature for a direct prediction. However I do like that they give a
range of dates and carbon use scenarios. I would like to know how plate
tectonic rise/fall factors into this.

0

Report Block

* * *

**ForFreeMinds**

Oct 12, 2015

LOL A study that contradicts itself in its findings, is worthless. First it
says that no matter what we do, Miami will be lost to rising seas. Then it
says that if we make extreme carbon cuts and move to renewable energy, we can
save coastal cities.

Either we can control the climate, or we can't. Climate "scientists" who earn
a living by being Chicken Littles, like to cry that the sky is falling, unless
we continue paying them money. When we quit paying them and let then earn a
living by doing things people would voluntarily pay for (rather than being
forced to fund them thru taxes), then they'll learn the rewards of helping
others, rather than the costs of being human leeches.

0

Report Block

* * *

**mbee1**

Oct 12, 2015

If one is to comment on this study it would help to look at the past. It was
warmer in 1000 to 2350 years ago than today as this story suggests on trees
under a glacier in Alaska  
http://www.iscien...aled.htm  
If it was warmer with less ice the seas should have been higher yet London and
Paris are and were in the same place so the oceans could not have been much
higher with warmer temperatures so something is wrong with the model.  
maybe this is the reason  
http://phys.org/n...ght.html  
or it could be the increase temperature assumption are simply wrong  
http://euanmearns...s-again/

0

Report Block

* * *

**mbee1**

Oct 12, 2015

Hansen and Mann are nuts. They happen to have a rabid fan club of fellow nuts
some of whom have PHd's. Their entire study is simply nuts. Here is the actual
ocean rise, about 3 inches or less Galveston Texas is close to zero See for
another city. http://tidesandcu...=680-140  
To get to the ocean melts they claim the melting rate would have to increase
thousands of percent which is impossible unless the sun explodes. What
Galveston, Miami, Sacramento, and New Orleans have in common is a land
subsidence problem caused by over pumping groundwater. Galveston land has sunk
2 feet while the ocean has risen 1 inch in those 100 years. Miami is a similar
case except Florida refuses to do anything about the over pumping unlike
Texas.

0

Report Block

* * *

**theyfly_com**

Oct 13, 2015

this warming of the earth is so simple to solve . JUST enact a law A birth
rate check law that alows only year out of every 7 years to have children with
a max of 3 per couple . with that in action we will have solved all this
polution stuff plus there will be enough food for everyone AGAIN and with
technologie thins will get easier.

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 13, 2015

Things I learned today: Paris and London were in the same place 2350 years
ago, global temperature records can be taken from some trees under a glacier
in Alaska, and the only way we can get projected sea level rises is if the sun
explodes.

I don't know why I bother with science journals at all.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Egleton**

Oct 13, 2015

Are they still putting fluorine in the drinking water in the US?  
Who shall I vote for? The elephant or the donkey? Oh, that's right. I and the
rest of the world don't live in that has-been country.  
What a short lived flash in the pan!  
Even Nero played a better fiddle.  
Can't even get porn right. (Now would that be left hand or right hand porn? )

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Oct 13, 2015

> o we lose those two cities, so what?

Well, it's going to cost a pretty penny to relocate all these people and
businesses. And what did you have in mind for them? Shoving them into other
cities? Or building 'replacement cities'? Either of those options would cost
way more than completely changing over the entire energy infrastricture of the
US to renewables.

Of course the first scenario would not be paid for by the tax payer. It would
just mean that a lot more poor people are generated as they lose their homes
and have to buy new ones ...and a lot of businesses go bust despite profitable
business models.

But the US doesn't really care what percentage of its populace is poor.
History - in other countries - of what happens when the poor/rich ratio
exceeds a certain threshold seems not to be taught (or is willfully being
ignored).

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Oct 13, 2015

> JUST enact a law A birth rate check law that alows only year out of every 7
years to have children with a max of 3 per couple

China has a one child policy and their emissions are still rising. So this
idea is no good.

Even if it did work you would never get that past christians (which are,
unfortunately, the majority). Neither prevention nor abortion are sanctioned
and even their priests find it impossible to remain celibate.

0

Report Block

* * *

**tommo**

Oct 13, 2015

The most unfortunate event happening is ocean acidification, it's 10-times
faster than a mass-extinction.

We are currently in a mass-extinction, the loss of one major animal during a
lifetime is rare and we're losing over 200 species a day.

But then that's paleontology wtf, eh?

Second deal is climate variability, the 2050 date is about right for the
average hot day to be hotter than any today, get it?

Our species is too stupid and violent to deserve to survive and it won't with
business-as-usual.

"The projected timing of climate departure from recent variability", from a
recent paper in Nature by the team; 24:44; http://www.youtub...R-aCTAVk

0

Report Block

* * *

**BobSage**

Oct 13, 2015

Is it interesting that all the AGW comments are rated 4 or 5 and all the anti-
AGW are rated 1 or 2? That might make sense if the overwhelming majority of
commenters were AGW people. But that is not the case. Is it that AGW people do
almost all the rating? Is that something like manipulating the data to make
global warming seem real?

But thank you because the ratings are instantly helpful in knowing which side
the comment is on.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 13, 2015

Can Bob tell us the ten hottest days in history?

Shall I look it up for him?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

> We are currently in a mass-extinction, the loss of one major animal during a
lifetime is rare and we're losing over 200 species a day.

Name just 2 of them?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

Look at that, the rate of sea level rise actually dropped when man was
responsible for GloBULL warming.  
https://upload.wi...2013.png

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

Anti said:

> Look at that, the rate of sea level rise actually dropped when man was
responsible for GloBULL warming.  
>  https://upload.wi...2013.png

Anti, you will have to help me find out where you see a drop in sea level rise
in this graph (you do understand uncertainty bands don't you?).

You have an interesting habit of chopping out all but a graph you interpret on
your own. Here is the web site that graph (that I linked to earlier) comes
from.

https://en.wikipe...vel_rise

The text states: "Additionally, sea level rise has accelerated in recent
years." Why would you neglect to include the basis of the mathematical
analysis that disproves your conjecture?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Vietvet**

Oct 13, 2015

> Look at that, the rate of sea level rise actually dropped when man was
responsible for GloBULL warming.  
>  https://upload.wi...2013.png

@antig has proved once again he's too frigging dumb to read a graph.

0

Report Block

* * *

**runrig**

Oct 13, 2015

> Is it interesting that all the AGW comments are rated 4 or 5 and all the
anti-AGW are rated 1 or 2? That might make sense if the overwhelming majority
of commenters were AGW people. But that is not the case. Is it that AGW people
do almost all the rating? Is that something like manipulating the data to make
global warming seem real?

>

> But thank you because the ratings are instantly helpful in knowing which
side the comment is on.

Nothing remarkable in it bob.  
AGW is verified (repeatedly) by science and this is a science site and not an
ant-science one.  
Deniers are here merely to spread doubt and have no interest in learning the
science.  
Oh, and thank you for making it clear that you too are anti-science.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 13, 2015

> Well, it's going to cost a pretty penny to relocate all these people and
businesses. And what did you have in mind for them? Shoving them into other
cities? Or building 'replacement cities'?

So wrong on so many levels.

Most buildings in modern cities arent built to last more than 30 years.  
http://www.woodwo...ives.pdf

-I know eurodisneys love to make up stories but please try to be a little more creative? 

-And abandoning cities is certainly not new.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 13, 2015

link for that last statement  
http://www.stuffy...-cities/

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

Sure thermo, tell me when man made global warming began?  
You may want to consult IPCC on that.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> link for that last statement  
>  http://www.stuffy...-cities/

Ghost: That was a good read. It appears to me that the Chinese city of
Beichuan was the closest to what we might see (a disaster that destroyed the
city and then rebuilding somewhere else). Chernobyl was interesting and
another example of a disaster followed by relocation. We don't know the size
of the Chilean towns from the article but I get the idea it was a few
thousand. Likewise for Detroit. Hashima Island was also just a few thousand.
And Centralia was also only a few thousand. How does that compare with the
populations of Miami, or NOLA?

Are you saying we would be OK just moving our big coastal cities? I would like
to see your estimated costs for that.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 13, 2015

And when I edited that last comment I lost another good link and the statement
that people change jobs and move on average every 5-7 years.  
http://www.forbes...ghtmare/

> the closest to what we might see (a disaster that destroyed the city and
then rebuilding somewhere else

-And we have many disasters pending around the globe. Cities are already going bankrupt and can no longer provide essential services. People are already abandoning them in droves.  
http://zfein.com/...detroit/

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 13, 2015

> And Centralia was also only a few thousand. How does that compare with the
populations of Miami, or NOLA?

-And how might that compare percentage-wise with rome or babylon or alexandria or troy or megiddo? 

Or whole civilizations?  
http://www.fsmith...ch05.htm

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> Sure thermo, tell me when man made global warming began?  
>  You may want to consult IPCC on that.

No, I don't want to consult IPCC on that. I will go back to Savante Arrhenius
and his approach to global warming. He related it, directly, to the increase
in CO2 in the atmosphere. From that, any increase in CO2 means that we have
started global warming. However, at the low-end of the change in CO2 content,
the change can be unmeasurable but there. Based on that and the CO2 balances
that are understood to take place, I look at global warming as starting with
significant land use changes in the mid 1800s. That is then exacerbated by the
addition of 7 billion people trying to achieve the dubious goal of matching
the energy consumption of the developed world. So, I contend (and I recognize
this is a contention since I have not produced a peer reviewed paper that
supports this) that anthropogenic global warming was happening long before we
could measure it (1800s).

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 13, 2015

Or any of these?  
https://en.wikipe...cultures

-Just trying to add a little perspective. Modern civilization has already been configured to provide jobs and habitation elsewhere. And this will happen over a few gens, not overnight. 

How many refugees and migrants have we been accommodating?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

> So, I contend (and I recognize this is a contention since I have not
produced a peer reviewed paper that supports this) that anthropogenic global
warming was happening long before we could measure it (1800s).

Alrighty. So tell me when we could first measure it.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> > So, I contend (and I recognize this is a contention since I have not
produced a peer reviewed paper that supports this) that anthropogenic global
warming was happening long before we could measure it (1800s).

>

> Alrighty. So tell me when we could first measure it.

Anti: I have access to the same figures and numbers you do. Based on those
figures and numbers I "contend" that we can start seeing the increase in
enthalpy of the Earth around the 1960s. I want to be clear that is a
contention, not an observation or a calculation. The reason is that I don't
want to go through a billion data points to reconstruct figures and tables
that are already available. Note, I am not talking about temperature of the
atmosphere, I am talking about the enthalpy balance of the earth. Again, a
contention, not a theory.

When do you think it started?

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 13, 2015

My grandmother died of stomach cancer. This is a fact. I defy anybody, despite
the reality of that absolute fact, to determine when her cancer " began". This
is just another distraction from somebody who's entire argument consists of,
"it's not happening, just 'cause and if you say it is it's because it's your
Al Gore".

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> My grandmother died of stomach cancer. This is a fact. I defy anybody,
despite the reality of that absolute fact, to determine when her cancer "
began". This is just another distraction from somebody who's entire argument
consists of, "it's not happening, just 'cause and if you say it is it's
because it's your Al Gore".

Lee you are right, but I am glad to see Anti participating in a discussion for
a change. I am waiting for him to give his interpretation now. I see it as OK
for him to ask these questions and for me to respond with the basis for my
thoughts on the issue. Now we see what his view is on the start and visibility
of AGW.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

> Anti: I have access to the same figures and numbers you do. Based on those
figures and numbers I "contend" that we can start seeing the increase in
enthalpy of the Earth around the 1960s.

Ok 1960s it is.  
Just to ensure we are on the same chapter and verse, would you point me to the
data you are looking at.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> > Anti: I have access to the same figures and numbers you do. Based on those
figures and numbers I "contend" that we can start seeing the increase in
enthalpy of the Earth around the 1960s.

>

> Ok 1960s it is.  
>  Just to ensure we are on the same chapter and verse, would you point me to
the data you are looking at.

Here: http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php]http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php[/url]

Here: https://en.wikipe..._warming

Here: http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php]http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php[/url]

Here: https://en.wikipe...ea_level

Your turn.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

Note, the NCDC links did not come through. Let me try one again.

http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php

Lets see if that works.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 13, 2015

> Note, the NCDC links did not come through. Let me try one again.

>

> http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php

>

> Lets see if that works.

That did work so there are four tabs on that page that I would use "Global
Temperatures", "Ocean heat content", "Sea Level Rise", and "Cryosphere."

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 13, 2015

antigoracle replied to thermodynamics when he said

> > . Based on those figures and numbers I "contend" that we can start seeing
the increase in enthalpy of the Earth around the 1960s.

>

> Ok 1960s it is

To clarify, this is likely when enthalpy increase overall was starting to be
noticed which obviously doesn't mean thats when heating actually started, the
detail of which can be discovered from evaluating this formula  
https://en.wikipe...transfer

The basis of which has been known for many decades, the essentials of that
Physics has been known for >100yrs

From the also proven Physics of specific heat & thermal inertia its
substantive that any noticeable measure circa 1960 would show that heat
increase must have begun much earlier ie It would be useful exercise to run
the enthalpy eqn back

Glad you accept Al Gore has zero influence on Physics, this is why such
education is essential & as early as possible...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Burnerjack**

Oct 13, 2015

"New York City will be underwater by 2015"-ABC News.  
BTW, Hasn't the planet been warming due to a continuing loss of albedo (among
other factors) since the end of the last ice age?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 13, 2015

Now we are cooking.  
So, I looked at that data and for the life of me can't figure out why you
would say the 1960s.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 14, 2015

> And Centralia... How does that compare with the populations of Miami, or
NOLA?

Also consider recent reconstructions such as the Wirtschaftswunder in postwar
germany, or the rebuilding of japan. These countries became the most powerful
and influential in their respective regions as a result.

As to aa's original comments:

> Well, it's going to cost a pretty penny to relocate all these people and
businesses

As I say, western economies have been configured to accomodate and even
encourage worker mobility. "To move up youve got to move around". This also
applies to corporations and whole industries which frequently move for
economic reasons.

As coastal cities become more expensive to live and work in, they will
gradually be abandoned.

> Shoving them into other cities?

Again, this is exactly what is already happening.

> Or building 'replacement cities'?

Cities are expanding all the time to accomodate new industries and workers.  
cont>

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 14, 2015

Infrastructure in cities such as NYC and boston are decrepit. 50% of all
potable water entering manhattan is lost due to leaks. And since 9/11 many
entities have either relocated or have built backup facilities farther inland
such as the stock exchange.

Cities themselves may be obsolete.  
http://www.newswe...e-203336

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 14, 2015

So thermo doesnt like ottos comments but doesnt feel the need to explain why?

Look at the pic above. Most of those bldgs will need to be demolished in 30
years as they werent designed to last that long.

They will be replaced by bldgs in other cities built to house workers who have
relocated along with their businesses, which themselves could no longer afford
to pay taxes and insurance costs for crumbling infrastructure and water
damage.

This is already happening along the jersey shore post-sandy and in new orleans
post-katrina.

And this demographic shift will happen over a few gens, not a few years.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Otto said:

> So thermo doesnt like ottos comments but doesnt feel the need to explain
why?

I have already made it clear that I disagree with your point. I have explained
that the scale of change is much larger than any we have seen before (in
historic records). It is your failure to provide anything other than hand
waving on the topic of relocation. As has been pointed out to you, places like
Bangladesh or Indonesia will feel the change in sea level more than any other
countries. But states like Florida are going to be in serious trouble. Your
response is hand-waving that we have moved cities before, but no analysis or
references on how much it will cost. Your opinion is that this will be no-big-
deal is the reason I give you a 1. I have given you the reasons why before and
just don't want to bruise my fingers trying to make it clearer in these
comments.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 14, 2015

" It is your failure to provide anything other than hand waving on the topic
of relocation."

* * *

That is a major point. Do some folk think there will be ready-made
infrastructure where people want or need to go? Where will they be put? How
will they be fed? Housed? How about running water, sewer and electricity?
Jobs? Family cohesion?

Even temporary relocation is a major effort at great Human cost.

There seems to be an authoritarian disregard for people in that comment to
which you respond.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

> Now we are cooking.  
>  So, I looked at that data and for the life of me can't figure out why you
would say the 1960s.

Anti: Your turn. I asked when you thought that AGW started and when it became
visible. I answered those questions for you, now please return the favor. Then
it will be my turn again.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 14, 2015

> > Now we are cooking.  
>  So, I looked at that data and for the life of me can't figure out why you
would say the 1960s.

>

> Anti: Your turn. I asked when you thought that AGW started and when it
became visible. I answered those questions for you, now please return the
favor. Then it will be my turn again.

AGW never has started.

This is all 100% natural cycles.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 14, 2015

> > > Now we are cooking.  
>  So, I looked at that data and for the life of me can't figure out why you
would say the 1960s.

>

> Anti: Your turn. I asked when you thought that AGW started and when it
became visible. I answered those questions for you, now please return the
favor. Then it will be my turn again.

>

> AGW never has started.

>

> This is all 100% natural cycles.

You can not back that up.  
Your statement is without any foundation.  
Look down. Check if your feet still touch the ground.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Returners said:

> AGW never has started.

>

> This is all 100% natural cycles.

We know you don't understand evolution, and now, you have shown us you don't
understand heat transfer either.

Do you reject the idea that GHGs help keep the earth warm?

Do you reject the idea that GHGs have been increasing due to human activities?

Do you, at least, agree that the Earth is in a warming phase?

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 14, 2015

Except, Returners, that is literally not true. The natural greenhouse effect
is being enhanced by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions - that's physics.
So obviously there's an effect. That's physics too. As it happens, that effect
is extremely well-documented but even if it wasn't we'd still know it was
there. It would have to be.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 14, 2015

> Except, Returners, that is literally not true. The natural greenhouse effect
is being enhanced by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions - that's physics.
So obviously there's an effect. That's physics too. As it happens, that effect
is extremely well-documented but even if it wasn't we'd still know it was
there. It would have to be.

Sound argument, but I bet a good bottle of wine that it does not convince
returners.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 14, 2015

> I asked when you thought that AGW started and when it became visible.

Thermo, I believe that's what I was trying to determine, hence the reason I'm
chatting with you, since you know the science and the data.  
Now, as I said before, when I looked at the data, I couldn't see why you chose
the 1960s.  
What I see is -  
Ocean temperatures dropping like a rock.  
The globe still in a cold spell that started around 1945 and lasted into the
1970s.  
Sea level rising at the same rate as it had in the previous decades.  
Now I've no idea how you see manmade global warming in that, unless you see
something else in the data.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Anti said:

> Ocean temperatures dropping like a rock.  
>  The globe still in a cold spell that started around 1945 and lasted into
the 1970s.  
>  Sea level rising at the same rate as it had in the previous decades.

Thanks for carrying on the conversation. We do not see the same thing on any
of these.

Let me address them one at a time (because of the 1000 character limit).

1) Where on earth do you see ocean temperatures "dropping like a rock?" I see
them increasing and published analyses indicate they are increasing.

Here is a good overview of the global sea surface temperatures:

http://www3.epa.g...emp.html

Both figures are instructive. The first shows the rise over time and there is
a flat spot in the curve that shows an uptick in about 1965. I want to be
clear that this is a visual estimation by me, not a regression analysis.

Are you saying the oceans are cooling in the face of graphs like these?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 14, 2015

From your own link http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php  
And, I should have said "Ocean heat content"

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Continuing anti's observations:

> The globe still in a cold spell that started around 1945 and lasted into the
1970s.

Is this cooling spell still taking place or did it stop in the 1970s like you
said? You say it is "still in the spell" but you then say it lasted into the
1970s. I can't respond to this one until you clarify that point.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Anti said:

> From your own link http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php  
>  And, I should have said "Ocean heat content"

That is an increasing curve. How do you see that as "dropping like a rock?"
That figure shows me how rapidly the ocean is gaining enthalpy.

Remember, the ocean and the atmosphere exchange energy (in cycles). There is
also noise in all measurements. I am curious as to how you can read that curve
as decreasing energy or temperature.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 14, 2015

> Here is a good overview of the global sea surface temperatures:

>

> http://www3.epa.g...emp.html  
>

Nice graph. Notice how much faster the oceans were warming from 1910-1945,
compared to anytime during/after 1960.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 14, 2015

> Anti said:

>

>> From your own link http://www.ncdc.n...ming.php  
>  And, I should have said "Ocean heat content"

>

> That is an increasing curve. How do you see that as "dropping like a rock?"
That figure shows me how rapidly the ocean is gaining enthalpy.

>

> Remember, the ocean and the atmosphere exchange energy (in cycles). There is
also noise in all measurements. I am curious as to how you can read that curve
as decreasing energy or temperature.

My god. Remember you said 1960s. Now look at the graph again.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Anti said:

> My god. Remember you said 1960s. Now look at the graph again.

By Thor's hammer! Yes, we are talking about the Enthalpy content of the Earth,
not just the oceans. I was incorrect here in that I had shown the sea surface
temperatures. Here is a graph of both Ocean and Land (that I linked to
earlier).

https://en.wikipe..._warming

Let me clarify. The oceans and atmosphere exchange energy. We really need to
look at the total enthalpy change of the atmosphere and oceans (as well as
land but that is much slower). The reason I don't see the "ocean temperature
dropping like a rock" is because (as anyone who understands linear regression
would know) you have to produce a regression analysis to get an idea of how a
line (or curve) will best fit through your points. You don't start at the
first point and draw a line to the last point. 1965 - 1970? I told you I
eyeballed it and 1970 would be fine also. What is your date?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 14, 2015

> > > > Now we are cooking.  
>  So, I looked at that data and for the life of me can't figure out why you
would say the 1960s.

>

> Anti: Your turn. I asked when you thought that AGW started and when it
became visible. I answered those questions for you, now please return the
favor. Then it will be my turn again.

>

>> AGW never has started.

>

> This is all 100% natural cycles.

>

> You can not back that up.  
>  Your statement is without any foundation.  
>  Look down. Check if your feet still touch the ground.

Their own alleged data on sea level rise and sea level history shows all this
stuff has happened before over and over.

Of course I can back that up, and I've shown the data before, and it bounces
off you.

There are lots of sunken cities all over the world. This stuff happens. It's
been happening for as long as man's been here.

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 14, 2015

> > Except, Returners, that is literally not true. The natural greenhouse
effect is being enhanced by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions - that's
physics. So obviously there's an effect. That's physics too. As it happens,
that effect is extremely well-documented but even if it wasn't we'd still know
it was there. It would have to be.

>

> Sound argument, but I bet a good bottle of wine that it does not convince
returners.  
>

No bet! But I could sure use the bottle of wine after a couple of hours
interacting with these bozos.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 14, 2015

Where do Cyro-meteors come from? Huge blocks of ice (not hail) which sometimes
fall out o the sky for no apparent reason...

I say cometary debris too small to be noticed by NASA's programs looking for
NEOS.

Do you know how much cometary debris is floating around in the SS?

Maybe that's contributing to sea level rise.

Nobody saw a 40m rock until it hit russia, and you gonna say how much water-
ice could be hitting earth as small as dust ranging to 40m in size? Nobody
would ever see it, because most of it would just melt or vaporize in the upper
atmosphere, then drift down later as rainfall....once in a while a big chunk
the size of a refrigerator hits somebody's house or car though...so we know
it's happening...

You guys don't even talk about that sort of stuff, becausemaybe you don't know
about it.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Returners said:

> There are lots of sunken cities all over the world. This stuff happens. It's
been happening for as long as man's been here.

I thought you were the one who said those sunken cities were evidence of the
"great flood." Have you backed off from that? Do you now believe in an old
earth and evolution?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 14, 2015

> Returners said:

>

>> There are lots of sunken cities all over the world. This stuff happens.
It's been happening for as long as man's been here.

>

> I thought you were the one who said those sunken cities were evidence of the
"great flood." Have you backed off from that? Do you now believe in an old
earth and evolution?

Um...the ones I had in mind actually sank in the past several thousand years
up to about 20,000 years ago or so.

I don't know when the great flood happened, if it's based on a literal event,
but i think certain evidence in S. America suggests it had to be push back
before 30,000 years ago because S. America has been populated continually for
30k years.

However, there is a lake in S. America on top of a mountain which has Sea
Horses living in it.

How in the hell did Sea Horses get on top of a mountain lake, unless it was
below sea level?

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 14, 2015

The real question is "Who rode them up there?"

The "History" channel knows.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

Returners posted:

> However, there is a lake in S. America on top of a mountain which has Sea
Horses living in it.

>

> How in the hell did Sea Horses get on top of a mountain lake, unless it was
below sea level?

First, most mountains are made of material that was below sea level at one
time. Things like plate tectonics, volcanism, earth quakes, etc... move low
land to high and high land to low. However, your story did get me looking.
What I found is that there is only a single photo of a single specimen in a
single museum near the lake that the sea horse was supposed to come out of. In
reality, there is no confirmation it even exists. Maybe you have a better
reference you can send me to.

The sea horse reported is called: Hippocampus titicacanesis and those who
study sea horses consider it a myth.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Uncle Ira**

Oct 14, 2015

> Maybe you have a better reference you can send me to.

@ Thermo-Skippy. Don't hold your breath on that one. And don't fall for it if
he postums you a link to the "scientists" who can tell you all about it. I
fell for it me. He got him from a interweb place where the "scientists" are
proving that the world is only a couple of thousands of years old and
dinosaurs are gone because the Noah-Skippy couldn't fit them on the boat he
built for the flood. And they will tell you a lot of foolishment about how all
the other silly scientists are all lying about fossils being millions of years
old.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 14, 2015

lol @ you.

I did get an A in physical Geology you know. Highest in class in fact.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

> > Maybe you have a better reference you can send me to.

>

> @ Thermo-Skippy. Don't hold your breath on that one. And don't fall for it
if he postums you a link to the "scientists" who can tell you all about it. I
fell for it me. He got him from a interweb place where the "scientists" are
proving that the world is only a couple of thousands of years old and
dinosaurs are gone because the Noah-Skippy couldn't fit them on the boat he
built for the flood. And they will tell you a lot of foolishment about how all
the other silly scientists are all lying about fossils being millions of years
old.  
>

I'm not holding my breath, but it is interesting that he has said the world
might be, as much as, 30,000 years old. He used to say 6,000. Returners, can
you expand on how old you think the earth might be now?

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 14, 2015

> lol @ you.

>

> I did get an A in physical Geology you know. Highest in class in fact.

That is interesting if you were not aware that a mountain lake could have been
at sea level 1Mybp.

However, since the references say the sea horse is probably a myth, do you
have better references?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Uncle Ira**

Oct 14, 2015

> lol @ you.

>

> I did get an A in physical Geology you know. Highest in class in fact.

Did you have to write up four or three hundred pages of rambling stuffs like
you do here to get the A? Maybe she give you the A to get you to pipe down,
eh?

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 14, 2015

Q: Discuss the formation of mountains

A: Science says the existence or non-existence of mountains cannot be
established experimentally and so we will never really know. The majority view
"mountains exist" is an appeal to majority fallacy and an appeal to authority
fallacy and is therefore fallacious. Geology has always existed so why would
any geology today be distinctive from geology yesterday?

God said Mohammed was the mountain and why would he say that if he meant us to
believe mountains existed as anything but a biblical metaphor? God would not
create mountains if it stopped us getting from A to B. Therefore a belief in
mountains is against God.

Anyway, the existence of mountains is a Liberal plot to redistribute wealth
for the UN. Mountains clearly don't exist because of socialism. Just ask Cecil
Gershwin Palmer.

I love Reagan.

Mark: A. I love Reagan too.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 15, 2015

@Returners  
In respect of regions >100Km west of Queensland coast, Australia  
There are many fossilised shells, sea life & ocean sediment remains that
didn't have the opportunity to degrade (eg dead fish rotting) normally if they
just stayed in the sea with gradual sea level fall, that & various other
evidence shows definitively there was a massive tsunami arising from the
Pacific. Estimates based on modern understaning of Physics & geology,
earthquake & meteorite phenomena suggest the tsunami produced waves of approx
300m (ie 1000ft) high somewhat more than a million years ago.

Great onsistency within Physics & keen observations in geology is way ahead of
a mere claim from an old book when people readily used many drugs & legally
too !

Thought about Ammonia (NH3) Returners, early Earth & there is much evidence,
was heavy in that & water vapor

You know you are primarily water & amino acids ie Amines ie lottsa NH2

Matter self-organises its chemistry ie bonding...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

> We know you don't understand evolution, and now, you have shown us you don't
understand heat transfer either.

Dinosaurs are real.

There idjit.

Life was created to adapt.  
We have the power to create and to adapt to the environment and control it,
and so do all life forms, but humans more so than other creatures because we
adapt both chemically and at the meta-cognition level, while other creatures
do not appear to do so.

Evolution doesn't disprove God silly. It actually proves God exists.

WE are created in the image and likeness of God. We likewise have the power to
create in our own image and likeness (procreation), but we even have the power
to create new types of life via combinations of what God already did, or via
robotics, or creating a new life form from scratch...because we are like God,
only finite...

Evolution is simply proactive creation. It IS "Intelligence".

"In the beginning was the Logos...all things were made by Him."

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

> > lol @ you.

>

> I did get an A in physical Geology you know. Highest in class in fact.

>

> That is interesting if you were not aware that a mountain lake could have
been at sea level 1Mybp.

>

> However, since the references say the sea horse is probably a myth, do you
have better references?

blah, blah, blah, punctuated equilibrium...

on another thread i had been talking about how coal deposits on the east coast
were formed by over-turning of lands covering entire forests during
continental collisions (the N.America is actually made of at least 3 plates
that I know of, 4 if you count the stuff west of San Andreas: one boundary is
New Madrid fault Zone (mississippi river basin) and one is east of the
Appalacians, which at some point covered over forests (under mountains) and
folded freaking rock in S-patterns like Taffy. I've been there and seen
it....and exposed Mantle rock in Canada...

You think I don't know mountains change?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

That's why I say it's not a big deal, and I'm convinced it's normal.

Much worse things have happened before, both wiht and without meteor/comet
impacts.

This planet has been to hell and back several times, and life still exists,
and is stronger than ever.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 15, 2015

Returners claims

> Evolution doesn't disprove God silly. It actually proves God exists.  
>  WE are created in the image..

Any evidence of any sort for such claims ?

Returners claims

> Evolution is simply proactive creation. It IS "Intelligence"

Can you clarify how this "intelligence" acts by nature's destructive paradigm
of "Eat & be Eaten" & occurs all the time everywhere from lowliest bacteria of
~10 million+ species to more complex life forms ?

Surely it is obvious nature's approach entails immense & ever-present
suffering at all levels & especially so to the unfortunate & often the
uneducated/vulnerable as life adapts & evolves constantly

Returners claimed

> "In the beginning was the Logos...all things were made by Him."

Have you seen my earlier posts re offering critique on belief a (personal) god
went to minimal trouble to chat with a tiny no. of people of its claim to be
the only origin ?

If your god exists then what are its key observable attributes ?

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 15, 2015

## "WE are created in the image and likeness of God."

Where does he poop?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

> If your god exists then what are its key observable attributes ?

Isaiah 55:8-9King James Version (KJV)

8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith
the Lord.

9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

1 John 4:8King James Version (KJV)

8 He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.

God is good, God is love, God is Light, God is Logos.

Gkam:

> Where does he poop?

You are blinded by your own pride and ignorance.  
I am sure that you have been told this many times, but

God doesn't have need of food or drink. He's the source of all reality.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 15, 2015

@Returners,  
Re-stating unsupportable claims is not observation of attributes !

Where did you learn debate, dialectic or anything smart or similar to Socratic
Method, please ?  
https://en.wikipe...c_method

Your pattern of response is wholly consistent with someone either drug induced
or suffering from early indoctrination in regards to emotional hypnosis, or
worse, both

Attributes are that which is observed, NOT that which is claimed

Eg. Here is one patently obvious attribute:

1 "Your god is a lousy communicator", evidence is staring you in the face, if
not then why not ?

Another patently obvious attribute:

2 "Your god ensures innocents suffer without respite for all time", if not
then why not ?

It is said in early Greek text that "You will know the character by the
action", in the later old testament it is said "You will know them by their
actions", in later renditions it is said "Actions speak louder than words"

Your god Acts as a Devil !

0

Report Block

* * *

**OdinsAcolyte**

Oct 15, 2015

Subsidence

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 15, 2015

> WE are created in the image and likeness of God.  
>

That line is why religion is a comfort zone for dangerous narcissists.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 15, 2015

Returners, you are nuts.  
If a supreme being had really created you in its image  
the world would have ended already.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 15, 2015

> have already made it clear that I disagree with your point

Which point is that? That most urban buildings arent built to last more than
30 years, that the typical urban worker changes jobs ever 4 to 7 years, or
that the infrastructure of many coastal cities is crumbling and irreplaceable?
I believe I supplied links for all of these. Do you require more?

> the scale of change is much larger than any we have seen before (in historic
records)

You fail to appreciate the scale of western city recycling, in terms of both
structures and people. Read the links I provided.

The article talks in terms of 'as early as next century... not for several
centuries'. You also fail to appreciate how quickly city structures are
replaced and how much time we actually have.

And hopefully Bangladesh and Indonesia will soon be modernized to the point
that their people will be able to relocate as easy as it now is to leave a job
in NYC for a better one in tulsa.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 15, 2015

> But states like Florida are going to be in serious trouble. Your response is
hand-waving

It was your hand tgat waved 'serious trouble'. A large percentage of Florida
residents are immigrants and retired people. Immigrants... immigrate. Retirees
die and are replaced by new ones.

Im sure they will find Phoenix or even tulsa, depending on the extent of
climate change, just as pleasant.

Cities are not the static, eternal entities you imagine them to be. They are
dynamic, ever-evolving, growing or shrinking depending on demographic shifts
and economic changes.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 15, 2015

> scale is much larger... historic records

You should learn more history.

"In the riots which preceded the partition in the Punjab region, between
200,000 and 500,000 people were killed in the retributive genocide between the
religions. UNHCR estimates 14 million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were displaced
during the partition; it was the largest mass migration in human history."

-And it was certainly not the only one during that time. And this was over the course of a few years, not gens as the article is saying. 

Consider: in the worst-case scenario per the article, everyone now living in
Florida would have grown old and died. The companies they worked for would
have long since relocated, along with their children, over the course of
decades, as economics made living and working in Florida untenable.

They would have scattered throughout the country and around the globe to
prospering regions where living is cheap and work plentiful.

Just like it is happening NOW.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 15, 2015

Ghost: You have done nothing to show any quantitative estimate of the cost of
relocation of a single city, let alone hundreds of them over the next two
centuries. Just show me the estimates that say it will be negligible and I
will quit worrying about what might happen.

You mention 14 million as being the largest human migration in history. How
many do you think will have to move when the oceans rise?

How much will it cost? You seem to think it will be inexpensive. Just show me
the research that agrees with you.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 15, 2015

I want to see where he puts the billion people in Asia who will lose their
sources of water when the glaciers finally give out. Got food stashed away for
them? Water, too?

We cannot have such a casual disregard for Human life.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Zzzzzzzz**

Oct 15, 2015

thermodynamics - arguing with a psycho is counter productive. You can never
make the psychotic see reality, that is the nature of their disease. There is
no cure.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Zzzzzzzz**

Oct 15, 2015

And we see the delusion of denial joined by the delusion of religious belief.
Exactly as predicted. Some brains have defects.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

> I want to see where he puts the billion people in Asia who will lose their
sources of water when the glaciers finally give out. Got food stashed away for
them? Water, too?

>

> We cannot have such a casual disregard for Human life.

the technology exists to make drinking water from sea water using solar power.

Plus you can't be sure there will even be that many people there to need that
much water by then anyway. Hopefully the east and central asians will continue
to reduce their birth rates to something remotely resembling sane levels.

India is sucking all of their ground water dry to irrigate farms for their 1
billion people. It is only a matter of time before they run out of ground
water anyway, so they better have a mitigation plan in place.

I have suggested solar desalination technology needs to be developed for
years.

India has 400million people who don't even have electricity yet. Wait till
they get coal fired power plants and gas guzzlers!

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

This comment has been removed by a moderator.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

Dummycrats want stricter gun laws?

Fine I do too. You're damn right I do.

Normal people don't need machine guns and shit.

And they can start by banning muslims from owning or possessing any gun at
all.

You should have to undergo a full psychological evaluation BEFORE buying a
gun, and you should have to be re-evaluated every year or so in order to keep
a gun.

I'm sick of punk kids who walk into theatres and schools killing people, and
so far in the past 20 years of mass shootings in the US, one ONE of them was
done by someone who bought their gun illegally....alll the other ones bought
their weapons legally and the pathetic laws we had couldn't detect them as a
criminal, because no requirement is put on anybody to do real research into
who is buying the gun and for what reason.

And it should be a felony to give a gun to anybody who is already a felon,
regards to that other church shooter who got the guns from his father or uncle
or some such.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 15, 2015

You don't have enough rope to lynch them all.

Give up your hate.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

We should have a summary execution law for mass shooters and bombers.

We don't need to spend a million dollars on a trial when we have 50 witnesses
see someone gun down `10 or 20 other people.

First cop on the scene? Don' accept surrender. Shoot the asshole in the head
and in the heart just to be sure, and kick his corpse for good measure.

They put these mass murderers up in "mental institutions" where they pay their
living for ~80 years or so and endanger countless other people's lives...

Donald Trump is right about one thing:

Our leaders are freaking IDIOTS...

"That's unconstitutional" - Dummycrat.

That's why there's an amendment process. It should get used. Promptly.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

> You don't have enough rope to lynch them all.

>

> Give up your hate.

I'm not the one going around shooting people and blowing up buses and diners.

I don't hate them. I actually pray for them.

I feel sorry for them, I really do. They're the ones that are going to burn in
hell for eternity for being/supporting murderers.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Returners**

Oct 15, 2015

Retardigans think it's okay for everyone to own a gun.  
Dummycrats think it's okay to be a muslim.

recipe for disaster.

Although, to be fair, muslim cowards in the US tend to be bomb makers, which
they learned from their comrads overseas.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 15, 2015

Returners proposed

> We should have a summary execution law for mass shooters and bombers

Ah I see, you take lazy way & arbitrarily follow jesus' ideas without thought
of consequence

ie. When jesus wanted to kill timothy ?

Returners stated

> We don't need to spend a million dollars on a trial when we have 50
witnesses see someone gun down `10 or 20 other people

So popular opinion has more import than "rules of evidence", they were many
Nazis last century who claimed jews were guilty of crimes, lots of witnesses
etc.

Reminder: The malevolant will irrationally lie/cheat & on mass scale, you want
to return us to ignoring the rule of law ?

Returners betrayed himself

> First cop on the scene? Don' accept surrender. Shoot the asshole in the head
and in the heart just to be sure, and kick his corpse for good measure

So you affirm you are NOT christian then, pretty obvious that, no forgiveness,
no care !

One 'witness' enough for more murder & insanity then ?

0

Report Block

* * *

**leetennant**

Oct 15, 2015

There's nothing like mass murder being the solution to mass murder. That mass
murder will definitely ensure there's no more mass murder. There's something
wrong with that logic but I'm a crazed theist and can't see it. incidentally,
my argument boils down to "we should save our society from becoming a
theocracy by becoming a different kind of theocracy first". Scratch a theist
and it's always all turtles... all the way down.

I'd also like to know what the hell this has to do with sea level rises -
unless you're in the Returners camp of ethics, summarised as "as long as
they're brown people dying, who cares?"

And for all those people who think Miami will be no big loss - how do you
think we'll cope once Bangkok and London become uninhabitable?

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 16, 2015

Returners, you appear to be close to the edge.  
Get help before you commit a crime.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 16, 2015

For Returners & the dude DQM who votes down many but, never has the courage
since Jan 17, 2013 to actually engage in any discussion at all, you guys
family ?

Kissin cousins perhaps and anti-Science & persecute those from the silent
idelines who don't robotically follow mere arbitrary emotive evil claim to put
yourself under the thumb of religious power (is DQM acronym for "Don't Query
Me") ?

Tell us all about the wondrous, the key essential details about your god & all
the other gods claimed to have spoken to men who only ever achieved: Status,
Power & Authority over the meek, vulnerable & unintelligent without providing
any education to learn such as the paradigm of Scientific Method ?

What are the specific attributes that distinguish your particular god from a
Devil any Devil ?

Be honest now, or wouldn't your god want you to be true ?

This vid is pertinent, is this a loving god, a Devil or mechanism of variance
in Nature's evolution:-  
https://youtu.be/k9Lp4-y4RFE

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 16, 2015

> For Returners & the dude DQM who votes down many but, never has the courage
since Jan 17, 2013 to actually engage in any discussion at all, you guys
family ?

>

> Kissin cousins perhaps and anti-Science & persecute those from the silent
idelines who don't robotically follow mere arbitrary emotive evil claim to put
yourself under the thumb of religious power (is DQM acronym for "Don't Query
Me") ?

>

> Tell us all about the wondrous, the key essential details about your god &
all the other gods claimed to have spoken to men who only ever achieved:
Status, Power & Authority over the meek, vulnerable & unintelligent without
providing any education to learn such as the paradigm of Scientific Method?

>

> What are the specific attributes that distinguish your particular god from a
Devil any Devil ?

>

> Be honest now, or wouldn't your god want you to be true ?  
>  is this a loving god, a Devil or mechanism of variance in Nature's
evolution

Muttering Mike, go study some Differential Equations

0

Report Block

* * *

**NealWV**

Oct 16, 2015

Wow! I hope they didn't spend allot of money to determine this ground breaking
info. Everyone including the native americans knew and know that New Orleans
is not only below sea level now but is continuing to sink. The river shifts
course and deposits silt every so often. Now that man has stopped this shift
the river is higher than the surrounding land. People not everywhere that is
high and dry is going to stay that way forever whether man was here or not!

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 16, 2015

"People not everywhere that is high and dry is going to stay that way forever
whether man was here or not!"

* * *

Oh. You should have said that before. (Whatever it means)

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 16, 2015

We haven't solved the problem here, have we? How are we going to make such a
major transition in Human Experience? What are the costs going to be, compared
to the much smaller costs of not polluting in the first place?

How will we replace the arable land lost to climate change? Who is going to
feed the displaced?

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 16, 2015

> Ghost: You have done nothing to show any quantitative estimate of the cost
of relocation of a single city

Neither have you. I gave you a realistic scenario in terms of decades and
gens, whereby natural, economically-driven shifts will relocate people out of
cities which by that time will be obsolete.

You seem to think we need to build neo-new yorks and bostons replete with
identical landmarks and businesses that refugees can move right into, over the
course of a decade or 2.

Business does not work that way.

Cities will be gradually abandoned by businesses which find it more profitable
to operate elsewhere, as they are doing NOW and have always done. Workers will
follow.

The cities and regions they move to will grow and develop to accomodate them,
as they are doing NOW.

Economics drives demographic shifts, not massive megalomanic amarnas in the
desert.

> You mention 14 million as being the largest human migration in history

-In a few years, not centuries.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 16, 2015

> How much will it cost? You seem to think it will be inexpensive. Just show
me the research that agrees with you

Where did I say that? Its absurd to think that replacement cities will need to
be built. Show me some research that BIG GOVT will have to replace cities
along with housing, businesses, infrastructure, transportation, etc.

The idea is absurd.

What did it cost BIG GOVT to build these?  
https://en.wikipe...d_States

-Business goes where the profit is. Bonds are floated and tax breaks secured to pay for it. 

-And speaking of an amarna in the desert, did BIG GOVT pay for Las Vegas?  
https://en.wikipe...as_Vegas

-No, Meyer Lansky did.

0

Report Block

* * *

**SuperThunder**

Oct 16, 2015

If you look at the studies of the human populations most affected by climate
change, you'll notice very few of them are strongholds for white western
bigots. Climate change deniers, at least in America, are near universally
bigots. They don't disbelieve, they approve, and will tell any lie to make
sure it happens. Once most of the Southern Hemisphere is dead (millions from
the climate change, millions more from the wars to profit from climate change)
they will all say those deaths were tragic, unavoidable, and nature's fault,
while secretly praising themselves for collusion in mass murder.

The knowledge that all of this was avoidable, and people who were violent,
barbaric, and cruel, prevented anyone from stopping it from happening cannot
be lost. It's too important that the survivors never let such people have this
kind of power ever again.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 16, 2015

> How will we replace the arable land lost to climate change? Who is going to
feed the displaced?

How about one thing at a time here.......first let's get New Orleans out of
that hole they continue digging themselves into even deeper. It seems somebody
around that town has lost the concept of water seeking the lowest level in
which to pool.

0

Report Block

* * *

**philstacy9**

Oct 16, 2015

http://www.thegwp...its1.pdf

0

Report Block

* * *

**chromal**

Oct 16, 2015

People seem willing to believe anything else first but that this is true. This
paper is just stating the obvious from my perspective, though I'm not familiar
with where wind and ocean current will make the first impacts manifest
themselves. I expect to live to see this begin to play out in earnest, and I
know people living in three of the cities forecast to be impacted early on...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Genep34**

Oct 16, 2015

to returners and the rest of the ignorant science deniers - keep on wasting
your time writing comments.

this is a science site - no one is going to take right wing deniers seriously
- but i must say it does offer some entertainment value.

after you get rid of the scientists and the rest of the right wing marks what
is left. just a bunch of white stupid males running around with their six
shooters trying to scare each other.

keep posting and we will continue to laugh.

0

Report Block

* * *

**chromal**

Oct 16, 2015

> So we lose those two cities, so what? it would be like cleaning out two
cesspools!

Then you'll really love it when they are 'flushed' into your neighborhood as
refugees. Also, these are fellow Americans now we're talking about. I'm not
surprised if people turn a hard heart to people living elsewhere in the world,
but, do you lack compassion even for fellow citizens? Who /doesn't/ deserve to
be smitten, in your view?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 16, 2015

Well chromal,

does it any sense to you that cities should not be built in coastal areas that
are below sea level? New Oleans averages 1-2 feet below sea level. What kind
of compassionate smart people do stupid stuff like building houses that are
doomed to flooding conditions? Do you imagine it is lack of compassion that an
engineer such as myself, would demand safe living accomodations through
abandonment of such foolhardy construction?

0

Report Block

* * *

**bluehigh**

Oct 16, 2015

Miami - a doom with a view?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 17, 2015

Benni claimed with naive "Appeal to Authority"

> Do you imagine it is lack of compassion that an engineer such as myself

Ah! a claimed "Nuclear Engineer" comments on Civil engineering issue or maybe
instead he advises on Structural engineering issues ?

New Orleans, neg. history of storm surge stats prior, doh

Benni, I asked before, prove your creds ? you resort to "Appeal to Authority"
when it suits to push a negative angle & boost ego, what's your student no,
institute you graduated first as an "Engineer" then later as "Nuclear
Engineer" ?

Mine 07602128 at Curtin University (formerly Western Australian Institute of
Technology), Bentley Western Australia:- Electronic Engineer 1982, Bachelor of
Science 2008, Post grad certificate Food Science 2010

Benii's view would inflame TheGhostofOtto1923 who has a fixed notion any
Electrical Engineer cannot work on a Mechanical Engineering project & vice
versa, why are you both appearing simpletons ?

Benni Prove it ?

0

Report Block

* * *

**mosahlah**

Oct 17, 2015

I'll trade some hill country for that soon-to-be-worthless beach property in
Miami. Any takers? I didn't think so.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 17, 2015

> Benni Prove it ?

He never does. Just put him on ignore.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 17, 2015

The end is nigh for the denialist trolls: Exxon knew for decades that AGW is a
fact.

http://phys.org/n...tic.html

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 17, 2015

Read this:  
http://www.thegua...-warming  
Or this:  
http://www.latime...ory.html

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 17, 2015

> does it make any sense to you that cities should not be built in coastal
areas that are below sea level? New Oleans averages 1-2 feet below sea level.
What kind of compassionate smart people do stupid stuff like building houses
that are doomed to flooding conditions? Do you imagine it is lack of
compassion that an engineer such as myself, would demand safe living
accomodations through abandonment of such foolhardy construction?

>

> Benii's view would inflame TheGhostofOtto1923 who has a fixed notion any
Electrical Engineer cannot work on a Mechanical Engineering project & vice
versa, why are you both appearing simpletons ?

>

> Benni Prove it?

Muttering Mike, you've consistently proven your adeptness at being one of the
most foul mouthed profanity prone old men on this site, so there is no reason
for me to care what you mutter about, you're just one more totally irrelevant
person who thinks it's smart to build houses below sea level.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 17, 2015

"Benii's view would inflame TheGhostofOtto1923 who has a fixed notion any
Electrical Engineer cannot work on a Mechanical Engineering project & vice
versa, why are you both appearing simpletons ?"

* * *

otto must have no education at all. He thinks my Master of Science diploma
should have had all kinds of stuff on it. I guess he never saw a real one.
Then, Ira, who apparently had never seen one either, had his wife tell him my
thesis, which I sent him was not real. And, of course, never having seen a
thesis, Ira thought so, too.

The problem is not their ignorance, it is their maladjustment, their need to
attack, to try to have a place in society for themselves, while hiding at home
behind pseudonyms.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Uncle Ira**

Oct 17, 2015

> Then, Ira, who apparently had never seen one either, had his wife tell him
my thesis, which I sent him was not real.

Skippy. In case you have not noticed. I have not been having anything to say
to or about you the last few days. But no, you keep wanting to drag it out. So
tell your lies all you want, it is okayeei with me. But quit dragging my name
into them

1) You got no idea of what I have seen and what I have not seen either. I did
see a picture of the diploma you send to me and it does not have anything
written on him about Energy, Environment, or Management either. Tell the lie
about him all you want, but if you bring my name into it, I am going to call
you a liar.

> The problem is not their ignorance, it is their maladjustment, their need to
attack, to try to have a place in society for themselves, while hiding at home
behind pseudonyms.

2) You don't know nothing about about me. What does saying something like that
mean anyway.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 17, 2015

It means just what I said it means: You are SCARED to use your real name and
take responsibility for your silly posts.

You cannot deny you disparaged my works because of your little ego problem.
Not as bad as that of your clone otto, your game of personal comments is just
silly.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 17, 2015

> It means just what I said it means: You are SCARED to use your real name and
take responsibility for your silly posts.

>

> You cannot deny you disparaged my works because of your little ego problem.
Not as bad as that of your clone otto, your game of personal comments is just
silly.

Well then, put him on Ignore as I've done & use another viewing device see how
fast he'll beg you to take it off. He begs not to be ignored by those far
beyond his comprehension capability because that is what makes him feel
relevant. The more you respond to him, the more relevant he feels.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 17, 2015

Perhaps it is time. Ira has no malice, he is here for banter. So I sent him my
personal information, thinking he would appreciate it and relate it to otto.
But egged on by otto, he chose to misrepresent it. Bad decision.

0

Report Block

* * *

**SuperThunder**

Oct 17, 2015

I hope space aliens don't read these comments.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 17, 2015

> Benii's view would inflame otto who has a fixed notion any EE cannot work on
a ME project & vice versa

Why thats not true mikey. I have a problem with people claiming to be
engineers when they have no formal engg education, no degree, no EIT-level
experience, and even no PE although I do understand this is not actually
necessary.

And I have a real problem with people claiming that their lies about being
engrs (just because they held job shop positions with 'engineer' titles),
makes them immune to criticism of their made-up facts and outright lies.

> You are SCARED to use your real name and take responsibility

This is obviously directed at barakn, thermodynamics, and even mike masson.
Who is mike masson? U of Victoria mike masson?

Who knows? Who cares? All thats important is the quality of the postings or
lack thereof.

Only evidence determines this. Evidence exposes lying, psychopaths no matter
what they pretend to be.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 17, 2015

> otto must have no education at all. He thinks my Master of Science diploma
should have had all kinds of stuff on it. I guess he never saw a real one.
Then, Ira, who apparently had never seen one either, had his wife tell him my
thesis, which I sent him was not real. And, of course, never having seen a
thesis, Ira thought so, too

George, ANYONE can read where you pretended to have an MS in environmental
mgt, and then sent ira info which said you only had a

"Master Degree of Professional Studies (it means "life experience of a varied
nature") The school will tell you that the Degree of Professional Studies is
for older or working people who have life experience that might be worth some
credits"  
http://phys.org/n...ack.html

-which is in no way an MS in environmental management, which or anything else youve claimed. 

THAT degree is indeed offered at that college, in a different school entirely.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 17, 2015

otto, get it straight or go home. You apparently never got very far in school,
since your image of it is like your ideas of engineers. Are you really one of
Putin's boys, trying to fit in here?

There are just too many things in this society of which you are completely
ignorant.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 17, 2015

What makes you think you can get away with lying about your MS again and again
and again? As Ive said before you may be able to get away with people you can
intimidate in person, but you cant get away with it HERE.

Typical ploy of the psychopath - lie, be exposed, wait a few weeks, and tell
the same lie again, thinking that people would forget the specifics of the
exposure.

That cant work HERE george where your lies and exposures are recorded in
perpetuity.

This is the internet. Follow the link I posted above and read your lies. Just
like everybody else.

Do you think we will get tired of showing everybody just what a sicko you are?

Never. It gets better every time you try to get away with it.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 17, 2015

> otto, get it straight or go home. You apparently never got very far in
school

Even if that were true, which I think the people here realize its not, I (or
any average hs sophomore) can expose your lies and made-up facts.

Its EASY. Too bad youre too sick to acknowledge this.

> since your image of it is like your ideas of engineers. Are you really one
of Putin's boys, trying to fit in here?

Its easy george. EXPLAIN why you lied about your MS.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 17, 2015

> There are just too many things in this society of which you are completely
ignorant

You can pretend all you want in that malformed little mind of yours. What
people see is entirely different.

"We are not commonly aware of, nor do we usually identify, the larger number
of nonviolent psychopaths among us, people who often are not blatant
lawbreakers, and against whom our formal legal system provides little defense.

"Most of us would not imagine any correspondence between conceiving an ethnic
genocide and, say, guiltlessly lying to one's boss about a coworker. But the
psychological correspondence is not only there; it is chilling. Simple and
profound, the link is the absence of the inner mechanism that beats up on us,
emotionally speaking, when we make a choice we view as immoral, unethical,
neglectful, or selfish.

"Those who have no conscience at all are a group unto themselves, whether they
be homicidal tyrants or merely ruthless social snipers."

IMO of course.

0

Report Block

* * *

**joefarah**

Oct 17, 2015

I'm just curious... a warmer planet will mean more evaporation, more moisture
in the atmosphere. Exactly how much moisture could the atmosphere hold when it
is warmer. Me thinks, a lot more than has been accounted for in the models,
imperfect as they are.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 17, 2015

> I'm just curious... a warmer planet will mean more evaporation, more
moisture in the atmosphere. Exactly how much moisture could the atmosphere
hold when it is warmer. Me thinks, a lot more than has been accounted for in
the models, imperfect as they are.

......yeah, just like what's going on in California right now.

0

Report Block

* * *

**thermodynamics**

Oct 17, 2015

GreenO said:

> Antigoracle says

>

>> Ocean temperatures dropping like a rock.

>

> Then clarifies saying -

>

>> And, I should have said "Ocean heat content"

>

> And then provides graphs that show exactly the opposite.

>

> Thermo - we are trying to talk rationally to someone who drinking from the
happy juice bottle. It is an interesting past time as an educational
experiment - but it can test your resolve. Best of luck.

I am a bit hard headed and I thought that giving them facts and links to the
methods of computation would help them understand why they are wrong about the
science. Instead, as you point out, it is futile. They are mired in politics.
I will continue to watch and contribute but I am not going to argue about
science with those who don't want to understand it. Thank for the reminder
Green.

0

Report Block

* * *

**AGreatWhopper**

Oct 17, 2015

> Wow, you people swarm these articles very quickly.

The give-away that it's going to be like that is when "returners" pulls out
his benni sock puppet so quickly.

Still hoping.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Vietvet**

Oct 17, 2015

@jimshitforbrains

You're sick, really sick and disgusting.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jljenkins**

Oct 17, 2015

Along with 1/2 the other people on this thread. What a cesspool!

0

Report Block

* * *

**AGreatWhopper**

Oct 17, 2015

gkam and otto are like watching a beta fish fight its reflection. Two peas in
a pod. I guess the comments section is only big enough for one raving
narcissist. Get a room you two. See who can get off more times to their own
reflection. I think G has an edge, but it'd be a fair fight. Which this isn't.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 17, 2015

Nope, AGW, he is on ignore. Notice no ratings from me?

You will be too, soon.

0

Report Block

* * *

**mosahlah**

Oct 18, 2015

Still offering to trade hill property for some of that doomed Miami beach
front property. I can't imagine why anyone would want to hang on to a beach
house when the scientific consensus is that submersion is imminent... Hmmm.
Strange isn't it?

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

about jim_xanara  
phys.org should remove this bigotry.  
They are responsible for managing content.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

> Still offering to trade hill property for some of that doomed Miami beach
front property. I can't imagine why anyone would want to hang on to a beach
house when the scientific consensus is that submersion is imminent... Hmmm.
Strange isn't it?

Science is often surprising, the rest is called common sense.  
I will explain with a simple example.  
Grass grows so slowly that you can't see it happening in real time with the
unaided eye.  
Are you surprised if you have to mow it again after a week ?

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

> I'm just curious... a warmer planet will mean more evaporation, more
moisture in the atmosphere. Exactly how much moisture could the atmosphere
hold when it is warmer. Me thinks, a lot more than has been accounted for in
the models, imperfect as they are.

You only say this because have no knowledge of physics.

0

Report Block

* * *

**joefarah**

Oct 18, 2015

@my2cts On the contrary, I'm quite learned in physics (minor undergrad and
subsequent studies especially in space sciences and general relativity). I say
this because the only significant changes to the earth's temperature through
human intervention come from nuclear energy/bombs (which releases significant
heat that otherwise would be released much more slowly) and clear-cutting of
forests (especially rain forests) which impact the balance of the plant (CO2
intake) and animal (O2 intake) worlds. However, additional CO2 in the
atmosphere feeds plant growth which increases CO2 to O2 conversion.

Now back to my original point. Given a warmer climate, say 2 degrees warmer,
how much more moisture would the atmosphere hold. And what portion of this do
the CC models take into consideration?

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 18, 2015

joefarah claims

> .. I'm quite learned in physics (minor undergrad and subsequent studies
especially in space sciences and general relativity)

LO. Nowhere near enough, beliefs don't cut it, education is an entirely
different matter, please review my last post here  
http://phys.org/n...tic.html

joefarah claims

> .. only significant changes to the earth's temperature through human
intervention come from nuclear energy/bombs..

No !

joefarah claims

> .. and clear-cutting of forests ... which impact the balance of the plant..

Not enough !

joefarah claims

> .. additional CO2 in the atmosphere feeds plant growth which increases CO2
to O2 conversion

No & Not simple !

Extra CO2 shifts some food crops produce cyanogens ie HCN=Poison :-(

joefarah asked

> Given a warmer climate, say 2 degrees warmer, how much more moisture would
the atmosphere hold..

Glad you asked for a change, here  
https://en.wikipe...ometrics

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 18, 2015

> joefarah claims

>

> I'm quite learned in physics (minor undergrad and subsequent studies
especially in space sciences and general relativity)

>

> LO. Nowhere near enough, beliefs don't cut it, education is an entirely
different matter, please review my last post here

.........so this means you too don't cut it because by your own words,
"education is an entirely different matter". You have little knowledge of
nuclear physics, chemistry, etc.......so in substitution you think filling up
your postings with a lot of name calling & foul mouthed vulgarity is an
appropriate substitute to make up for your own lack of education.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Mike_Massen**

Oct 18, 2015

LOL

Benni Fails digging yet deeper hole lacking comprehension

> ..so this means you too don't cut it because by your own words, "education
is an entirely different matter"

No. Read !

joefarah believes he's "learned in Physics", I'm simply advising its nowhere
near enough (re AGW), both of you need clearly understand radiative transfer,
please read my posts & Physics links

ie Lectures missed yet claiming graduation first as "Engineer" & then as
"Nuclear engineer" ?

I've supplied my creds, email Curtin Uni - where are yours please ?

Benni fails claiming

> You have little knowledge of nuclear physics, chemistry, etc.......so in
substitution you think filling up your postings with a lot of name calling &
foul mouthed vulgarity is an appropriate substitute to make up for your own
lack of education

See my cred, your claims don't cut it !

Prove yourself & your claim re DEs  
https://en.wikipe...transfer

/LOL

0

Report Block

* * *

**eachus**

Oct 18, 2015

> > o we lose those two cities, so what?

>

> Well, it's going to cost a pretty penny to relocate all these people and
businesses. And what did you have in mind for them? Shoving them into other
cities? Or building 'replacement cities'? Either of those options would cost
way more than completely changing over the entire energy infrastricture of the
US to renewables.

Um. We already lost New Orleans in Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. A lot of the
refugees were smart enough not to move back. I went to a convention in New
Orleans several years after the hurricanes, and even though downtown was
restored (and the food was great) the population had not recovered. In fact,
the population is still more than 10% down from before the hurricanes.

As for Miami? If we had sensible disaster management, the US should be
evacuating the entire Florida East coast (and other areas) prior to the next
(super-)tsunami in the Atlantic Ocean.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

> I'm just curious... Me thinks, a lot more than has been accounted for in the
models, imperfect as they are.

Knowledge of physics should have stopped you from making your totally
unfounded statement.  
Why didn't it?  
Since you do know physics, here's what a physicist would do. Read the climate
modelling papers. Check if the authors are indeed dead wrong. As this would be
entirely surprising, publish and place a link here to the peer reviewed paper.

0

Report Block

* * *

**AGreatWhopper**

Oct 18, 2015

It's an American attitude. The farmer that visits the big city for the first
time and sees a Picasso and says, "I don't know anhthing about art, but I know
what I like and I don't like that!". Democracy means every yahoo yelling their
opinion. Two generation raised without anyone backhanding them and saying STFU
if you don't know what you're talking about. And now one has a chance to be
President. This stuff is not harmless.

0

Report Block

* * *

**AGreatWhopper**

Oct 18, 2015

> about jim_xanara  
>  phys.org should remove this bigotry.  
>  They are responsible for managing content.

The climate spammers are less dangerous? They don't manage content, they take
payment for content. If it's right wing, it's bought and paid for. You will
never see the kind of content management you see on every other site of any
repute as long as that is the case.

0

Report Block

* * *

**AGreatWhopper**

Oct 18, 2015

> Still offering to trade hill property for some of that doomed Miami beach
front property. I can't imagine why anyone would want to hang on to a beach
house when the scientific consensus is that submersion is imminent... Hmmm.
Strange isn't it?

SFBs, does anyone on here own any? Very good example though of the kind of
thinking your ilk engage in. The fact that there is not one person on here
that could accept the offer doesn't deter you from making the point...again.
Classic. Snapshot of a logic-challenged troll. Can't happen, but you can just
shout that it should...or everyone's a liar. Facts and reality be damned. I
have a better idea. You can be damned.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 18, 2015

> LOL......  
>  Prove yourself & your claim re DEs  
>  https://en.wikipe...transfer  
>  /LOL

Ha..ha.. Mutterin Mike pretending to know science because he "learnt" it from
Wikipedia.  
Mutterin Mike may I suggest you go on another walkabout, but this time,
instead of letting that roo kick you in the head, have him kick you in the
nuts. Perhaps that would knock some sense into you.  
/LOL

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

@anti  
As always you make no sense.  
You appear more a mobster than an interested layman.  
Why don't you split ? Hang around with your own sort?  
Wait, Exxon is paying you a dollar a month.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 18, 2015

> @anti  
>  Hee...hawww....hee...hawww..  
>  Wait, Exxon is paying you a dollar a month.

Yep, and Exxon is holding a gun to your head, every time you full up your gas
tank.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Oct 18, 2015

> gkam and otto are like

George comes here to make up lies about his past as justification for the
facts he makes up.

Do yourself a favor; check what he posts from time to time. Check the lies we
have already flagged him with. Youll soon be convinced, like most of the rest
of us here, that he is a compulsive liar.

Im not. See the difference?

You can then decide if you want to keep encouraging a compulsive liar here,
just because he supports your cause, or not.

Which stance is more honorable?

"Part of the hurt and damage was done because others could but would not see
what was actually happening. He would always try to ingratiate himself to
others it was sickening. Usually psychopaths put on the nicest act...

"My biggest frustration and source of anger, is at those who have refused to
take a stand when they see the abuse... No matter how outrageous his behavior
others often stood by and inadvertently fueled his grandiosity and denial..."

-Youre a Dupe.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 18, 2015

> > @anti  
>  Hee...hawww....hee...hawww..  
>  Wait, Exxon is paying you a dollar a month.

>

> Yep, and Exxon is holding a gun to your head, every time you full up your
gas tank.

So go make yourself scarse.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 18, 2015

> > > @anti  
>  Hee...hawww....hee...hawww..  
>  Wait, Exxon is paying you a dollar a month.

>>

>> Yep, and Exxon is holding a gun to your head, every time you full up your
gas tank.

>

> So go make yourself scarse.

Wow, you're really that ignorant and you have my pity.  
Ever wonder where they are getting that dollar to pay me?  
Here's an idea, to put an end to it, and Exxon.  
Next time you fill up, just drive away without paying. Even better yet, stop
being a hypocrite and don't fill up at all. And, still better, get all your
Chicken Little friends to do the same. That will show them. So, go make
yourself useful.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 18, 2015

> Even better yet, stop being a hypocrite and don't fill up at all. And, still
better, get all your Chicken Little friends to do the same. That will show
them. So, go make yourself useful.

You're kidding? You really expect these greenies to give up the use of jet
fuel or gasoline to attend Al Gore's next gig when he flies in on that fuel
hog?

By the way, I do know of a couple of habitats of pure greenies who live in the
vicinity of where I live, they are off the grid, their wind turbines & PV's do
not work most of the time. It's a stark reality how absolutely shabby their
lives & their habitats are. They don't have productive jobs because they ride
bikes everywhere & do not use cars. Come winter around here & these people beg
others, who own cars, for the means of getting to a food store the nearest of
which is 15 miles away.

Why are greenies so enamored with using someone else's gasoline if they
imagine themselves to be such purists??

0

Report Block

* * *

**jljenkins**

Oct 18, 2015

They're hypocrites. Well, that's only if you believe the schtick and I don't.
Actually, they're most like right wing Christians. We call them hypocrites a
lot too. I think both cases miss the mark.

The point of their morality isn't that they think it's something everyone
should follow. It's certainly not anything that they think applies to them.
It's a way to control "the other" of which they are terrified. It's the white,
middle-class philandering Christian preaching the gospel to a poor black youth
because the Christian thinks it is a good form of behavioral control. It's not
for him or his family, it's for "the other".

It's obvious when you look at the consumer greenies. Nothing reduces footprint
like reducing feet on the ground, yet they don't talk about population which
would be causing a major extinction without any climate change at all. Many
are realtors and religious that depend on constant population growth. Maybe
hypocrites was right.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jljenkins**

Oct 18, 2015

Oh, and my FAVORITE has to be when they have a "clean energy summit" or some
such nonsense IN FREAKIN' LAS VEGAS!!! It would be funny if it weren't so
pitiful. Harry Reid and Obummer get all righteous about addressing AGW. One if
from Las Vegas and one from Hawaii. You know, those two places could be the
illustration in the child's encylopedia of simple concepts under the word
"unsustainable". Are there two less sustainable places for the population they
have on earth? AND LAS VEGAS DELIBERATLY TRIES TO ATTRACT TEMPORARY RESIDENTS
TO MAKE IT WORSE!!! Shoot water into the air for recreation. "What me, worry?
YOU worry, I'm going right on as usual."

You know, I just can't imagine why there are climate skeptics. Greenies yell,
"My house is on fire; DO something to save me", and then go back to watching
the boob tube. blueoregon.com actually had an article "What's the worst thing
about AGW deniers?" I posted, "That they're caused by your hypocrisy".

0

Report Block

* * *

**I Have Questions**

Oct 19, 2015

The vast majority of deniers are religious conservative republicans. I think
that they are influenced by the notion that Armageddon is coming and they are
subconsciously making that a self-fulfilling prophecy.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antigoracle**

Oct 19, 2015

> The vast majority of deniers are religious conservative republicans. I think
that they are influenced by the notion that Armageddon is coming and they are
subconsciously making that a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Oh no!! This Chicken Little is on to us!!  
Wait...who are the ones who believe the sky is falling... oh yeah... the
Chicken Littles.  
I believe the Chicken Littles are so stupid, they wouldn't know the truth even
if it slapped them upside their dumb faces.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 19, 2015

> The vast majority of deniers are religious conservative republicans. I think
that they are influenced by the notion that Armageddon is coming and they are
subconsciously making that a self-fulfilling prophecy.

So, "deniers" have created a prophecy through what in their stance on AGW or
GW? That there is a thing called Armageddon coming in which what will take
place? That there will be no global warming? Lack of rain & all manner of fire
& brimstone followed up by drought all over the globe will not result in GW?

Or are you saying they want GW while at the same time being "deniers" of what?
Global warming?

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 19, 2015

I think he made it pretty clear, Benni.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Benni**

Oct 19, 2015

> I think he made it pretty clear, Benni.

Right, IHQ is just as confused as right wing religious conservative
Republicans?

Tell you what Geek, because you're so entuned to what's "pretty clear", you
explain what IHQ is talking about.

0

Report Block

* * *

**gkam**

Oct 20, 2015

It is about you, Benni.

0

Report Block

* * *

**my2cts**

Oct 21, 2015

> > > > @anti  
>  Hee...hawww....hee...hawww..  
>  Wait, Exxon is paying you a dollar a month.

>>>

>>> Yep, and Exxon is holding a gun to your head, every time you full up your
gas tank.

>>

>> So go make yourself scarse.

>

> Wow, you're really that ignorant and you have my pity.  
>  Ever wonder where they are getting that dollar to pay me?  
>  Here's an idea, to put an end to it, and Exxon.  
>  Next time you fill up, just drive away without paying. Even better yet,
stop being a hypocrite and don't fill up at all. And, still better, get all
your Chicken Little friends to do the same. That will show them. So, go make
yourself useful.

So you confess that you are paid by Exxon a dollar a month.  
That is one dollar too many for someone of your level.  
Also it shows a worrying failure of intelligence in the company.  
Stocks will fall when this gets out.

0

Report Block

* * *

Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a
minute. Read more

Sign in

Forgot Password  
Registration

##### What do you think about this particular story?

Your feedback will go directly to Science X editors.

Your message to the editors

Your email (only if you want to be contacted back)

Send Feedback

Thank you for taking your time to send in your valued opinion to Science X
editors.

You can be assured our editors closely monitor every feedback sent and will
take appropriate actions. Your opinions are important to us.

We do not guarantee individual replies due to extremely high volume of
correspondence.

###### E-mail the story

##### Sea level rise will swallow Miami, New Orleans, study finds

Your friend's email

Your email

I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more

Your name

###### Note

Your email address is used **only** to let the recipient know who sent the
email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any
other purpose. The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message
and is not retained by Phys.org in any form.

Your message

Send

#### Newsletter sign up

Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox. You can unsubscribe
at any time and we'll never share your details to third parties.

Subscribe

More information Privacy policy

![Medical

Xpress](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/MedicalXpress.svg)

### Medical Xpress

Medical Xpress covers all medical research advances and health news

![Tech

Xplore](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/techexploer.svg)

### Tech Xplore

Tech Xplore covers the latest engineering, electronics and technology advances

![ScienceX](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/ScienceX.svg)

### ScienceX

Science X Network offers the most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the
web

## Newsletters

Subscribe

Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow
you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox

## Follow us

                
                                      *           *           *           *           * Top
                      * Home
                      * Search
                      * Mobile version
                      * Help
                      * FAQ
                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * Science X Account
                      * Sponsored Account
                      * Archive
                      * News wire
                      * Android app
                      * iOS app
                      * RSS feeds
                      * Push notification
                

(C) Phys.org 2003 - 2019 powered by Science X Network

Privacy policy Terms of use

#### Your Privacy

This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our
services, and provide content from third parties. By using our site, you
acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy and Terms of
Use.

Ok More Information

#### E-mail newsletter

Subscribe

#### Follow us

                
                                      *           *           *           * It appears that you are currently using **Ad Blocking software**. What are the consequences?  ×
                

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-5dNhPAnM9r0yY.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

