  
                  
                                      *  
                      * Look up a Term Close Panel
                      *  
                      * CLAM Bake Close Clams
                      *
                

# Climate Science Glossary

## Term Lookup

Enter a term in the search box to find its definition.

## Settings

Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of
terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off).

# Term Lookup

Term:

Define

# Settings

Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life: 5 seconds 10
seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds 1 minute Until closed

* * *

_All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. 941-954.
Cambridge University Press._

![](images/_core/head/button_sks_200.jpg)
![](images/_core/head/button_sks2_200.jpg)

![](images/_core/head/wflag_english.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_chinese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_czech.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_croatian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_danish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_dutch.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_finnish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_french.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_german.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_israel.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_hungarian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_icelandic.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_indonesian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_italian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_japanese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_korean.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_norwegian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_polish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_portugese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_russian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovak.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovene.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_spanish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_swedish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_thai.gif)

* * *

Home ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) Arguments
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Software ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Resources
Comments ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)The Consensus Project
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Translations ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)About
Donate  
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![Twitter](images/_core/head/icon_twitter.gif)
![Facebook](images/_core/head/icon_facebook.gif)
![YouTube](images/_core/head/icon_youtube.gif)
![Pinterest](images/_core/head/icon_pinterest.gif)

![RSS Posts](images/_core/head/icon_rss_posts.gif) ![RSS

Comments](images/_core/head/icon_rss_comments.gif) ![Email

Subscribe](images/_core/head/icon_email2.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_header.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/left_1.gif) |
Climate's changed before  
---|---  
![](images/_core/head/left_2.gif) | It's the sun  
![](images/_core/head/left_3.gif) | It's not bad  
![](images/_core/head/left_4.gif) | There is no consensus  
![](images/_core/head/left_5.gif) | It's cooling  
![](images/_core/head/left_6.gif) | Models are unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_7.gif) | Temp record is unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_8.gif) | Animals and plants can adapt  
![](images/_core/head/left_9.gif) | It hasn't warmed since 1998  
![](images/_core/head/left_10.gif) | Antarctica is gaining ice  
![](images/_core/head/left_11.gif) | View All Arguments...  
![](images/_core/head/left_therm_bottom.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

![](images/_core/left_margin/IPCC_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/rcp_icon.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/theConsensusProject_88.png)
![](images/_core/left_margin/trend_button_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/pp88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/Predictions_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_oanotok_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/climate_myths88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_history.gif)
![](images/_core/left_margin/button_misinformers_88.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
Username| |  
---|---|---  
Password| |  
Keep me logged in  
| | New? Register here  
Forgot your password?  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

## Latest Posts

                
                                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Climate Change vs Cosmological Catastrophe
                      * Effects of Global Warming
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #22
                      * Humans and volcanoes caused nearly all of global heating in past 140 years
                      * Four scientists make creativity a key to communicating their research
                      * Beleaguered journalism interests seek to aid ailing planet
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #21
                      * New research, May 13-19, 2019
                      * Introducing a new citizens initiative for carbon pricing in Europe
                      * Deep sea carbon reservoirs once superheated the Earth – could it happen again?
                      * Climate Adam reacts to Bill Nye: "The planet's on f@*&ing; fire!"
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #20
                      * New research, May 6-12, 2019
                      * IPCC Updates Methodology for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                      * Inspiring, not depressing, film fest messages
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #19
                      * New research, April 29 - May 5, 2019
                      * Fox News made the US a hotbed of climate denial. Kids are the cure.
                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Nature’s Dangerous Decline ‘Unprecedented’; Species Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’
                      * Former climate 'denier' regrets 'how wrongheaded but certain I was'
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #18
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #18
                      * New research, April 22-28, 2019
                      * What's Earth's ideal temperature?
                      * Climate change could cost the U.S. economy hundreds of billions a year by 2090
                      * Rebellious Times
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #17
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #17
                

Archives

Climate Hustle

![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/flags/flag_finnish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_spanish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_german.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_swedish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_polish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_portugese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_japanese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_french.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_dutch.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_russian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_italian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovak.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_israel.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovene.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_norwegian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_indonesian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_croatian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_korean.gif)

# The 97% consensus on global warming

Link to this page

## What the science says...

| Select a level...| ![](images/_core/other/level1.gif) Basic | |
![](images/_core/other/level2.gif) **Intermediate** | |
![](images/_core/other/level3.gif) Advanced | |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 

That humans are causing global warming is the position of the Academies of
Science from 80 countries plus many scientific organizations that study
climate science. More specifically, around 95% of active climate researchers
actively publishing climate papers endorse the consensus position.

## Climate Myth...

There is no consensus  
The Petition Project features over 31,000 scientists signing the petition
stating "There is no convincing scientific evidence that human release of
carbon dioxide will, in the forseeable future, cause catastrophic heating of
the Earth's atmosphere ...". (Petition Project)

### Consensus on Consensus - Cook et al. (2016)

Authors of seven climate consensus studies -- including Naomi Oreskes, Peter
Doran, William Anderegg, Bart Verheggen, Ed Maibach, J. Stuart Carlton, and
John Cook -- co-authored a paper that should settle the expert climate
consensus question once and for all. The two key conclusions from the paper
are:

> 1) Depending on exactly how you measure the expert consensus, it's somewhere
between 90% and 100% that agree humans are responsible for climate change,
with most of our studies finding 97% consensus among publishing climate
scientists.

>

> 2) The greater the climate expertise among those surveyed, the higher the
consensus on human-caused global warming.

![consensus

studies](https://skepticalscience.com/graphics/studies_consensus.jpg)

Expert consensus results on the question of human-caused global warming among
the previous studies published by the co-authors of Cook et al. (2016).
Illustration: John Cook. Available on the SkS Graphics page

![consensus vs

expertise](https://skepticalscience.com/graphics/Expertise_vs_Consensus.jpg)

Scientific consensus on human-caused global warming as compared to the
expertise of the surveyed sample. There's a strong correlation between
consensus and climate science expertise. Illustration: John Cook. Available on
the SkS Graphics page

Expert consensus is a powerful thing. People know we don't have the time or
capacity to learn about everything, and so we frequently defer to the
conclusions of experts. It's why we visit doctors when we're ill. The same is
true of climate change: most people defer to the expert consensus of climate
scientists. Crucially, as we note in our paper:

> _Public perception of the scientific consensus has been found to be a
gateway belief, affecting other climate beliefs and attitudes including policy
support._

That's why those who oppose taking action to curb climate change have engaged
in a misinformation campaign to deny the existence of the expert consensus.
They've been largely successful, as the public badly underestimate the expert
consensus, in what we call the "consensus gap." Only 16% of Americans realize
that the consensus is above 90%.

Lead author John Cook explaining the team's 2016 consensus paper.

### Skeptical Science's 2013 'The Consensus Project'

Scientists need to back up their opinions with research and data that survive
the peer-review process. A Skeptical Science peer-reviewed survey of all (over
12,000) peer-reviewed abstracts on the subject 'global climate change' and
'global warming' published between 1991 and 2011 (Cook et al. 2013) found that
over 97% of the papers taking a position on the subject agreed with the
consensus position that humans are causing global warming. In a second phase
of the project, the scientist authors were emailed and rated over 2,000 of
their own papers. Once again, over 97% of the papers taking a position on the
cause of global warming agreed that humans are causing it.

![consensus pie

chart](https://skepticalscience.com//pics/C02_TCP_social_media_image_97.jpg)

Lead author John Cook created a short video abstract summarizing the study:

### Oreskes 2004 and Peiser

A survey of all peer-reviewed abstracts on the subject 'global climate change'
published between 1993 and 2003 shows that not a single paper rejected the
consensus position that global warming is man caused (Oreskes 2004). 75% of
the papers agreed with the consensus position while 25% made no comment either
way (focused on methods or paleoclimate analysis).

Benny Peiser, a climate contrarian, repeated Oreskes' survey and claimed to
have found 34 peer reviewed studies rejecting the consensus. However, an
inspection of each of the 34 studies reveals most of them don't reject the
consensus at all. The remaining articles in Peiser's list are editorials or
letters, not peer-reviewed studies. Peiser has since retracted his criticism
of Oreskes survey:

> "Only [a] few abstracts explicitly reject or doubt the AGW (anthropogenic
global warming) consensus which is why I have publicly withdrawn this point of
my critique. [snip] I do not think anyone is questioning that we are in a
period of global warming. Neither do I doubt that the overwhelming majority of
climatologists is agreed that the current warming period is mostly due to
human impact."

### Doran 2009

Subsequent research has confirmed this result. A survey of 3146 earth
scientists asked the question _"Do you think human activity is a significant
contributing factor in changing mean global temperatures? **"**_ ( Doran
2009). More than 90% of participants had Ph.D.s, and 7% had master's degrees.
Overall, 82% of the scientists answered yes. However, what are most
interesting are responses compared to the level of expertise in climate
science. Of scientists who were non-climatologists and didn't publish
research, 77% answered yes. In contrast, 97.5% of climatologists who actively
publish research on climate change responded yes. As the level of active
research and specialization in climate science increases, so does agreement
that humans are significantly changing global temperatures.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/images/poll_scientists.gif)  
_Figure 1: Response to the survey question "Do you think human activity is a
significant contributing factor in changing mean global temperatures?" (_
_Doran 2009_ _)_ _General public data come from a_ _2008 Gallup poll_ _._

Most striking is the divide between expert climate scientists (97.4%) and the
general public (58%). The paper concludes:

> _"It seems that the debate on the authenticity of global warming and the
role played by human activity is largely nonexistent among those who
understand the nuances and scientific basis of long-term climate processes.
The challenge, rather, appears to be how to effectively communicate this fact
to policy makers and to a public that continues to mistakenly perceive debate
among scientists."_

### Anderegg 2010

This overwhelming consensus among climate experts is confirmed by an
independent study that surveys all climate scientists who have publicly signed
declarations supporting or rejecting the consensus. They find between 97% to
98% of climate experts support the consensus (Anderegg 2010). Moreover, they
examine the number of publications by each scientist as a measure of expertise
in climate science. They find the average number of publications by
unconvinced scientists (eg - skeptics) is around half the number by scientists
convinced by the evidence. Not only is there a vast difference in the number
of convinced versus unconvinced scientists, there is also a considerable gap
in expertise between the two groups.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Consensus_publications.gif)  
_Figure 2: Distribution of the number of researchers convinced by the evidence
of anthropogenic climate change and unconvinced by the evidence with a given
number of total climate publications_ _(Anderegg 2010)_ _._

### Vision Prize

The Vision Prize is an online poll of scientists about climate risk. It is an
impartial and independent research platform for incentivized polling of
experts on important scientific issues that are relevant to policymakers. In
addition to assessing the views of scientists, Vision Prize asked its expert
participants to predict the views of their scientific colleagues. The
participant affiliations and fields are illustrated in Figure 3.

![vision prize

participants](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/VisionParticipants.jpg)

_Figure 3: Vision Prize participant affiliations and fields_

__As this figure shows, the majority (~85%) of participants are academics, and
approximately half of all participants are Earth Scientists. Thus the average
climate science expertise of the participants is quite good.

Approximately 90% of participants responded that human activity has had a
primary influence over global temperatures over the past 250 years, with the
other 10% answering that it has been a secondary cause, and none answering
either that humans have had no influence or that temperatures have not
increased. Note also that the participants expected less than 80% to peg
humans as the primary cause, and a few percent to say humans have no influence
- the consensus was significantly better than the participants anticipated
(Figure 4).

![vision Q1](http://static.visionprize.s3.amazonaws.com/Q1.jpg)

_Figure 4: Vision Prize answers and expected distribution to the question
"What influence has human activity had on global average ocean temperatures in
the last 250 years?"_

### Scientific organizations endorsing the consensus

The following scientific organizations endorse the consensus position that
"most of the global warming in recent decades can be attributed to human
activities":

                
                                      * American Association for the Advancement of Science
                      * American Astronomical Society
                      * American Chemical Society
                      * American Geophysical Union
                      * American Institute of Physics
                      * American Meteorological Society
                      * American Physical Society
                      * Australian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society
                      * Australian Bureau of Meteorology and the CSIRO
                      * British Antarctic Survey
                      * Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences
                      * Canadian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society
                      * Environmental Protection Agency
                      * European Geosciences Union
                      * European Physical Society
                      * Federation of American Scientists
                      * Federation of Australian Scientific and Technological Societies
                      * Geological Society of America
                      * Geological Society of London
                      * International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA)
                      * International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
                      * National Center for Atmospheric Research
                      * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
                      * Royal Meteorological Society
                      * Royal Society of the UK
                

The Academies of Science from 80 different countries all endorse the
consensus.

![NAS consensus](https://skepticalscience.com//pics/NAS_Consensus.jpg)

13 countries have signed a joint statement endorsing the consensus position:

                
                                      * Academia Brasiliera de Ciencias (Brazil)
                      * Royal Society of Canada
                      * Chinese Academy of Sciences
                      * Academie des Sciences (France)
                      * Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina (Germany)
                      * Indian National Science Academy
                      * Accademia dei Lincei (Italy)
                      * Science Council of Japan
                      * Academia Mexicana de Ciencias (Mexico)
                      * Russian Academy of Sciences
                      * Academy of Science of South Africa
                      * Royal Society (United Kingdom)
                      * National Academy of Sciences (USA) (12 Mar 2009 news release)
                

A letter from 18 scientific organizations to US Congress states:

> "Observations throughout the world make it clear that climate change is
occurring, and rigorous scientific research demonstrates that the greenhouse
gases emitted by human activities are the primary driver. These conclusions
are based on multiple independent lines of evidence, and contrary assertions
are inconsistent with an objective assessment of the vast body of peer-
reviewed science."

The consensus is also endorsed by a Joint statement by the Network of African
Science Academies (NASAC), including the following bodies:

                
                                      * African Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Cameroon Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences
                
                      * Kenya National Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Madagascar's National Academy of Arts, Letters and Sciences
                
                      * Nigerian Academy of Sciences
                
                      * l'Academie des Sciences et Techniques du Senegal
                
                      * Uganda National Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Academy of Science of South Africa
                
                      * Tanzania Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Zimbabwe Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Zambia Academy of Sciences
                
                      * Sudan Academy of Sciences
                

Other Academies of Sciences that endorse the consensus:

                
                                      * Australian Academy of Science
                      * Royal Society of New Zealand
                      * Polish Academy of Sciences
                

Update January 28, 2017:  
Some broken links were updated in the rebuttal. In addition, please check out
the recent article Joint Statements on Climate Change from National Academies
of Science Around the World published by Peter Gleick on his Significant
Figures blog.

Last updated on 29 January 2017 by dana1981. View Archives

Printable Version | Offline PDF Version | Link to this page

## Related Arguments

                
                                      * Less than half of published scientists endorse global warming
                      * Naomi Oreskes' study on consensus was flawed
                      * IPCC is alarmist
                

## Further reading

Richard Black at the BBC investigates whether there is a bias against
skepticism in the scientific community.

## Further viewing

The "Climate Denial Crock of the Week" video series examines the list of
"32,000 leading skeptical scientists."

Naomi Oreskes gives a thorough presentation of the development of our
scientific understanding of anthropogenic global warming:

## Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Joe Crouch for his efforts in tracking down scientific
organizations endorsing the consensus as well as links to their public
statements.

## Update

On 21 Jan 2012, we revised 'the skeptic argument' with a minor quote
formatting correction.

## Comments

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Next

Comments 1 to 50 out of 802:

                
                                      1. **roverdc** at 17:32 PM on 27 September, 2007
                

Concensus only has meaning if there is no pressure to conform in either
direction. In the climate debate this is extremely far from being true. How
far could we reasonably expect a questioner to go in an IPCC panel when that
instantly collects a denialist label and probably guarantees a dead end to
even the most able career? In the current climate it is reasonable to assume
the dissent camp is at least ten times the admitted size. I know that as an
admittedly uninformed questioner I get some pretty vitriolic responses from
the eco faithful.

                
                                      2. **Wondering Aloud** at 06:54 AM on 10 November, 2007
                

Roverdc hits the nail on the head. To say there is bias in the science at this
point is a wild understatement. What the public hears is claims that "all
scientists except a few kooks agree that catastrophic global warming is
immenent and caused by your car.". This is what they think you mean by
consensus.

Is it safe to say the real consensus is closer to the view of those so called
deniers in the National Post series or to the alarmist panic that is being
widely circulated through things like "An Inconvenient Truth"?

                
                                      3. **Will Nitschke (www.capitaloffice.com.au)** at 16:22 PM on 21 December, 2007
                

The fact that there are so many Academies of Science endorsing the global
warming position is probably the strongest argument for supporting it. The
question to ask is how mature is this field? If the answer is 'very mature'
then this type of support has high credibility. If the answer is 'immature'
then it's significance is considerably less.

Here is a link to US Senate Committee on the Environment that lists in detail
400 scientists who disagree with the anthropomorphic global warming
hypothesis:

http://epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Minority.SenateReport

That there are so many when we repeatedly hear on the news and radio that the
actual number of dissenters is 'miniscule' will have the tendency to turn
believers into sceptics.

I would also feel more confident if the 'hockey stick' graphics that predict
rapid change and global catastrophe would not all be linked back to a small
handful of researchers and students who work together and presumably have the
same preconceptions and modus operandi. If there are no 'hockey sticks' then
the small increase in global temperature over the last century does not
statistically look different from what one would expect from natural
variation.

                
                                      4. **paledriver** at 04:57 AM on 10 January, 2008
                

that list of 400 is about as big a hoax as the "Petition Project" was.  
Here's one of many sites exposing it.  
http://gristmill.grist.org/user/Andrew%20Dessler  
would you like to try again, Mr. Nitschke?

                
                                      5. **paledriver** at 10:07 AM on 10 January, 2008
                

sorry about the double post, and for the unintended smarmy tone.

                
                                      6. **Wondering Aloud** at 06:52 AM on 16 January, 2008
                

I think I'd put the list on the petition project up against the IPCC list,
many of whom disagree with IPCC conclusions, any day of the week. The listed
expose here paledriver is pure rubbish.

Maybe you should investigate the actual list rather than the fake and
distorted claims about it.

                
                                      7. **paledriver** at 01:27 AM on 20 January, 2008
                

The Marshall Institute co-sponsored with the OISM a deceptive campaign --
known as the Petition Project -- to undermine and discredit the scientific
authority of the IPCC and to oppose the Kyoto Protocol. Early in the spring of
1998, thousands of scientists around the country received a mass mailing
urging them to sign a petition calling on the government to reject the Kyoto
Protocol. The petition was accompanied by other pieces including an article
formatted to mimic the journal of the National Academy of Sciences. Subsequent
research revealed that the article had not been peer-reviewed, nor published,
nor even accepted for publication in that journal and the Academy released a
strong statement disclaiming any connection to this effort and reaffirming the
reality of climate change. The Petition resurfaced in 2001.

They openly lied about endorsement from National Academy of Sciences, were
caught, the Academy issues a statement disclaiming any connection, they re-
release it again anyways, and you're foolish and gullible enough to buy it and
defend it.

Would you like me to post a sample of the signers? That would be embarrassing
for you.

                
                                      8. **paledriver** at 01:35 AM on 20 January, 2008
                

i will anyways.........................  
The term "scientists" is often used in describing signatories. The petition
requests signatories list their degree (B.S., M.S., or Ph.D.) and to list
their scientific field.[3] The distribution of petitions was relatively
uncontrolled: those receiving the petition could check a line that said "send
more petition cards for me to distribute".

The Petition Project itself used to state:  
“ Of the 19,700 signatures that the project has received in total so far,
17,800 have been independently verified and the other 1,900 have not yet been
independently verified. Of those signers holding the degree of PhD, 95% have
now been independently verified. One name that was sent in by enviro
pranksters, Geri Halliwell, PhD, has been eliminated. Several names, such as
Perry Mason and Robert Byrd are still on the list even though enviro press
reports have ridiculed their identity with the names of famous personalities.
They are actual signers. Perry Mason, for example, is a PhD Chemist.[2] ”

In May 1998 the Seattle Times wrote:  
“ Several environmental groups questioned dozens of the names: "Perry S.
Mason" (the fictitious lawyer?), "Michael J. Fox" (the actor?), "Robert C.
Byrd" (the senator?), "John C. Grisham" (the lawyer-author?). And then there's
the Spice Girl, a k a. Geraldine Halliwell: The petition listed "Dr. Geri
Halliwell" and "Dr. Halliwell."

Asked about the pop singer, Robinson said he was duped. The returned petition,
one of thousands of mailings he sent out, identified her as having a degree in
microbiology and living in Boston. "It's fake," he said.[15]  
”

In 2005, Scientific American reported:  
“ Scientific American took a sample of 30 of the 1,400 signatories claiming to
hold a Ph.D. in a climate-related science. Of the 26 we were able to identify
in various databases, 11 said they still agreed with the petition —- one was
an active climate researcher, two others had relevant expertise, and eight
signed based on an informal evaluation. Six said they would not sign the
petition today, three did not remember any such petition, one had died, and
five did not answer repeated messages. Crudely extrapolating, the petition
supporters include a core of about 200 climate researchers – a respectable
number, though rather a small fraction of the climatological community.[16] ”

In a 2005 op-ed in the Hawaii Reporter, Todd Shelly wrote:  
“ In less than 10 minutes of casual scanning, I found duplicate names (Did two
Joe R. Eaglemans and two David Tompkins sign the petition, or were some
individuals counted twice?), single names without even an initial (Biolchini),
corporate names (Graybeal & Sayre, Inc. How does a business sign a petition?),
and an apparently phony single name (Redwine, Ph.D.). These examples
underscore a major weakness of the list: there is no way to check the
authenticity of the names. Names are given, but no identifying information
(e.g., institutional affiliation) is provided. Why the lack of
transparency?[17]

                
                                      9. **Wondering Aloud** at 13:59 PM on 21 January, 2008
                

I have the article you claim was "formatted to mimic..." sitting right here.
It doesn't look like it is anything of the sort. In fact it clearly lists
Author and who puplished it. It looks like a review of literature type paper
which...it is.

As for mass mailing as it was done with a tiny budget it was nothing of the
sort. In fact I never even got one despite being on one of the main mailing
lists they supposedly used. How many copies of this supposed mass mailing did
you get?

Aren't you bothered by a clear attempt by the "enviros" to commit fraud with
fake names? Shouldn't you question why they think this is needed or something
to be proud of. Is it ok to be dishonest as long as they are on your side?

A sample of 30 in which some back down (people get fired for being skeptics in
this field you know)is instantly credible to you while you arm wave away
17,000

You are pointing out 1 fake signature out of 19,000! Really? It was caught, we
had thousands of Fake names on our voting list in one nearby city alone.

You are avoiding the main issue. Consensus is not science but if it was the
supposed 2500 scientists of the IPCC report have every failing you mention of
the petition project and more important the people who signed the petition
agreed with what it said. The same can not be said for the IPCC and its
supposed 2500. Counted in that IPCC number are hundreds of non scientists, NGO
reps (these are people with an agenda)and most importantly reviewers, many of
whom don't even agree with the conclusions of the IPCC report. In fact most of
the famous "deniers" are included in the 2500 IPCC counts.

Someone made the mistake of asking them after the second IPCC report (surveyed
participants) and found that over 60% did not agree with the summary for
policy makers.

Maybe we should stop pretending numbers and NGOs are scientists and that
consensus is science. It's that claim that raises huge red flags for me.

                
                                      10. **Wondering Aloud** at 04:09 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

Wow, that was terrible punctuation. Darn Packers

                
                                      11. **paledriver** at 06:42 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

I'm sorry. Are you a Packer fan?

Picked another losing cause?

I'm sorry again,but I couldn't help myself on that one.  
Great game though.

                
                                      12. **paledriver** at 06:49 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

Let's take a look at the "Inhofe 400"  
Meteorologist George Waldenberg was named.  
In response to his inclusion ,Mr. Waldenberg sent an email to Senator Inhofes'
staff that began  
"Marc, Matthew:

Take me off your list of 400 (Prominent) Scientists that dispute Man-Made
Global warming claims. I've never made any claims that debunk the "Consensus".

You quoted a newspaper article that's main focus was scoring the accuracy of
local weathermen. Hardly Scientific ... yet I'm guessing some of your other
sources pale in comparison in terms of credibility.

You also didn't ask for my permission to use these statements. That's not a
very respectable way of doing "research".

One shining example. I have many more.

                
                                      13. **Wondering Aloud** at 07:45 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

Again? now its one out of 400 and who the heck was talking about the Inhofe
400?

The point remains it is not a popularity contest despite all the attempted
score keeping by the IPCC fans. Also many of the prominent scientists counted
in that score are in fact the so called deniers.

                
                                      14. **paledriver** at 08:35 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

the point remains that the deniers flesh out their "petitions" and "lists"
with fakes, fraudulent claims, and people who in no way have made any claims
against the consensus and pointedly say so.  
I've pointed out one of many, (which I've linked to above)  
And the "400" was brought up on post#3, which is why I even referred to
fraudulent "Petition Project" in the first place.

                
                                      15. **paledriver** at 08:41 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

p.s. I'm not claiming that there's no dissent.  
Just that there IS a consensus. An overwhelming one.

                
                                      16. **Wondering Aloud** at 09:50 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

Well that awful Inhofe 400 is now over 420 as in the time it took for you to
complain about the one that didn't sign 20 more "scientists" did. But, it
isn't important.

My problem with this is, it isn't an election, you claim the skeptics inflate
their numbers, maybe so, beyond question the AGW catastrophy folks inflate
theirs. At least two of the best known "deniers" are IPCC lead authors. Dozens
of others are listed as contributers or reviewers, several have been so
disgusted with the process they withdrew and asked their names be removed.
This means they are counted on both sides.

What is that overwelming consensus? Here is what is presented as that
consensus: Human CO2 emissions will cause massive catastrophic warming, It
will cause disaster in the near future ruining the world for our children.
This warming will lead to massive flooding, drought, wide scale starvation,
wars, plagues, melting of the polar ice, flooding of huge areas of the
world...

Refer to my post number 2 above. Which is closer to the consensus? Al Gore
with 23 feet of sea level rise this century or the "deniers" with 15-20 cm ?  
Al Gore with his talk of "unprecidented warming". Or the "deniers" claims that
the world seems to have wamed about .6-.7 C over the last century and that may
be somewhat due to human activity.

Most of the "deniers" probably don't even have that much trouble with the
consensus as stated in the first paragraph of the original post. They are
vilified largely because they refuse to accept the supposed consensus I just
described.

In general I agreed with the stated consensus in the original post, though
based on the recent data and the trouble with the historical record I think
now I would not use the word "most".

                
                                      17. **paledriver** at 10:15 AM on 22 January, 2008
                

420?  
In the original 400 I found many who were completely unqualified, some of whom
are skeptical, some of whom are not. Many who are qualified who are either not
actually skeptical, are skeptical only of some proposed solutions or who have
actually stated their agreement WITH the consensus. The list was not made to
hold up to close scrutiny.  
I imagine it's the same with the additional 20.

                
                                      18. **paledriver** at 08:21 AM on 24 January, 2008
                

addressing claims about the IPCC...............  
"John McLean and the NRSP

Category: Global Warming  
Posted on: December 20, 2007 1:02 PM, by Tim Lambert

Hey, remember John McLean? The guy who kept steering Andrew Bolt into brick
walls? Well he's teamed up with Tom Harris of the NRSP to accuse the IPCC of
lying about the scientific support for its reports:

In total, only 62 scientists reviewed the chapter in which this statement
appears, the critical chapter 9, "Understanding and Attributing Climate
Change". Of the comments received from the 62 reviewers of this critical
chapter, almost 60% of them were rejected by IPCC editors. And of the 62
expert reviewers of this chapter, 55 had serious vested interest, leaving only
seven expert reviewers who appear impartial.

First, there were much more than 62 reviewers for chapter 9. McLean and Harris
have only counted the reviewers of the second order draft and ignored the more
numerous comments on the first order draft.

Second, they mislead by giving the impression that 60% of the reviewers
disagreed with the IPCC, but half of the comments (572 of them!) were made by
Vincent Gray, with 97% of them rejected. Only 16% of the comments by other
reviewers were rejected. Gray was also responsible for most the rejected
comments on the first order draft. Examples of Gray's rejected comments
include:

Insert after "to" "the utterly ridiculous assumption of"

Insert after "Bayesian" "(or super-guesswork)"

Insret before "Calibrated" "Bogus"

Dave Semeniuk has a more detailed analysis of Gray's comments -- 50 of them
were Gray repeatedly asking for "anthropogenic" to be replaced with "human-
induced".

Third, as Richard Littlemore points out, it is pretty dodgy for the NRSP to
complain about "vested interest" when their own vested interest is so blatant.
But how did McLean and Harris come up with their claim that 55 of the
reviewers had "serious vested interest"? McLean gives details in a piece
published by the SPPI (an oil industry funded think tank that apparently does
not count as a vested interested to McLean). Scientists were declared to have
a vested interest if they were an IPCC author, or an IPCC author of a previous
assessment, or if any of their work was cited by the report, or if they worked
for a government, or if they work for an organization that gets government
funding, or if they have a "possible commercial vested interest in the claim
of man-made warming". Basically that leaves amateurs like Gray and McKitrick.
In one of his comments Gray asked them to cite one of his Energy and
Environment papers. Fortunately it was rejected, or he would have been ruled
out as well.

John Mashey examined McLean's background and it seems that while the National
Post awarded him a PhD he actually has no scientific qualifications at all,
just a Bachelor of Architecture. Which makes McLean's rant against a critic,
which was captured by Nexus 6 particularly funny."

http://scienceblogs.com/deltoid/2007/12/john_mclean_and_the_nrsp.php

                
                                      19. **Wondering Aloud** at 01:07 AM on 16 February, 2008
                

It appears you have proved my point.

                
                                      20. **paledriver** at 11:09 AM on 25 February, 2008
                

it took you 23 days to come up with that?

                
                                      21. **Wondering Aloud** at 03:07 AM on 26 February, 2008
                

You mean I should have quickly pointed out that you had proven my point? Not
allow you time to elaborate or correct?

                
                                      22. **paledriver** at 10:02 AM on 26 February, 2008
                

please, for my age addled mind, explain how I've proved your point.

                
                                      23. **Wondering Aloud** at 02:05 AM on 28 February, 2008
                

My point is the consensus, such as it is, is closer to the denialist view than
the popular view of Al Gore etc.

The claim that there is some vast number of scientists that constitute a
consensus and that agree with catastrophic warming is not only not science it
isn't even correct. We constantly see people pointing out IPCC to supposedly
prove this supposed consensus. IPCC isnt all qualified scientists any more
than any of these lists are. But more important than that, despite the fact
that a pro warming bias is built into the entire IPCC process, the actual body
of the IPCC report in fact supports my position rather than that of Al Gore.

When I pointed out that the petition project and other similar things like the
Heidelberg appeal all had one thing the IPCC didn't have; the consent and
agreement of the people involved. (This is something lacking in the lists of
academies etc. in the original post as well.) You ignored it completely as if
tiny politically active committees somehow spoke for all.

Personal attacks on a handful of people, each of which is questionable in
itself does nothing to refute my stated point. It appears rather to be a
deliberate attempt to obfuscate the issue.

                
                                      24. **Wondering Aloud** at 06:25 AM on 28 February, 2008
                

The deniers series in the National post has grown much larger. It is still a
good series can you update the link so it doesn't just lead to the first 10.

                
                                      25. **frankbi** at 21:00 PM on 4 March, 2008
                

Yeah, Vincent Gray made a lot of noise, ergo there's no consensus.

Genius logic!

                
                                      26. **Quietman** at 10:46 AM on 12 March, 2008
                

If science relied on consensus then the Earth would be the center of the
universe and you would fall off the edge. Science is not about consensus,
opinion is about consensus. A german physisist,Gerhard Gerlich, demonstrated
(in a very long and boring paper) how there can be no greenhouse effect. Do we
burn him at the stake? I have seen many explanations about how the greenhouse
effect works but no proof. Is it real and can it be proven?

                
                                      27. **paledriver** at 23:36 PM on 14 March, 2008
                

# 26

here's a good post for you at "A Few Things Ill-Considered."

" Definately Not Galileo  
A common theme among hardcore denialists, after slowly dragging them around to
admit there is a consensus, is an appeal to the Galileo syndrome. "Galileo
went against the consensus and he was right!" This is a flawed argument in the
climate change debate for many reasons, and it is a Guide entry that is
missing for the moment.

I am only bringing it up now, rather than do a proper entry, because of a
discussion paper by Ernst-Georg Beck that was presented on Warwick Hughes'
blog (no relation to me... to Glenn Beck? I don't know). It is basically a
well dressed version of the "there is no anthropogenic CO2 rise" argument. Eli
Rabett took the time to take it apart in a rather thorough and scientific
manner, especially given the total lack of a credible conclusion Beck arrives
at. You can see the featured graph at Deltoid and read Stoat's dismissive
opinion of it here.

The irony I want to point out is that Galileo was a forward thinker, reaching
into previously untrodden territory. His innovation and imagination helped him
see past the prevailing state of human knowledge at the time and go into new
ground. What are the denialists doing here? Digging up decades old research
with results all over the place, results that lead to all sorts of impossible
conclusions and then trying to claim that this is the reality and the new,
consistent and refined results are the ones that are wrong. Never mind that
this is what progress looks like, this is many minds working to overcome the
challenges that caused prior confusion to finally achieve consistent, sensible
and reliable data.

But what if you don't like what the new data are telling you? Just chuck it
and go back to the old stuff!

Sorry, that is so not Galileo!"  
http://illconsidered.blogspot.com/2006/10/definately-not-galileo.html

                
                                      28. **paledriver** at 23:43 PM on 14 March, 2008
                

in response to wonderings #23  
relying on the petition project?

The term "scientists" is often used in describing signatories. The petition
requests signatories list their degree (B.S., M.S., or Ph.D.) and to list
their scientific field.[3] The distribution of petitions was relatively
uncontrolled: those receiving the petition could check a line that said "send
more petition cards for me to distribute".

The Petition Project itself used to state:  
“ Of the 19,700 signatures that the project has received in total so far,
17,800 have been independently verified and the other 1,900 have not yet been
independently verified. Of those signers holding the degree of PhD, 95% have
now been independently verified. One name that was sent in by enviro
pranksters, Geri Halliwell, PhD, has been eliminated. Several names, such as
Perry Mason and Robert Byrd are still on the list even though enviro press
reports have ridiculed their identity with the names of famous personalities.
They are actual signers. Perry Mason, for example, is a PhD Chemist.[2] ”

In May 1998 the Seattle Times wrote:  
“ Several environmental groups questioned dozens of the names: "Perry S.
Mason" (the fictitious lawyer?), "Michael J. Fox" (the actor?), "Robert C.
Byrd" (the senator?), "John C. Grisham" (the lawyer-author?). And then there's
the Spice Girl, a k a. Geraldine Halliwell: The petition listed "Dr. Geri
Halliwell" and "Dr. Halliwell."

Asked about the pop singer, Robinson said he was duped. The returned petition,
one of thousands of mailings he sent out, identified her as having a degree in
microbiology and living in Boston. "It's fake," he said.[15]  
”

In 2005, Scientific American reported:  
“ Scientific American took a sample of 30 of the 1,400 signatories claiming to
hold a Ph.D. in a climate-related science. Of the 26 we were able to identify
in various databases, 11 said they still agreed with the petition —- one was
an active climate researcher, two others had relevant expertise, and eight
signed based on an informal evaluation. Six said they would not sign the
petition today, three did not remember any such petition, one had died, and
five did not answer repeated messages. Crudely extrapolating, the petition
supporters include a core of about 200 climate researchers – a respectable
number, though rather a small fraction of the climatological community.[16] ”

In a 2005 op-ed in the Hawaii Reporter, Todd Shelly wrote:  
“ In less than 10 minutes of casual scanning, I found duplicate names (Did two
Joe R. Eaglemans and two David Tompkins sign the petition, or were some
individuals counted twice?), single names without even an initial (Biolchini),
corporate names (Graybeal & Sayre, Inc. How does a business sign a petition?),
and an apparently phony single name (Redwine, Ph.D.). These examples
underscore a major weakness of the list: there is no way to check the
authenticity of the names. Names are given, but no identifying information
(e.g., institutional affiliation) is provided. Why the lack of
transparency?[17]"

wikipedia.com

and...........  
"Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine

The Marshall Institute co-sponsored with the OISM a deceptive campaign --
known as the Petition Project -- to undermine and discredit the scientific
authority of the IPCC and to oppose the Kyoto Protocol. Early in the spring of
1998, thousands of scientists around the country received a mass mailing
urging them to sign a petition calling on the government to reject the Kyoto
Protocol. The petition was accompanied by other pieces including an article
formatted to mimic the journal of the National Academy of Sciences. Subsequent
research revealed that the article had not been peer-reviewed, nor published,
nor even accepted for publication in that journal and the Academy released a
strong statement disclaiming any connection to this effort and reaffirming the
reality of climate change. The Petition resurfaced in 2001."  
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science/skeptic-organizations.html

                
                                      29. **paledriver** at 23:49 PM on 14 March, 2008
                

and on the Heidelberg Appeal..............  
"Parts of the Heidelberg Appeal do endorse environmental concerns, such as a
sentence that states, "We fully subscribe to the objectives of a scientific
ecology for a universe whose resources must be taken stock of, monitored and
preserved." Its 72 Nobel laureates include 49 who also signed the "World
Scientists' Warning to Humanity," which was circulated that same year by the
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) and attracted the majority of the world's
living Nobel laureates in science along with some 1,700 other leading
scientists. In contrast with the vagueness of the Heidelberg Appeal, the
"World Scientists' Warning" is a very explicit environmental manifesto,
stating that "human beings and the natural world are on a collision course"
and citing ozone depletion, global climate change, air pollution, groundwater
depletion, deforestation, overfishing, and species extinction among the trends
that threaten to "so alter the living world that it will be unable to sustain
life in the manner that we know." Moreover the Heidelberg Appeal has been, if
not specifically misrepresented, at least broadly interpreted out of context,
for example, by The National Center for Public Policy which asserts "The
appeal warns industrialized nations that no compelling scientific consensus
exists to justify mandatory greenhouse gas emissions cuts.""

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heidelberg_Appeal

                
                                      30. **Wondering Aloud** at 01:34 AM on 26 March, 2008
                

Yup, clearly ignoring the entire point. You continue to waste my time here. If
you can't answer the main points and instead must repeatedly resort to
nibbling on the fringes of the petition project it appears you are merely
trying to obfuscate the issue.

I am trying to learn things here other than your bias. You seriously are proud
that there was 1 fake signature out of 20,000? Even if it was 2000 fakes you
would have lost that argument wouldn't you? Please,you've proven my point to
any unbiased reader.

                
                                      31. **paledriver** at 00:23 AM on 29 March, 2008
                

if it's such a waste of your time, stay the heck away.  
You seriously don't understand that any "fake" signatures, and there were many
on both, not to mention the fraudulant article to support the "petition
project", you really mean to say that you can't grasp that that in and of
itself shows the desperate need to dupe the public with policy driven pseudo-
science?  
you're point is on your head.

                
                                      32. **paledriver** at 03:14 AM on 29 March, 2008
                

and were do you get "1"?  
but please, wondering, rephrase your point for me.  
perhaps I have misunderstood?

                
                                      33. **Philippe Chantreau** at 15:41 PM on 29 March, 2008
                

WA, I don't understand why you would even pay attention to the "my list is
bigger than yours" type of attitude, which is obviously utter nonsense. Why
are you trying to defend that so-called "petition project?" What does that
have to do with science and evidence?

Disputing that there is a consensus among climate scientists is downright
futile. All sources of information arguing that point are non scientific
(Heartland, Cato, Inhofe's office, CO2 science and all that crap). Real
scientific organizations (AAAS, AGU, etc) endorse the AGW hypothesis, which is
by itself an interesting fact. I find it really funny that "skeptics" both
dispute the existence of a consensus and also argue that consensus is
meaningless anyway, as Quietman does with a mightily inappropriate comparison.

As for Quietman post about Gerlich's pathetic load of dung, Rabett Run has
more on that than anyone really needs to know. And to answer his question,
there is no doubt about the radiative properties of CO2 and the reality of the
GH effect. It can be precisely measured in the lab, and if there was no GH
effect, this planet would be an ice covered rock. The Gerlich paper is also
funny in the sense that it denies the very existence of a GH effect at all
but, later, the authors questioned about Venus go on explaining Venus' temps
by GH effect from other sources than CO2. It's perfectly grotesque, a fine
example of the worst BS that denialism can produce.

The quality of skepticism here is on the way down if that's the kind of stuff
we're going to talk about. Well, BTN had already set the bar so far down that
we might have a margin anyway, but still.

This my thought of the day to you, Quietman, and others. You can not apply
extreme scrutiny to the CO2 hypothesis and lower scrutiny to alternate
explanations. I know that it makes for a lot more work but that's the only
way. If you apply the same extreme scrutiny to these other alternate
explanations, what is left of them? Have you even tried (sincerely)? If not,
you can not call yourself a skeptic in the true sense of the word. In my
experience, if you try to take apart these alternate theories with any
eagerness comparable to what "skeptics" use against the CO2 hypothesis, there
is nothing left, zilch, nada. That's one reason why I'm skeptical about
climate skepticism.

                
                                      34. **Philippe Chantreau** at 15:56 PM on 29 March, 2008
                

WA: "The claim that there is some vast number of scientists that constitute a
consensus and that agree with catastrophic warming is not only not science it
isn't even correct."

Here is a strawman so big, it's more akin to the Chinese straw dogs. Let's
merrily burn it.

Indeed, it's not correct at all. The SCIENTIFIC consensus is that there is
warming, happening quite fast, and that the massive CO2 release from the
burning of fossil fuels is a major contributor to it. That is the real
consensus.

                
                                      35. **Wondering Aloud** at 02:07 AM on 1 April, 2008
                

paledriver,

Read from the 3rd paragraph on of my post 16. That was my point.

I do indeed think it is clear that the public is being duped. I think it is
deliberate and I think the AGW alarmists are the ones doing it.

The "many fake signatures" is both clearly incorrect and irrelevent. By your
own references over 90% were verified.

Phillippe I don't agree with your way of stating the consensus though It isn't
far enough off to argue.

On your double standard point though, Phillippe, that is exactly the
contention I have been making from the other side of the issue for a long time
so it is kind of funny.

The correct hypothesis has to defeat all the others. It has to pass the
experimental test and make predictions that other hypothesis don't. Being
experimentally supported is the beginning of this; that isn't enough to prove
it, but at this point we haven't even got that. Being only not much worse than
the other explanations is not enough. Holding the accepted theory to the
highest standard is what a scientist is supposed to do. It only takes one
thing to prove it wrong.

The perhaps painful truth is CO2 has not been a major cause of climate change
in the past, despite levels many times the current level. In order to believe
it is about to cause huge consequences today when it never did in the past you
need some pretty convincing proof or some new physical reality.

John I am pretty impressed with how current you keep your articles references.

                
                                      36. **Philippe Chantreau** at 03:31 AM on 2 April, 2008
                

"The perhaps painful truth is CO2 has not been a major cause of climate change
in the past"

That may be because there has not been a release of CO2 on the scale we
experienced these last 150 years during the 600k years of very stable climate
the planet has been through. If you try to go farther in time, there is too
much uncertainty to do informative comparisons. There is nothing to prove that
a massive injection of CO2 in an otherwise stable climate can not have serious
consequences. And, by the way, spare me the exaggerations that have nothing to
do with what the research actually shows and suggest is possible. I do not pay
more attention to exaggerated claims from advocay groups, whether they're from
one side of the spectrum or the other.

And I also maintain that, if you are a true skeptic with physics background,
you should be screaming bloody murder to the flat-earthers like Gerlich. If
not, then you're applying a double standard far worse than anything you claim
is practiced in the scientific peer-reviewed litterature.

                
                                      37. **ScaredAmoeba** at 01:02 AM on 9 April, 2008
                

Re 23 Wondering Aloud  
'Not all that glisters is gold'  
And The Oregon Petition of Science and Medicine 'Petition Project' Review, now
updated with a change in authors was neither peer-reviewed (despite explicit
claims)), nor science - it was deceptive pseudo-science, deliberately
formatted to appear as if it were a NAS publication (and therefore peer-
reviewed).

For an excellent insight into the Oregon Petition Document, see:  
http://tinyurl.com/nt38z

This is from a Professor who frankly admits that he was nearly fooled by it.

Enough people were fooled that the National Academy was inundated with calls
asking if it was their new position and had to issue a news release.  
Quote  
''The Council of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) is concerned about the
confusion cause by a petition being circulated via a letter from a former
president of this Academy. This petition criticizes the science underlying the
Kyoto treaty on carbon dioxide emissions (the Kyoto Protocol to the Framework
Convention on Climate Change), and it asks scientists to recommend rejection
of this treaty by the U.S. Senate. The petition was mailed with an op-ed
article from The Wall Street Journal and a manuscript in a format that is
nearly identical to that of scientific articles published in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The NAS Council would like to make it
clear that this petition has nothing to do with the National Academy of
Sciences and that the manuscript was not published in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences or in any other peer-reviewed journal.  
The petition does not reflect the conclusions of expert reports of the
Academy.''  
End quote

http://tinyurl.com/38nqdj

Note: Seitz, Baliunas & Soon are all associated with the ExxonMobil funded
George C Marshall Institute!  
Seitz was a solid-state Physicist.  
Baliunas & Soon are Astrophysicists.  
Arthur Robinson and his son Zachary are Chemists.

Note that none of the authors of this purportedly climatological paper are
climatologists!

                
                                      38. **ScaredAmoeba** at 01:57 AM on 9 April, 2008
                

The updated version of this OISM 'review' was published in that well known
organ of climate research - The Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons
(2007).  
Little wonder that it survived peer review.

Apparently the previous 1998 version was later published in Climate Research -
A Journal that has had serious problems with its criticised peer-review
process, notably under the editorship of Chris de Freitas, under whom numerous
editors resigned in protest. I don't know when the 1998 version was published,
or whether the Editor was de Freitas. But there seem to have been some pretty
suspect papers published in CR.

                
                                      39. **Robert S** at 07:42 AM on 15 April, 2008
                

Philippe (36) said:

"That may be because there has not been a release of CO2 on the scale we
experienced these last 150 years during the 600k years of very stable climate
the planet has been through."

Hold on, did anyone else notice that? 600k years of very stable climate? The
last 600k years has been a torrent of climatic change. So if by "stable" you
mean "always changing between extremes," then yes, you are correct. Beyond
that, the Earth's climate has never really been stable.

I just had to point out that ridiculous comment.

                
                                      40. **Philippe Chantreau** at 11:33 AM on 16 April, 2008
                

Robert, these extremes are very well constrained compared to numerous changes
that happened before that period. It is fair to say that the climate of the
past 600k years has been quite stable compared to the climate of times before
that, because those "extremes" remain within a certain range. Even the
periodicity of the changes remains overall nicely consistent. So my comment is
far from being ridiculous.

This page gives a quick glance at very long term variability:  
http://www.scotese.com/climate.htm

I have ran many times into the argument that climate has changed to extremes
in the past and they always call on paleoclimate examples from way before the
ice core records, especially hot house periods of the mesozoic times, which
are of little relevance to our situation.

Besides, it is interesting to note that the 2 largest mass extinctions of the
geological record happened in hot times (P/T and Cretaceous).

It is also interesting to look at how CO2 has changed during these 600k years
compared to what has happened in the (very) recent past. There is no precedent
in the ice core record to such an injection of CO2. Nothing even remotely
comparable to it. See this link, slide number 8.  
http://ec.europa.eu/research/environment/pdf/descriptions/raynaud_ipy_bxl07.pdf

                
                                      41. **Robert S** at 19:12 PM on 16 April, 2008
                

Thanks for the response.

You say:  
"Robert, these extremes are very well constrained compared to numerous changes
that happened before that period. It is fair to say that the climate of the
past 600k years has been quite stable compared to the climate of times before
that, because those "extremes" remain within a certain range. Even the
periodicity of the changes remains overall nicely consistent. So my comment is
far from being ridiculous."

and then you say:  
"I have ran many times into the argument that climate has changed to extremes
in the past and they always call on paleoclimate examples from way before the
ice core records, especially hot house periods of the mesozoic times, which
are of little relevance to our situation."

This seems slightly peculiar--you use that very comparison in your first
paragraph. Regardless, the last 600,000 only appears stable when compared to
the vastly different time scale of the previous 600myr (such a comparison is
not useful). Essentially your argument boils down to the "the last 600k years
have been stable in that they are consistent in their extremes and
periodicity." The belief in constant change as "very stable climate" seems
misplaced.

Then you say:  
"Besides, it is interesting to note that the 2 largest mass extinctions of the
geological record happened in hot times (P/T and Cretaceous)."

They did occur in "hot times," but the mechanism behind these extinctions is
considered to be volcanism and/or meteor impact-- blocking sunlight and
preventing photosynthesis. On the other hand, the Ordovician-Silurian
extinction (3rd largest) occurred during the transition to one of the largest
Ice Ages in the past 600myr. Anyhow, this seems irrelevant to my response (39)
above. Your last paragraph also seems irrelevant--I don't disagree that CO2 is
higher now than any time in the last 600kyr.

-Robert 42. **Philippe Chantreau** at 05:33 AM on 17 April, 2008

Change alone does not make unstability. Perhaps a comparison with weather
would be useful. The weather changes continuously along the year, yet we deal
with it just fine so long as nothing happens like 4 months without rain or
freezing in june.

The examples of hot house as in the mesozoic times are commonly used by
advocates who argue that because it has been very hot before, it's OK to go
that route again now. The fact that the world and the biosphere were vastly
different in these times is what makes that argument irrelevant, not the
climatological elements themselves. Those advocates often argue that warmer is
better, yet mass exctinctions have happened during these periods, indicating
that a hot house does not guarantee against them.

The cause of the Permian extinction is unknown. I don't know any that has been
established for the Ordovician. So the volcanic/collision explanation for mass
extinction applies with any level of certainty to the Cretaceous only.

                
                                      43. **Robert S** at 08:35 AM on 17 April, 2008
                

Philippe said:  
"Change alone does not make unstability. Perhaps a comparison with weather
would be useful. The weather changes continuously along the year, yet we deal
with it just fine so long as nothing happens like 4 months without rain or
freezing in june."

You have invoked two comparisons which are irrelevant: Weather and climate
more than 600kya. And your last sentence seems odd--based upon other
interglacials, we have been in late november for the last 2000 years and the
first frost still hasn't come.

Then Philippe said:  
"The examples of hot house as in the mesozoic times are commonly used by
advocates who argue that because it has been very hot before, it's OK to go
that route again now. The fact that the world and the biosphere were vastly
different in these times is what makes that argument irrelevant, not the
climatological elements themselves. Those advocates often argue that warmer is
better, yet mass exctinctions have happened during these periods, indicating
that a hot house does not guarantee against them."

I don't know who these "advocates" are but this does not seem to be in either
of my responses.

"The cause of the Permian extinction is unknown. I don't know any that has
been established for the Ordovician. So the volcanic/collision explanation for
mass extinction applies with any level of certainty to the Cretaceous only."

The cause for an ancient extinction is never "known." It has been speculated
that the Permian extinction was caused by a similar event to the one that
caused the Cretaceous--volcanism and/or meteor impact.  
The Ordovician-Silurian extinction occurred at the transition to one of the
largest Ice Ages in the last 600myr. So while he cause is not "known," the
current running theory speculates that the cause is the somewhat rapid
decrease in temperatures.

                
                                      44. **Robert S** at 09:02 AM on 17 April, 2008
                

When you compare the last 600kyr to the previous 600myr, of course the climate
looks "very stable," but that is not a meaningful comparison--it's useless.
Not only is the time scale vastly different, but the mechanism for change is
as well (also, time periods before the ice core record are far less certain).
No great departure from extremes does not necessarily equate to "very stable
climate."

                
                                      45. **Philippe Chantreau** at 15:34 PM on 18 April, 2008
                

The weather comparison is not useless or irrelevant. Events like freezing in
june or 4 months without rain are elements of instability, if they turn into a
trend. Just like being in late november and still waiting for a frost to come,
if it happens more and more regularly (as it has). About climate, a warming
like the one seen lately, while temps should be stable in our kind of time
scale, is an element of instability. A massive injection in the atmosphere of
a gas ike CO2 (whose physical properties are known) is also an element of
instability.

                
                                      46. **Robert S** at 16:00 PM on 18 April, 2008
                

My comparison using November and late frost was meant to imply that this
interglacial has gone on several thousand years too long, with respect to
previous interglacials.

You say:  
"About climate, a warming like the one seen lately, while temps should be
stable in our kind of time scale, is an element of instability."

If the recent warming is an element of instability, then you have just
contradicted your previous assertion that we have had 600kyr of very stable
climate, because events similar to the recent warming have occurred a
multitude of times in the last half a million years. The recent warming is
hardly unprecedented.

                
                                      47. **Philippe Chantreau** at 06:50 AM on 19 April, 2008
                

"The recent warming is hardly unprecedented." Even in periods of end
interglacial times, when temps would be expected to slowly cooling down, as
you mentioned? Even on that kind of time scale, a blink of an eye really?

OK, but can you substantiate with references?

                
                                      48. **Robert S** at 12:54 PM on 19 April, 2008
                

Philippe wrote:  
"Even in periods of end interglacial times, when temps would be expected to
slowly cooling down, as you mentioned?"

Is it a "period of end interglacial time"? Well it depends on what you think
causes the glacial periods--if the mechanism isn't there, then it isn't going
to happen. If you believe the Milankovitch cycles are what initiates the
glacial/interglacial, then we are still a ways from another glacial period. So
it is not inconceivable that the planet would experience a warming at this
time.

Then he wrote:  
"Even on that kind of time scale, a blink of an eye really?

OK, but can you substantiate with references?"

If you want to take issue with the idea that the planet has had warming
similar to the recent warming on both the time scale and in magnitude, be my
guest. It would be a losing battle. As for references, all one has to do is a
little searching--this interglacial, the last glacial, the last interglacial,
etc. It won't be too hard to find warming of this magnitude in this time
scale.

                
                                      49. **Quietman** at 07:30 AM on 20 April, 2008
                

All of you do realize of course that there is a very basic premise involved:
If there was a consensus, there would be very little dissent. Given the
extremely large amount of dissent, we must assume one of two things:  
1) there is no consensus or  
2) the consensus is not what the IPCC claims it to be.

                
                                      50. **frankbi** at 00:45 AM on 21 April, 2008
                

The so-called "large amount of dissent" is just a small group of people making
a lot of noise again and again.

Remember the claim that there were 19,000 scientists disputing global warming?
During the New York denialist conference ("2008 International Conference on
Climate Change"), it turned out there were only _19_ scientists. Looks like
the number 19,000 is off by a factor of 1,000.

As an added bogus, the logo for the denialist conference was a loudspeaker.

-- bi, http://frankbi.wordpress.com/

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Next

## Post a Comment

Political, off-topic or ad hominem comments will be deleted. Comments
Policy...

You need to be logged in to post a comment. Login via the left margin or if
you're new, register here.

Link to this page ![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/eureka.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/protruth_pledge.gif)

![](https://www.skepticalscience.com//pics/crowdsourcing.png)

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Denial101x_ad.png)

:

:

![](images/_core/foot/tcpsite.png)  
The Consensus Project Website

THE ESCALATOR  
![](images/_core/foot/SkepticsvRealists_180.gif)  
(free to republish)

(C) Copyright 2019 John Cook | |  
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)  
Home | Links | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married *[FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times

