

__

                
                                      * About
                        * Masthead
                        * Contact
                        * Advertise
                        * Contribute
                        * Heroes of Ragnarök
                        * Work for us
                      * Subscribe
                      * Online Subscription
                      * Shop
                      * Cookbook
                      * Events
                      * Login
                

__

![The Norwegian American](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/05/cropped-mastheadwideblue2016.jpg?fit=1575%2C188&ssl=1)

__

                
                                      * Arts & Entertainment
                      * Books
                      * Business
                      * Comics
                      * Features
                      * Fiction
                      * News
                      * Norsk Språk
                      * Norway Near You
                      * Norwegian Heritage
                      * Opinion
                      * Research & Science
                      * Sports
                      * Taste of Norway
                      * Travel
                
                      * Opinion
                

# Opportunity of social mobility great in Scandinavia

by admin * Published August 26, 2015 * Updated August 24, 2015

![Bar chart: Michael Rogers Intergenerational persistence of incomes for 11

developed countries.](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/08/BarChart.jpg?resize=500%2C430&ssl=1)

Bar chart: Michael Rogers  
Intergenerational persistence of incomes for 11 developed countries.

M. Michael Brady  
Asker, Norway

Economic opportunity and upward mobility now seem elusive in face of
increasing inequality in high-income countries. Why that is so has recently
been the object of much research. The resultant comparative rankings of the
social mobility of countries imply that the Scandinavian countries offer
greater opportunity than most others.

Social mobility in a society is usually expressed in terms of its opposite,
the intergenerational persistence of income, which is the likelihood that
someone will inherit their parents’ relative income level.

The intergenerational persistence of income is measured by a statistical
measure called the intergenerational income elasticity (IIE), which expresses
the relationship between the incomes of fathers and the incomes of their sons.
In a country with high intergenerational income elasticity, financial standing
tends to be passed on from generation to generation. In a country with low
intergenerational income elasticity, the persistence of financial standing is
weaker and social mobility hence greater.

The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) published a
report of a study of that issue in 2010 (Further reading). In it,
intergenerational income elasticity was found to be high in the UK and the
U.S. and low in the Scandinavian countries. Today that means that the
Scandinavian countries plus Australia and Canada have the most mobile
societies.

Much of the data used in the OECD study came from the Economic Mobility
Project conducted by University of Ottawa labor economist Miles Corak.
Professor Corak’s data also contributed significantly to the “Great Gatsby
Curve,” first presented in 2012 by economist Alan Krueger (Further reading),
Chairman of the American president’s Council of Economic Advisors.

Named for F. Scott Fitzgerald’s 1922 novel, the “Great Gatsby Curve” is a
graphic plot that illustrates the relationship between inequality and mobility
in the U.S. and 12 other developed countries.

Other economists have also probed the threat to the middle class and the
economy as a whole. In a book published September 2013 (Further reading),
George Mason University cultural economist Tyler Cowen predicts that the ever
faster changing world of work and wages signals an end to the American dream.
No longer will hard work trample a path to prosperity. The elite of the future
will comprise those who master tomorrow’s technologies, and the young will
struggle in a labor market that rewards brains over brawn. The comfortable
security of an average life somewhere in the middle of the spectrum of wealth
is over.

In Norway, University of Bergen sociologist Johannes Hjellbrekke warns against
broad generalizing on the basis of comparisons of intergenerational income. He
believes that “Norwegian society is more open than many others, but class
demarcations also are clear here. Including investment earnings and the income
of both parents would lower the assessment of social mobility in Norwegian
society.” (Further reading).

Despite predictions and warnings, renowned weekly The Economist argued in 2006
that “inequality is not inherently wrong—as long as three conditions are met:
first, society as a whole is getting richer; second, there is a safety net for
the very poor; and third, everybody, regardless of class, race, creed, or sex,
has an opportunity to climb up through the system.”

**Further reading:**  
• “Intergenerational Social Mobility in OECD Countries” by Orsetta Causa and
Åsa Johansson, _OECD Journal: Economic Studies_ , Volume 2010, 44 page PDF.

• “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility”
by Miles Corak, _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , 27(3), 2013, pp 79-102.

• “Inequality from generation to generation: the United States in Comparison”
by Miles Corak, WordPress.com 2012.

• “The Rise and Consequences of Inequality,” speech delivered by Alan Krueger,
12 January 2012.

• _Average is Over_ by Tyler Cowen, New York, Dutton Books, 2013, 304 pages
hardcover, ISBN 978-0525953739.

• _Sosial mobilitet_ (“Social mobility”) by Johannes Hjellbrekke and Olav
Korsnes, Oslo, Det Norske Samlaget, 2012, 199 pages softcover, ISBN
978-82-521-7942-2 (in Nynorsk).

_M. Michael Brady was educated as a scientist and with time turned to writing
and translating._

_This article originally appeared in the Aug. 28, 2015, issue of the Norwegian
American Weekly. To subscribe, visit **SUBSCRIBE** or call us at (206)
784-4617._

![Print Friendly, PDF &

Email](https://i0.wp.com/cdn.printfriendly.com/icons/printfriendly-icon-

md.png?ssl=1) Print

### Share this:

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * ### Like this:
                

Like Loading...

Tags: inequalityM. Michael Bradysocial mobilityWealth

#### __You may also like...

                
                                      * ![](https://i2.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/IMG_2203dig.jpg?resize=520%2C245&ssl=1)
                

#### This Norwegian life: An American at Folkehøgskole

February 9, 2016

by admin * Published February 9, 2016

                
                                      * ![Emily C. Skaftun](https://i2.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/EmilyWpaper.jpeg?resize=520%2C245&ssl=1)
                

#### State of the newspaper

January 12, 2018

by admin * Published January 12, 2018

                
                                      * ![](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/IMG_3300dig.jpg?resize=469%2C245&ssl=1)
                

#### Following the king for a day: eight observations in no particular order

June 10, 2015

by admin * Published June 10, 2015

__

Follow:

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

###

                
                                      * __Recent Posts
                      *  __Popular Posts
                
                      * ![](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_HaikUff-da-Contest.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

HaikUff-Da!

31 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_IMG_6908.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

Pytt i panne enlivens what’s on hand

30 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_outside-insight.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

Meltwater monitors masses of media

30 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_Joster-2-Visit-Sunnfjord_kajakk-Foto_Magnus_Roaldset.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

Hike, bike, or boat through fjord Norway

30 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i2.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped-headshot.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

Freia Titland is a modern-day skald

30 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_HaikUff-da-Contest.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

HaikUff-Da!

31 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![](https://i2.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_rhubarb.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

A new approach to rhubarb

13 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![Dale of Norway](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_20190501_100148.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

The sweater that broke the internet

13 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![plastics ban](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/MaxPixel.freegreatpicture.com-Garbage-Waste-Plastic-Waste-Plastic-Pollution-2263208.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

Norway to ban plastics

13 May, 2019

                
                                      * ![bylaws](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cropped_Vaksdal.jpg?resize=160%2C160&ssl=1)
                

The “by” in “bylaw”

13 May, 2019

### Get some Norway in your inbox!

Get news and highlights from America's only Norwegian newspaper delivered
right to your inbox each Friday.

First Name

Last Name

Email *

Yes, I would like to receive emails from The Norwegian American. (You can
unsubscribe anytime).

Constant Contact Use.

* * *

By submitting this form, you are consenting to receive marketing emails from:
The Norwegian American, 17713 15th Avenue NE Suite 205, Shoreline, WA, 98155,
http://www.norwegianamerican.com. You can revoke your consent to receive
emails at any time by using the SafeUnsubscribe® link, found at the bottom of
every email. Emails are serviced by Constant Contact

![](https://i1.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/04/sealift-eighth.jpg?fit=1760%2C1208&ssl=1)

__

More

                
                                      * __**Next story** Norway: A key player in the Atomic Age
                      * __**Previous story** Classic brownies with a Nordic touch
                

![Nordic Council of Seattle](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Nordic-200-v3-2.png?fit=200%2C240&ssl=1)

![Northwest Edvard Grieg

Society](https://i2.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/18814815_113525655903631_180430173165231931_o.jpg?fit=200%2C89&ssl=1)

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.norwegianamerican.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/07/website-callout22.jpg?fit=521%2C775&ssl=1)

__

17713 15th Ave NE, #205 | Shoreline, WA 98155 | 206.784.4617 | ISSN 2473-9251

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

