

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

![Listen to this

article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-

icon.svg/20px-Sound-icon.svg.png)

# _Roe v. Wade_

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For the upcoming film, see Roe v. Wade (film).

United States Supreme Court case

## Roe v. Wade

![Seal of the United States Supreme

Court](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Seal_of_the_United_States_Supreme_Court.svg/100px-

Seal_of_the_United_States_Supreme_Court.svg.png)

**Supreme Court of the United States**

Argued December 13, 1971  
Reargued October 11, 1972  
Decided January 22, 1973  
Full case name| _Jane Roe, et al. v. Henry Wade, District Attorney of Dallas
County_  
Citations| 410 U.S. 113 ( _more_ )

93 S. Ct. 705; 35 L. Ed. 2d 147; 1973 U.S. LEXIS 159

Argument| Oral argument  
Reargument| Reargument  
Decision| Opinion  
Case history  
Prior| _Judgment for plaintiffs, injunction denied_ , 314 F. Supp. 1217 (N.D.
Tex. 1970); _probable jurisdiction noted_ , 402 U.S. 941 (1971); _set for
reargument_ , 408 U.S. 919 (1972)  
Subsequent| _Rehearing denied_ , 410 U.S. 959 (1973)  
Holding  
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
provides a fundamental "right to privacy" that protects a pregnant woman's
liberty to choose whether or not to have an abortion. This right is not
absolute, and must be balanced against the government's interests in
protecting women's health and protecting prenatal life. Texas law making it a
crime to assist a woman to get an abortion violated this right.  
Court membership

Chief Justice

    
    
    Warren E. Burger
    

Associate Justices

    
    
    William O. Douglas ***** William J. Brennan Jr.
    

Potter Stewart **_*_ Byron White  
Thurgood Marshall ****_Harry Blackmun  
Lewis F. Powell Jr. _** ** William Rehnquist  
Case opinions  
Majority| Blackmun, joined by Burger, Douglas, Brennan, Stewart, Marshall,
Powell  
Concurrence| Burger  
Concurrence| Douglas  
Concurrence| Stewart  
Dissent| White, joined by Rehnquist  
Dissent| Rehnquist  
Laws applied  
U.S. Const. Amend. XIV;  
Tex. Code Crim. Proc. arts. 1191–94, 1196

Superseded by

(partially) _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)

_**Roe v. Wade**_ , 410 U.S. 113 (1973),[1] was a landmark decision of the
U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides a fundamental "right to
privacy" that protects a pregnant woman's liberty to choose whether or not to
have an abortion. However, it ruled that this right is not absolute, and must
be balanced against the government's interests in protecting women's health
and protecting prenatal life.[2][3] The Court resolved this balancing test by
tying state regulation of abortion to the three trimesters of pregnancy: the
Court ruled that during the first trimester, governments could not prohibit
abortions at all; during the second trimester, governments could require
reasonable health regulations; during the third trimester, abortions could be
prohibited entirely so long as the laws contained exceptions for cases when
they were necessary to save the life or health of the mother.[4] Because the
Court classified the right to choose to have an abortion as "fundamental", the
decision required courts to evaluate challenged abortion laws under the
"strict scrutiny" standard, the highest level of judicial review in the United
States.[5]

In disallowing many state and federal restrictions on abortion in the United
States,[6][7] _Roe v. Wade_ prompted a national debate that continues today
about issues including whether, and to what extent, abortion should be legal,
who should decide the legality of abortion, what methods the Supreme Court
should use in constitutional adjudication, and what the role should be of
religious and moral views in the political sphere. _Roe v. Wade_ reshaped
national politics, dividing much of the United States into pro-life and pro-
choice camps, while activating grassroots movements on both sides. _Roe_ was
criticized by some in the legal community,[8] with the decision being seen as
a form of judicial activism.[9] In a 1973 article in the _Yale Law Journal_
,[8][9] the American legal scholar John Hart Ely criticized _Roe_ as a
decision that "is not constitutional law and gives almost no sense of an
obligation to try to be."[10] The American constitutional lawyer Laurence
Tribe had similar thoughts: "One of the most curious things about _Roe_ is
that, behind its own verbal smokescreen, the substantive judgment on which it
rests is nowhere to be found."[11]

In 1992, the Supreme Court revisited and modified its legal rulings in _Roe_
in the case of _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_.[12] In _Casey_ , the Court
reaffirmed _Roe_ 's holding that a woman's right to abort a nonviable fetus is
constitutionally protected, but abandoned _Roe_ 's trimester framework in
favor of a standard based on fetal viability, and overruled _Roe_ 's
requirement that government regulations on abortion be subjected to the strict
scrutiny standard.[2][13] The _Roe_ decision defined "viable" as "potentially
able to live outside the mother's womb, albeit with artificial aid."[14]
Justices in _Casey_ acknowledged that viability may occur at 23 or 24 weeks,
or sometimes even earlier, in light of medical advances.[15]

## Contents

  * 1 Background
    * 1.1 History of abortion laws in the United States
    * 1.2 History of the case
  * 2 Issues before the Supreme Court
  * 3 Supreme Court decision
    * 3.1 Opinion of the Court
    * 3.1.1 Justiciability
    * 3.1.2 Right to privacy
    * 3.2 Concurrences
    * 3.3 Dissents
  * 4 Reception
    * 4.1 Political
    * 4.1.1 Support
    * 4.1.2 Opposition
    * 4.2 Legal
    * 4.3 Public opinion
  * 5 Role in subsequent decisions and politics
    * 5.1 _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_
    * 5.2 _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_
    * 5.3 _Stenberg v. Carhart_
    * 5.4 _Gonzales v. Carhart_
    * 5.5 _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_
    * 5.6 Activities of Norma McCorvey
    * 5.7 Activities of Sarah Weddington
    * 5.8 Presidential positions
    * 5.9 State laws regarding _Roe_
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Footnotes
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

## Background

### History of abortion laws in the United States

According to the Court, "the restrictive criminal abortion laws in effect in a
majority of States today are of relatively recent vintage." Providing a
historical analysis on abortion, Justice Harry Blackmun noted that abortion
was "resorted to without scruple" in Greek and Roman times.[16] Blackmun also
addressed the permissive and restrictive abortion attitudes and laws
throughout history, noting the disagreements among leaders (of all different
professions) in those eras and the formative laws and cases.[17] In the United
States, in 1821, Connecticut passed the first state statute criminalizing
abortion. Every state had abortion legislation by 1900.[18] In the United
States, abortion was sometimes considered a common law crime,[19] though
Justice Blackmun would conclude that the criminalization of abortion did not
have "roots in the English common-law tradition."[20] Rather than arresting
the women having the abortions, legal officials were more likely to
interrogate these women to obtain evidence against the abortion provider in
order to close down that provider's business.[21][22]

In 1971, Shirley Wheeler was charged with manslaughter after Florida hospital
staff reported her illegal abortion to the police. She received a sentence of
two years' probation and, under her probation, had to move back into her
parents' house in North Carolina.[21] The Boston Women's Abortion Coalition
held a rally for Wheeler in Boston to raise money and awareness of her charges
as well as had staff members from the Women's National Abortion Action
Coalition (WONAAC) speak at the rally.[23] Wheeler was possibly the first
woman to be held criminally responsible for submitting to an abortion.[24] Her
conviction was overturned by the Florida Supreme Court.[21]

### History of the case

In June 1969, 21-year-old Norma McCorvey discovered she was pregnant with her
third child. She returned to Dallas, Texas, where friends advised her to
assert falsely that she had been raped in order to obtain a legal abortion
(with the incorrect assumption that Texas law allowed abortion in cases of
rape and incest). This scheme would also fail because there was no police
report documenting the alleged rape. In any case, the Texas statute allowed
abortion only ”for the purpose of saving the life of the mother”. She
attempted to obtain an Illegal abortion, but found that the unauthorized
facility had been closed down by the police. Eventually, she was referred to
attorneys Linda Coffee and Sarah Weddington.[25][26] (McCorvey would end up
giving birth before the case was decided, and the child was put up for
adoption.)[27]

In 1970, Coffee and Weddington filed suit in the United States District Court
for the Northern District of Texas on behalf of McCorvey (under the alias Jane
Roe). The defendant in the case was Dallas County District Attorney Henry
Wade, who represented the State of Texas. McCorvey was no longer claiming her
pregnancy was a result of rape, and later acknowledged that she had lied about
having been raped.[28][29] "Rape" is not mentioned in the judicial opinions in
the case.[30]

On June 17, 1970, a three-judge panel of the District Court, consisting of
Northern District of Texas Judges Sarah T. Hughes, William McLaughlin Taylor
Jr. and Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Irving Loeb Goldberg,
unanimously[30] declared the Texas law unconstitutional, finding that it
violated the right to privacy found in the Ninth Amendment. In addition, the
court relied on Justice Arthur Goldberg's 1965 concurrence in _Griswold v.
Connecticut_. The court, however, declined to grant an injunction against
enforcement of the law.[31]

## Issues before the Supreme Court

_Roe v. Wade_ reached the Supreme Court on appeal in 1970. The justices
delayed taking action on _Roe_ and a closely related case, _Doe v. Bolton_ ,
until they had decided _Younger v. Harris_ (because they felt the appeals
raised difficult questions on judicial jurisdiction) and _United States v.
Vuitch_ (in which they considered the constitutionality of a District of
Columbia statute that criminalized abortion except where the mother's life or
health was endangered). In _Vuitch_ , the Court narrowly upheld the statute,
though in doing so, it treated abortion as a medical procedure and stated that
physicians must be given room to determine what constitutes a danger to
(physical or mental) health. The day after they announced their decision in
_Vuitch_ , they voted to hear both _Roe_ and _Doe_.[32]

Arguments were scheduled by the full Court for December 13, 1971. Before the
Court could hear the oral arguments, Justices Hugo Black and John Marshall
Harlan II retired. Chief Justice Warren Burger asked Justice Potter Stewart
and Justice Blackmun to determine whether _Roe_ and _Doe_ , among others,
should be heard as scheduled. According to Blackmun, Stewart felt that the
cases were a straightforward application of _Younger v. Harris_ , and they
recommended that the Court move forward as scheduled.[33]

In his opening argument in defense of the abortion restrictions, attorney Jay
Floyd made what was later described as the "worst joke in legal history."[34]
Appearing against two female lawyers, Floyd began, "Mr. Chief Justice and may
it please the Court. It's an old joke, but when a man argues against two
beautiful ladies like this, they are going to have the last word." His remark
was met with cold silence; one observer thought that Chief Justice Burger "was
going to come right off the bench at him. He glared him down."[35][36]

After a first round of arguments, all seven justices tentatively agreed that
the Texas law should be struck down, but on varying grounds.[37] Burger
assigned the role of writing the Court's opinion in _Roe_ (as well as _Doe_ )
to Blackmun, who began drafting a preliminary opinion that emphasized what he
saw as the Texas law's vagueness.[38] (At this point, Black and Harlan had
been replaced by Justices William Rehnquist and Lewis F. Powell Jr., but they
arrived too late to hear the first round of arguments.) But Blackmun felt that
his opinion did not adequately reflect his liberal colleagues' views.[39] In
May 1972, he proposed that the case be reargued. Justice William O. Douglas
threatened to write a dissent from the reargument order (he and the other
liberal justices were suspicious that Rehnquist and Powell would vote to
uphold the statute), but was coaxed out of the action by his colleagues, and
his dissent was merely mentioned in the reargument order without further
statement or opinion.[40][41] The case was reargued on October 11, 1972.
Weddington continued to represent _Roe_ , and Texas Assistant Attorney General
Robert C. Flowers replaced Jay Floyd for Texas.[ _citation needed_ ]

Blackmun continued to work on his opinions in both cases over the summer
recess, even though there was no guarantee that he would be assigned to write
them again. Over the recess, he spent a week researching the history of
abortion at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, where he had worked in the 1950s.
After the Court heard the second round of arguments, Powell said he would
agree with Blackmun's conclusion but pushed for _Roe_ to be the lead of the
two abortion cases being considered. Powell also suggested that the Court
strike down the Texas law on privacy grounds. Justice Byron White was
unwilling to sign on to Blackmun's opinion, and Rehnquist had already decided
to dissent.[42]

Prior to the decision, the justices discussed the trimester framework at great
length. Justice Powell had suggested that the point where the state could
intervene be placed at viability, which Justice Thurgood Marshall supported as
well.[43] In an internal memo to the other justices before the majority
decision was published, Justice Blackmun wrote: "You will observe that I have
concluded that the end of the first trimester is critical. This is arbitrary,
but perhaps any other selected point, such as quickening or viability, is
equally arbitrary."[44] Roe supporters are quick to point out, however, that
the memo only reflects Blackmun's uncertainty about the timing of the
trimester framework, not the framework or the holding itself.[45] In his
opinion, Blackmun also clearly explained how he had reached the trimester
framework – scrutinizing history, common law, the Hippocratic Oath, medical
knowledge, and the positions of medical organizations.[46] Justice Blackmun's
trimester framework was later rejected by the O'Connor–Souter–Kennedy
plurality in _Casey_ , in favor of the "undue burden" analysis still employed
by the Court.[47] Contrary to Blackmun, Justice Douglas preferred the first-
trimester line.[48] Justice Stewart said the lines were "legislative" and
wanted more flexibility and consideration paid to state legislatures, though
he joined Blackmun's decision.[49] Justice William J. Brennan Jr. proposed
abandoning frameworks based on the age of the fetus and instead allowing
states to regulate the procedure based on its safety for the mother.[48]

## Supreme Court decision

On January 22, 1973, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 decision in favor of Roe
that held that women in the United States have a fundamental right to choose
whether or not to have abortions and therefore struck down Texas's abortion
ban as unconstitutional.

### Opinion of the Court

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/US_Supreme_Court_Justice_Harry_Blackmun%2C_detail.jpg/170px-

US_Supreme_Court_Justice_Harry_Blackmun%2C_detail.jpg)

Justice Harry Blackmun, the author of the majority opinion in _Roe v. Wade_.

Seven justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Justice
Harry Blackmun. The opinion recited the facts of the case, then dealt with
issues of procedure and justiciability before proceeding to the main
constitutional issues of the case.

#### Justiciability

Though not often discussed, the Court's opinion first addressed the issues of
standing and mootness. Under the traditional interpretation of these rules,
Jane Roe's appeal was "moot" because she had already given birth to her child
and thus would not be affected by the ruling; she also lacked "standing" to
assert the rights of other pregnant women.[50] As she did not present an
"actual case or controversy" (a grievance and a demand for relief), any
opinion issued by the Supreme Court would constitute an advisory opinion.

The Court concluded that the case came within an established exception to the
rule: one that allowed consideration of an issue that was "capable of
repetition, yet evading review."[51] This phrase had been coined in 1911 by
Justice Joseph McKenna in _Southern Pacific Terminal Co. v. ICC_.[52]
Blackmun's opinion quoted McKenna and noted that pregnancy would normally
conclude more quickly than an appellate process: "If that termination makes a
case moot, pregnancy litigation seldom will survive much beyond the trial
stage, and appellate review will be effectively denied."[53]

#### Right to privacy

After dealing with justiciability, the Court then proceeded to the main issue
of the case: the legality of abortion laws. The opinion began with a
historical survey of the status of abortion under the Anglo-American common
law and Roman law.[54] It also reviewed the developments of medical procedures
and technology to perform abortions, which had only become reliably safe in
the early 20th century.[54]

With its historical survey as background, the Court introduced the concept of
a constitutional "right to privacy" that was intimated in earlier cases
involving parental control over childrearing ( _Meyer v. Nebraska_ and _Pierce
v. Society of Sisters_ ) and reproductive autonomy ( _Griswold v. Connecticut_
).[54] Then, "with virtually no further explanation of the privacy value",[5]
the Court ruled that regardless of exactly which of its provisions were
involved, the U.S. Constitution's guarantees of liberty covered a right to
privacy that generally protected a pregnant woman's decision whether or not to
abort a pregnancy.[3]

> This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth Amendment's
concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it
is, or ... in the Ninth Amendment's reservation of rights to the people, is
broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her
pregnancy.

>

> — _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 153.[55]

The Court reasoned that outlawing abortions would infringe a pregnant woman's
right to privacy for several reasons: having unwanted children "may force upon
the woman a distressful life and future"; it may bring imminent psychological
harm; caring for the child may tax the mother's physical and mental health;
and because there may be "distress, for all concerned, associated with the
unwanted child."[56] However, the Court rejected the notion that a pregnant
woman's right to abort her pregnancy was absolute, and held that the right
must be balanced against certain other government interests.[57]

The Court acknowledged that states had two interests that were sufficiently
"compelling" to permit some limitations on the right to choose to have an
abortion: first, their interests in protecting the mother's health; and,
second, protecting the life of the fetus. The Court rejected Texas's argument
that total bans on abortion were justifiable because "life" begins at the
moment of conception.[5] The Court found that there was no indication that the
Constitution's uses of the word "person" were meant to include fetuses, and so
it rejected Texas's argument that a fetus should be considered a "person" with
a legal and constitutional right to life.[58] It noted that there was still
great disagreement over when an unborn fetus becomes a "person".[58]

> We need not resolve the difficult question of when life begins. When those
trained in the respective disciplines of medicine, philosophy, and theology
are unable to arrive at any consensus, the judiciary, in this point in the
development of man's knowledge, is not in a position to speculate as to the
answer.

>

> — _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 159.[59]

The Court settled on the three trimesters of pregnancy as the framework to
resolve the problem. During the first trimester, when it was believed that the
procedure was safer than childbirth, the Court ruled that the government could
place no restriction on a woman's ability to choose to abort a pregnancy other
than minimal medical safeguards such as requiring a licensed physician to
perform the procedure.[5] From the second trimester on, the Court ruled that
evidence of increasing risks to the mother's health gave the state a
compelling interest, and that it could enact medical regulations on the
procedure so long as they were reasonable and "narrowly tailored" to
protecting mothers' health.[5] Since the beginning of the third trimester was
normally considered to be the point at which a fetus became viable under the
level of medical science available in the early 1970s, the Court ruled that
during the third trimester the state had a compelling interest in protecting
prenatal life, and could legally prohibit all abortions except where necessary
to protect the mother's life or health.[5]

### Concurrences

Several other members of the Supreme Court filed concurring opinions in the
case. Justice Potter Stewart wrote a concurring opinion in which he stated
that even though the Constitution makes no mention of the right to choose to
have an abortion without interference, he thought the Court's decision was a
permissible interpretation of the doctrine of substantive due process, which
says that the Due Process Clause's protection of liberty extends beyond simple
procedures and protects certain fundamental rights.[58] Justice William O.
Douglas wrote a concurring opinion in which he described how he believed that
while the Court was correct to find that the right to choose to have an
abortion was a fundamental right, it would be better to derive it from the
Ninth Amendment—which states that the fact that a right is not specifically
enumerated in the Constitution shall not be construed to mean that American
people do not possess it—rather than through the Fourteenth Amendment's Due
Process Clause.[58]

### Dissents

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/Justice_White_Official.jpg/170px-

Justice_White_Official.jpg)

Byron White was the senior dissenting justice.

Two justices—Byron White and William Rehnquist—dissented from the Court's
decision, and their dissents touched on the points that would lead to later
criticism of the _Roe_ decision.[5]

White's dissent was issued with _Roe_ 's companion case, _Doe v. Bolton_ , and
describes his belief that the Court had no basis for deciding between the
competing values of pregnant women and unborn children.

> I find nothing in the language or history of the Constitution to support the
Court's judgment. The Court simply fashions and announces a new constitutional
right for pregnant women and, with scarcely any reason or authority for its
action, invests that right with sufficient substance to override most existing
state abortion statutes. The upshot is that the people and the legislatures of
the 50 States are constitutionally disentitled to weigh the relative
importance of the continued existence and development of the fetus, on the one
hand, against a spectrum of possible impacts on the woman, on the other hand.
As an exercise of raw judicial power, the Court perhaps has authority to do
what it does today; but, in my view, its judgment is an improvident and
extravagant exercise of the power of judicial review that the Constitution
extends to this Court.

>

> — _Doe_ , 410 U.S. at 221–22 (White, J., dissenting).

White asserted that the Court "values the convenience of the pregnant mother
more than the continued existence and development of the life or potential
life that she carries." Though he suggested that he "might agree" with the
Court's values and priorities, he wrote that he saw "no constitutional warrant
for imposing such an order of priorities on the people and legislatures of the
States." White criticized the Court for involving itself in the issue of
abortion by creating "a constitutional barrier to state efforts to protect
human life and by investing mothers and doctors with the constitutionally
protected right to exterminate it." He would have left this issue, for the
most part, "with the people and to the political processes the people have
devised to govern their affairs."

Justice William Rehnquist also dissented from the Court's decision. In his
dissent, he compared the majority's use of substantive due process to the
Court's repudiated use of the doctrine in the 1905 case _Lochner v. New
York_.[5] He elaborated on several of White's points, asserting that the
Court's historical analysis was flawed:

> To reach its result, the Court necessarily has had to find within the scope
of the Fourteenth Amendment a right that was apparently completely unknown to
the drafters of the Amendment. As early as 1821, the first state law dealing
directly with abortion was enacted by the Connecticut Legislature. By the time
of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868, there were at least 36
laws enacted by state or territorial legislatures limiting abortion. While
many States have amended or updated their laws, 21 of the laws on the books in
1868 remain in effect today.

>

> — _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 174–76 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).[60][61][62]

From this historical record, Rehnquist concluded, "There apparently was no
question concerning the validity of this provision or of any of the other
state statutes when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted." Therefore, in his
view, "the drafters did not intend to have the Fourteenth Amendment withdraw
from the States the power to legislate with respect to this matter."

## Reception

### Political

A statistical evaluation of the relationship of political affiliation to pro-
choice and anti-abortion issues shows that public opinion is much more nuanced
about when abortion is acceptable than is commonly assumed.[63] The most
prominent organized groups that mobilized in response to _Roe_ are the
National Abortion Rights Action League and the National Right to Life
Committee.

#### Support

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3b/Roevwade.jpg/200px-

Roevwade.jpg)

Advocates of _Roe_ describe it as vital to the preservation of women's rights,
personal freedom, bodily integrity, and privacy. Advocates have also reasoned
that access to safe abortion and reproductive freedom generally are
fundamental rights. Some scholars (not including any member of the Supreme
Court) have equated the denial of abortion rights to compulsory motherhood,
and have argued that abortion bans therefore violate the Thirteenth Amendment:

> When women are compelled to carry and bear children, they are subjected to
'involuntary servitude' in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment….[E]ven if
the woman has stipulated to have consented to the risk of pregnancy, that does
not permit the state to force her to remain pregnant.[64]

Supporters of _Roe_ contend that the decision has a valid constitutional
foundation in the Fourteenth Amendment, or that the fundamental right to
abortion is found elsewhere in the Constitution but not in the articles
referenced in the decision.[64][65]

#### Opposition

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/3/31/AntiObamaBiden.jpg/200px-

AntiObamaBiden.jpg)

Protestors at the 2009 March for Life rally against _Roe v. Wade_

Every year, on the anniversary of the decision, opponents of abortion march up
Constitution Avenue to the Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., in the
March for Life.[66] Around 250,000 people attended the march until
2010.[67][68] Estimates put the 2011 and 2012 attendances at 400,000 each,[69]
and the 2013 March for Life drew an estimated 650,000 people.[70]

Opponents of _Roe_ assert that the decision lacks a valid constitutional
foundation.[71] Like the dissenters in _Roe_ , they maintain that the
Constitution is silent on the issue, and that proper solutions to the question
would best be found via state legislatures and the legislative process, rather
than through an all-encompassing ruling from the Supreme Court.[72]

A prominent argument against the _Roe_ decision is that, in the absence of
consensus about when meaningful life begins, it is best to avoid the risk of
doing harm.[73]

In response to _Roe v. Wade_ , most states enacted or attempted to enact laws
limiting or regulating abortion, such as laws requiring parental consent or
parental notification for minors to obtain abortions; spousal mutual consent
laws; spousal notification laws; laws requiring abortions to be performed in
hospitals, not clinics; laws barring state funding for abortions; laws banning
intact dilation and extraction, also known as partial-birth abortion; laws
requiring waiting periods before abortions; and laws mandating that women read
certain types of literature and watch a fetal ultrasound before undergoing an
abortion.[74] In 1976, Congress passed the Hyde Amendment, barring federal
funding of abortions (except in cases of rape, incest, or a threat to the life
of the mother) for poor women through the Medicaid program. The Supreme Court
struck down some state restrictions in a long series of cases stretching from
the mid-1970s to the late 1980s, but upheld restrictions on funding, including
the Hyde Amendment, in the case of _Harris v. McRae_ (1980).[75]

Some opponents of abortion maintain that personhood begins at fertilization or
conception, and should therefore be protected by the Constitution;[65] the
dissenting justices in _Roe_ instead wrote that decisions about abortion
"should be left with the people and to the political processes the people have
devised to govern their affairs."[76]

Perhaps the most notable opposition to _Roe_ comes from Roe herself: In 1995,
Norma L. McCorvey revealed that she had become pro-life, and from then until
her death in 2017, she was a vocal opponent of abortion.[77]

### Legal

Justice Blackmun, who authored the _Roe_ decision, stood by the analytical
framework he established in _Roe_ throughout his career.[78] Despite his
initial reluctance, he became the decision's chief champion and protector
during his later years on the Court.[79] Liberal and feminist legal scholars
have had various reactions to _Roe_ , not always giving the decision
unqualified support. One argument is that Justice Blackmun reached the correct
result but went about it the wrong way.[80] Another is that the end achieved
by _Roe_ does not justify its means of judicial fiat.[81]

Justice John Paul Stevens, while agreeing with the decision, has suggested
that it should have been more narrowly focused on the issue of privacy.
According to Stevens, if the decision had avoided the trimester framework and
simply stated that the right to privacy included a right to choose abortion,
"it might have been much more acceptable" from a legal standpoint.[82] Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg had, before joining the Court, criticized the decision for
ending a nascent movement to liberalize abortion law through legislation.[83]
Ginsburg has also faulted the Court's approach for being "about a doctor's
freedom to practice his profession as he thinks best.... It wasn't woman-
centered. It was physician-centered."[84] Watergate prosecutor Archibald Cox
wrote: "[ _Roe_ 's] failure to confront the issue in principled terms leaves
the opinion to read like a set of hospital rules and regulations.... Neither
historian, nor layman, nor lawyer will be persuaded that all the prescriptions
of Justice Blackmun are part of the Constitution."[85]

In a highly cited 1973 article in the _Yale Law Journal_ ,[9] Professor John
Hart Ely criticized _Roe_ as a decision that "is not constitutional law and
gives almost no sense of an obligation to try to be."[86] Ely added: "What is
frightening about _Roe_ is that this super-protected right is not inferable
from the language of the Constitution, the framers’ thinking respecting the
specific problem in issue, any general value derivable from the provisions
they included, or the nation's governmental structure." Professor Laurence
Tribe had similar thoughts: "One of the most curious things about _Roe_ is
that, behind its own verbal smokescreen, the substantive judgment on which it
rests is nowhere to be found."[87] Liberal law professors Alan Dershowitz,[88]
Cass Sunstein,[89] and Kermit Roosevelt[90] have also expressed disappointment
with _Roe_.

Jeffrey Rosen[91] and Michael Kinsley[92] echo Ginsburg, arguing that a
legislative movement would have been the correct way to build a more durable
consensus in support of abortion rights. William Saletan wrote, "Blackmun's
[Supreme Court] papers vindicate every indictment of _Roe_ : invention,
overreach, arbitrariness, textual indifference."[93] Benjamin Wittes has
written that _Roe_ "disenfranchised millions of conservatives on an issue
about which they care deeply."[94] And Edward Lazarus, a former Blackmun clerk
who "loved _Roe_ 's author like a grandfather," wrote: "As a matter of
constitutional interpretation and judicial method, _Roe_ borders on the
indefensible.... Justice Blackmun's opinion provides essentially no reasoning
in support of its holding. And in the almost 30 years since _Roe'_ s
announcement, no one has produced a convincing defense of _Roe_ on its own
terms."[95]

The assertion that the Supreme Court was making a legislative decision is
often repeated by opponents of the ruling.[96] The "viability" criterion is
still in effect, although the point of viability has changed as medical
science has found ways to help premature babies survive.[97]

### Public opinion

See also: Abortion in the United States: Public opinion

Americans have been equally divided on the issue; a May 2018 Gallup poll
indicated that 48% of Americans described themselves as pro-choice and 48%
described themselves as pro-life. A July 2018 poll indicated that only 28% of
Americans wanted the Supreme Court to overturn Roe vs. Wade, while 64% did not
want the ruling to be overturned.[98]

A Gallup poll conducted in May 2009 indicated that 53% of Americans believed
that abortions should be legal under certain circumstances, 23% believed
abortion should be legal under any circumstances, and 22% believed that
abortion should be illegal in all circumstances. However, in this poll, more
Americans referred to themselves as "Pro-Life" than "Pro-Choice" for the first
time since the poll asked the question in 1995, with 51% identifying as "Pro-
Life" and 42% identifying as "Pro-Choice".[99] Similarly, an April 2009 Pew
Research Center poll showed a softening of support for legal abortion in all
cases compared to the previous years of polling. People who said they support
abortion in all or most cases dropped from 54% in 2008 to 46% in 2009.[100]

In contrast, an October 2007 Harris poll on _Roe v. Wade_ asked the following
question:

> In 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court decided that states laws which made it
illegal for a woman to have an abortion up to three months of pregnancy were
unconstitutional, and that the decision on whether a woman should have an
abortion up to three months of pregnancy should be left to the woman and her
doctor to decide. In general, do you favor or oppose this part of the U.S.
Supreme Court decision making abortions up to three months of pregnancy
legal?[101]

In reply, 56% of respondents indicated favour while 40% indicated opposition.
The Harris organization concluded from this poll that "56 percent now favours
the U.S. Supreme Court decision." Anti-abortion activists have disputed
whether the Harris poll question is a valid measure of public opinion about
_Roe_ 's overall decision, because the question focuses only on the first
three months of pregnancy.[102][103] The Harris poll has tracked public
opinion about _Roe_ since 1973:[101][104]

![Roe v

Wade.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Roe_v_Wade.svg/750px-

Roe_v_Wade.svg.png)

Regarding the _Roe_ decision as a whole, more Americans support it than
support overturning it.[105] When pollsters describe various regulations that
_Roe_ prevents legislatures from enacting, support for _Roe_ drops.[105][106]

## Role in subsequent decisions and politics

Opposition to _Roe_ on the bench grew when President Reagan, who supported
legislative restrictions on abortion, began making federal judicial
appointments in 1981. Reagan denied that there was any litmus test: "I have
never given a litmus test to anyone that I have appointed to the bench…. I
feel very strongly about those social issues, but I also place my confidence
in the fact that the one thing that I do seek are judges that will interpret
the law and not write the law. We've had too many examples in recent years of
courts and judges legislating."[107]

In addition to White and Rehnquist, Reagan appointee Sandra Day O'Connor began
dissenting from the Court's abortion cases, arguing in 1983 that the
trimester-based analysis devised by the _Roe_ Court was "unworkable."[108]
Shortly before his retirement from the bench, Chief Justice Warren Burger
suggested in 1986 that _Roe_ be "reexamined";[109] the associate justice who
filled Burger's place on the Court – Justice Antonin Scalia – vigorously
opposed _Roe_. Concern about overturning _Roe_ played a major role in the
defeat of Robert Bork's nomination to the Court in 1987; the man eventually
appointed to replace _Roe_ -supporter Lewis Powell was Anthony Kennedy.

The Supreme Court of Canada used the rulings in both _Roe_ and _Doe v. Bolton_
as grounds to find Canada's federal law restricting access to abortions
unconstitutional. That Canadian case, _R. v. Morgentaler_ , was decided in
1988.[110]

### _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_

Main article: Webster v. Reproductive Health Services

In a 5–4 decision in 1989's _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ , Chief
Justice Rehnquist, writing for the Court, declined to explicitly overrule
_Roe_ , because "none of the challenged provisions of the Missouri Act
properly before us conflict with the Constitution."[111] In this case, the
Court upheld several abortion restrictions, and modified the _Roe_ trimester
framework.[111]

In concurring opinions, O'Connor refused to reconsider _Roe_ , and Justice
Antonin Scalia criticized the Court and O'Connor for not overruling
_Roe_.[111] Blackmun – author of the _Roe_ decision – stated in his dissent
that White, Kennedy and Rehnquist were "callous" and "deceptive," that they
deserved to be charged with "cowardice and illegitimacy," and that their
plurality opinion "foments disregard for the law."[111] White had recently
opined that the majority reasoning in _Roe v. Wade_ was "warped."[109]

### _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_

Main article: Planned Parenthood v. Casey

During initial deliberations for _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992), an
initial majority of five Justices (Rehnquist, White, Scalia, Kennedy, and
Thomas) were willing to effectively overturn _Roe_. Kennedy changed his mind
after the initial conference,[112] and O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter joined
Blackmun and Stevens to reaffirm the central holding of _Roe_ ,[113] saying,
"Our law affords constitutional protection to personal decisions relating to
marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and
education. [...] These matters, involving the most intimate and personal
choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity
and autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment. At the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own concept of
existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human
life."[114] Only Justice Blackmun would have retained _Roe_ entirely and
struck down all aspects of the statute at issue in _Casey_.[78]

Scalia's dissent acknowledged that abortion rights are of "great importance to
many women", but asserted that it is not a liberty protected by the
Constitution, because the Constitution does not mention it, and because
longstanding traditions have permitted it to be legally proscribed. Scalia
concluded: "[B]y foreclosing all democratic outlet for the deep passions this
issue arouses, by banishing the issue from the political forum that gives all
participants, even the losers, the satisfaction of a fair hearing and an
honest fight, by continuing the imposition of a rigid national rule instead of
allowing for regional differences, the Court merely prolongs and intensifies
the anguish."[115]

### _Stenberg v. Carhart_

Main article: Stenberg v. Carhart

During the 1990s, the state of Nebraska attempted to ban a certain second-
trimester abortion procedure known as intact dilation and extraction
(sometimes called partial birth abortion). The Nebraska ban allowed other
second-trimester abortion procedures called dilation and evacuation abortions.
Ginsburg (who replaced White) stated, "this law does not save any fetus from
destruction, for it targets only 'a method of performing abortion'."[116] The
Supreme Court struck down the Nebraska ban by a 5–4 vote in _Stenberg v.
Carhart_ (2000), citing a right to use the safest method of second trimester
abortion.

Kennedy, who had co-authored the 5–4 _Casey_ decision upholding _Roe_ , was
among the dissenters in _Stenberg_ , writing that Nebraska had done nothing
unconstitutional.[116] In his dissent, Kennedy described the second trimester
abortion procedure that Nebraska was not seeking to prohibit, and thus argued
that since this dilation and evacuation procedure remained available in
Nebraska, the state was free to ban the other procedure sometimes called
"partial birth abortion."[116]

The remaining three dissenters in _Stenberg_ – Rehnquist, Scalia, and Thomas –
disagreed again with _Roe_ : "Although a State may permit abortion, nothing in
the Constitution dictates that a State must do so."

### _Gonzales v. Carhart_

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( January 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

---|--- 

Main article: Gonzales v. Carhart

In 2003, Congress passed the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act,[117] which led to
a lawsuit in the case of _Gonzales v. Carhart_. The Court had previously ruled
in _Stenberg v. Carhart_ that a state's ban on "partial birth abortion" was
unconstitutional because such a ban did not have an exception for the health
of the woman. The membership of the Court changed after _Stenberg_ , with John
Roberts and Samuel Alito replacing Rehnquist and O'Connor, respectively.
Further, the ban at issue in _Gonzales v. Carhart_ was a clear federal
statute, rather than a relatively vague state statute as in the _Stenberg_
case.

On April 18, 2007, the Supreme Court handed down a 5 to 4 decision upholding
the constitutionality of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. Kennedy wrote the
majority opinion, asserting that Congress was within its power to generally
ban the procedure, although the Court left the door open for as-applied
challenges. Kennedy's opinion did not reach the question of whether the
Court's prior decisions in _Roe v. Wade_ , _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , and
_Stenberg v. Carhart_ remained valid, and instead the Court stated that the
challenged statute remained consistent with those past decisions whether or
not those decisions remained valid.

Chief Justice John Roberts, Scalia, Thomas, and Alito joined the majority.
Justices Ginsburg, Stevens, Souter, and Breyer dissented, contending that the
ruling ignored Supreme Court abortion precedent, and also offering an
equality-based justification for abortion precedent. Thomas filed a concurring
opinion, joined by Scalia, contending that the Court's prior decisions in _Roe
v. Wade_ and _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ should be reversed, and also noting
that the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act possibly exceeded the powers of
Congress under the Commerce Clause.

### _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_

Main article: Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt

In the case of _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ , the most significant
abortion rights case before the Supreme Court since _Planned Parenthood v.
Casey_ in 1992,[118][119][120] the Supreme Court in a 5–3 decision on June 27,
2016, swept away forms of state restrictions on the way abortion clinics can
function. The Texas legislature enacted in 2013 restrictions on the delivery
of abortions services that created an undue burden for women seeking an
abortion by requiring abortion doctors to have difficult-to-obtain "admitting
privileges" at a local hospital and by requiring clinics to have costly
hospital-grade facilities. The Court struck down these two provisions
"facially" from the law at issue – that is, the very words of the provisions
were invalid, no matter how they might be applied in any practical situation.
According to the Supreme Court the task of judging whether a law puts an
unconstitutional burden on a woman's right to abortion belongs with the courts
and not the legislatures.[121]

### Activities of Norma McCorvey

Norma McCorvey became a member of the anti-abortion movement in 1995; she
supported making abortion illegal until her death in 2017.[122] In 1998, she
testified to Congress:

> It was my pseudonym, Jane Roe, which had been used to create the "right" to
abortion out of legal thin air. But Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee never
told me that what I was signing would allow women to come up to me 15, 20
years later and say, "Thank you for allowing me to have my five or six
abortions. Without you, it wouldn't have been possible." Sarah never mentioned
women using abortions as a form of birth control. We talked about truly
desperate and needy women, not women already wearing maternity clothes.[29]

As a party to the original litigation, she sought to reopen the case in U.S.
District Court in Texas to have _Roe v. Wade_ overturned. However, the Fifth
Circuit decided that her case was moot, in _McCorvey v. Hill_.[123] In a
concurring opinion, Judge Edith Jones agreed that McCorvey was raising
legitimate questions about emotional and other harm suffered by women who have
had abortions, about increased resources available for the care of unwanted
children, and about new scientific understanding of fetal development, but
Jones said she was compelled to agree that the case was moot. On February 22,
2005, the Supreme Court refused to grant a writ of certiorari, and McCorvey's
appeal ended.

### Activities of Sarah Weddington

After arguing before the Court in _Roe v. Wade_ at the age of 26, Sarah
Weddington went on to be a representative in the Texas House of
Representatives for three terms.[124] Weddington has also had a long and
successful career as General Counsel for the United States Department of
Agriculture, Assistant to President Jimmy Carter, lecturer at Texas Wesleyan
University, and speaker and adjunct professor at the University of Texas at
Austin.[124]

### Presidential positions

President Richard Nixon did not publicly comment about the decision.[125] In
private conversation later revealed as part of the Nixon tapes, Nixon said
"There are times when an abortion is necessary,... ."[126][127] However, Nixon
was also concerned that greater access to abortions would foster
"permissiveness," and said that "it breaks the family."[126]

Generally, presidential opinion has been split between major party lines. The
_Roe_ decision was opposed by Presidents Gerald Ford,[128] Ronald Reagan,[129]
and George W. Bush.[130] President George H.W. Bush also opposed _Roe_ ,
though he had supported abortion rights earlier in his career.[131][132]

President Jimmy Carter supported legal abortion from an early point in his
political career, in order to prevent birth defects and in other extreme
cases; he encouraged the outcome in _Roe_ and generally supported abortion
rights.[133] _Roe_ was also supported by President Bill Clinton.[134]
President Barack Obama has taken the position that "Abortions should be
legally available in accordance with _Roe v. Wade_."[135]

President Donald Trump has publicly opposed the decision, vowing to appoint
pro-life justices to the Supreme Court.[136] Upon Justice Kennedy's retirement
in 2018, Trump nominated Brett Kavanaugh to replace him, and he was confirmed
by the Senate in October 2018. A central point of Kavanaugh's appointment
hearings was his stance on _Roe v. Wade_ , of which he said to Senator Susan
Collins that he would not "overturn a long-established precedent if five
current justices believed that it was wrongly decided".[137] Despite
Kavanaugh's statement, there is concern that with the Supreme Court having a
strong conservative majority, that _Roe v. Wade_ will be overturned given an
appropriate case to challenge it. Further concerns were raised following the
May 2019 Supreme Court 5-4 decision along ideological lines in _Franchise Tax
Board of California v. Hyatt_. While the case had nothing to do with abortion
rights, the decision overturned a previous 1979 decision from _Nevada v. Hall_
without maintaining the _stare decisis_ precedent, indicating the current
Court makeup would be willing to apply the same to overturn _Roe v.
Wade_.[138] Pro-abortion organizations like Planned Parenthood are planning on
how they will operate should _Roe v. Wade_ be overturned.[139]

### State laws regarding _Roe_

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/Guttmacher_Abortion_Restrictions.SVG/240px-

Guttmacher_Abortion_Restrictions.SVG.png)

Since 2010 there has been an increase in state restrictions on abortion.

Several states have enacted so-called trigger laws which would take effect in
the event that _Roe v. Wade_ is overturned, with the effect of outlawing
abortions on the state level. Those states include Arkansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota and South Dakota.[140] Additionally, many
states did not repeal pre-1973 statutes that criminalized abortion, and some
of those statutes could again be in force if _Roe_ were reversed.[141]

Other states have passed laws to maintain the legality of abortion if _Roe v.
Wade_ is overturned. Those states include California, Connecticut, Hawaii,
Maine, Maryland, Nevada and Washington.[140]

The Mississippi Legislature has attempted to make abortion unfeasible without
having to overturn _Roe v. Wade_. The Mississippi law as of 2012 was being
challenged in federal courts and was temporarily blocked.[142]

Alabama House Republicans passed a law on April 30, 2019 that will criminalize
abortion if it goes into effect.[143] It offers only two exceptions: serious
health risk to the mother or a lethal fetal anomaly. Alabama governor Kay Ivey
signed the bill into law on May 14, primarily as a symbolic gesture in hopes
of challenging _Roe v. Wade_ in the Supreme Court.[144][145][146]

## See also

  * List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 410

## Footnotes

  1. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Nowak  & Rotunda (2012), §18.29(a)(i).
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, pp. 854–55.
  4. **^** Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1 (quoting _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 164).
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ Nowak  & Rotunda (2012), §18.29(b)(i).
  6. **^** Mears, William; Franken, Bob (January 22, 2003). "30 years after ruling, ambiguity, anxiety surround abortion debate". CNN. "In all, the Roe and Doe rulings impacted laws in 46 states."
  7. **^** Greenhouse 2005, p. 72
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dworkin, Roger (1996). _Limits: The Role of the Law in Bioethical Decision Making_. Indiana University Press. pp. 28–36. ISBN 978-0253330758.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Greenhouse 2005, pp. 135–36
  10. **^** Ely, John Hart. "The Wages of Crying Wolf Archived 2007-06-25 at the Wayback Machine", 82 _Yale Law Journal_ 920 (1973). Retrieved January 23, 2007. Professor Ely "supported the availability of abortion as a matter of policy." See Liptak, Adam. "John Hart Ely, a Constitutional Scholar, Is Dead at 64", _The New York Times_ (2003-10-27). Ely is generally regarded as having been a "liberal constitutional scholar." Perry, Michael (1999). _We the People: The Fourteenth Amendment and the Supreme Court_ at Google Books"Archived copy". Archived from the original on June 25, 2007. Retrieved October 5, 2009.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  11. **^** Tribe, Laurence (1973). "The Supreme Court, 1972 Term – Foreword: Toward a Model of Roles in the Due Process of Life and Law". _Harvard Law Review_. **87** (1): 1 [p. 7]. doi:10.2307/1339866. JSTOR 1339866. Quoted in Morgan, Richard Gregory (1979). " _Roe v. Wade_ and the Lesson of the Pre- _Roe_ Case Law". _Michigan Law Review_. **77** (7): 1724–48. doi:10.2307/1288040. JSTOR 1288040.
  12. **^** _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833 (1992).
  13. **^** Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1.
  14. **^** Wood, Mary and Hawkins, Lisa. "State Regulation of Late Abortion and the Physician's Duty of Care to the Viable Fetus", 45 _Missouri Law Review_ 394 (1980).
  15. **^** _Casey_ , 505 U.S. at 860.
  16. **^** _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 130.
  17. **^** _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 131–36, 143.
  18. **^** Cole, George; Frankowski, Stanislaw. _Abortion and protection of the human fetus : legal problems in a cross-cultural perspective_ , p. 20 (1987): "By 1900 every state in the Union had an anti-abortion prohibition." Via Google Books. Retrieved (April 8, 2008).
  19. **^** Wilson, James, "Of the Natural Rights of Individuals" (1790–1792): "In the contemplation of law, life begins when the infant is first able to stir in the womb." Also see Blackstone, William. Commentaries (1765): "Life ... begins in contemplation of law as soon as an infant is able to stir in the mother's womb."
  20. **^** Greenhouse 2005, p. 92
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Paltrow, Lynn M. (January 2013). "Roe v Wade and the New Jane Crow: Reproductive Rights in the Age of Mass Incarceration". _American Journal of Public Health_. **103** (1): 17–21. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.301104. PMC 3518325. PMID 23153159.
  22. **^** Reagan, LJ (1997). _When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United States 1867–1973_. University of California Press. [ _page needed_ ]
  23. **^** "Rally Today Supports Wheeler". _The Harvard Crimson_. Cambridge, Mass. Retrieved November 29, 2016.
  24. **^** Nordheimer, Jon (December 4, 1971). "She's Fighting Conviction For Aborting Her Child". _The New York Times_. Retrieved December 15, 2017.
  25. **^** McCorvey, Norma and Meisler, Andy. _I Am Roe: My Life, Roe V. Wade, and Freedom of Choice_ (Harper Collins 1994).
  26. **^** Friedman Goldstein, Leslie (1994). _Contemporary Cases in Women's Rights_. Madison: The University of Wisconsin. p. 15.
  27. **^** Rourke, Mary; Reyes, Emily Alpert (February 18, 2017). "Norma McCorvey, once-anonymous plaintiff in 'Roe vs. Wade,' dies at 69". _Los Angeles Times_. Retrieved February 19, 2017.
  28. **^** Richard Ostling. "A second religious conversion for 'Jane Roe' of Roe vs. Wade" Archived February 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press (October 19, 1998): "She confessed that her tale of rape a decade before had been a lie; she was simply an unwed mother who later gave the child up for adoption."
  29. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McCorvey, Norma. Testimony to the Senate Subcommittee on the Constitution, Federalism and Property Rights (January 21, 1998), also quoted in the parliament of Western Australia (PDF) (1998-05-20): "The affidavit submitted to the Supreme Court didn’t happen the way I said it did, pure and simple." Retrieved January 27, 2007
  30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Roe v. Wade_ , 314 F. Supp. 1217, 1221 (N.D. Tex. 1970) ("On the merits, plaintiffs argue as their principal contention that the Texas Abortion Laws must be declared unconstitutional because they deprive single women and married couple of their rights secured by the Ninth Amendment to choose whether to have children. We agree."). 
  31. **^** O'Connor, Karen. Testimony before U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, "The Consequences of Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton", via archive.org (June 23, 2005). Retrieved January 30, 2007
  32. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 77–79
  33. **^** Greenhouse 2005, p. 80
  34. **^** Sant, Geoffrey. "8 horrible courtroom jokes and their ensuing legal calamities", _Salon.com_ (July 27, 2013): "The title of Worst Joke in Legal History belongs to one of history's highest-profile cases. Defending Texas's abortion restrictions before the Supreme Court, attorney Mr. Jay Floyd decided to open oral argument with a sexist joke. Arguing against two female attorneys, Floyd begins: 'It's an old joke, but when a man argues against two beautiful ladies like this, they are going to have the last word.'" Retrieved 2010-08-10.
  35. **^** Malphurs 2010, p. 48
  36. **^** Garrow 1994, p. 526
  37. **^** Greenhouse 2005, p. 81
  38. **^** Schwartz 1988, p. 103
  39. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 81–88
  40. **^** Garrow 1994, p. 556
  41. **^** Greenhouse 2005, p. 89
  42. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 93–95
  43. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 96–97
  44. **^** Woodward, Bob. "The Abortion Papers Archived June 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine", _Washington Post_ (January 22, 1989). Retrieved 2007-02-03.
  45. **^** Michelman, Kate; Johnsen, Dawn (February 4, 1989). "The Abortion Papers (Op-Ed)". _The Washington Post_.
  46. **^** _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 129–47.
  47. **^** _See_ 505 U.S. at 873–74.
  48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Greenhouse 2005, p. 97
  49. **^** Kmiec, Douglas. "Testimony Before Subcommittee on the Constitution, Judiciary Committee, U.S. House of Representatives" (April 22, 1996), via the "Abortion Law Homepage". Retrieved 2007-01-23.
  50. **^** Abernathy, M. et al. (1993), _Civil Liberties Under the Constitution_. U. South Carolina, p. 4. Retrieved February 4, 2007.
  51. **^** Chemerinsky, Erwin (2003). _Federal Jurisdiction_. Introduction to Law (4th ed.). Aspen Publishers. p. 132. ISBN 978-0-7355-2718-8.
  52. **^** _Southern Pacific v. Interstate Commerce Commission_ , 219 U.S. 498 (1911).
  53. **^** _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 125; see also Schwartz 1988, pp. 108–09
  54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, p. 854.
  55. **^** Quoted in Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, pp. 854–55.
  56. **^** Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, p. 855, quoting _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 153.
  57. **^** Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, p. 855, quoting _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 155.
  58. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, p. 855.
  59. **^** Quoted in Chemerinsky (2015), §10.3.3.1, p. 855.
  60. **^** _Roe_ , 410 U.S. at 174–77 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
  61. **^** Currie, David (1994). "The Constitution in the Supreme Court: The Second Century, 1888–1986". **2**. University of Chicago Press: 470.
  62. **^** "Rehnquist's legacy", _The Economist_ (June 30, 2005).
  63. **^** "Analysis | How America feels about abortion". _Washington Post_. Retrieved April 25, 2017.
  64. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Koppelman, Andrew. "Forced Labor: A Thirteenth Amendment Defense of Abortion" Archived February 25, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, _Northwestern Law Review_ , Vol. 84, p. 480 (1990).
  65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _What Roe v. Wade Should Have Said; The Nation's Top Legal Experts Rewrite America's Most Controversial decision_ , Jack Balkin Ed. (NYU Press 2005). Retrieved January 26, 2007
  66. **^** Shimron, Yonat. "Democratic Gains Spur Abortion Foes into Action," _The News & Observer_ (January 18, 2009): "The annual March for Life procession is already among Washington's largest rallies, drawing an estimated 200,000 people."
  67. **^** Harper, Jennifer. "a marchers lose attention," _Washington Times_ (January 22, 2009): "the event has consistently drawn about 250,000 participants each year since 2003."
  68. **^** Johnston, Laura. "Cleveland's first March for Life anti-abortion event draws 200," _The Plain Dealer_ (January 18, 2009): "the Washington March for Life…draws 200,000 annually on the anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision."
  69. **^** "Youth Turnout Strong at US March for Life". _Catholic.net_. Zenit.org. January 25, 2011. Retrieved February 9, 2011.
  70. **^** Portteus, Danielle (February 10, 2013). "Newport: 650,000 In March For Life". _MonroeNews_. MonroeNews. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2013.
  71. **^** James F. Childress (1984). _Bioethics Reporter_. University Publications of America. p. 463. Retrieved August 2, 2013. "Roe v. Wade itself provided abortion rights with an unstable foundation."
  72. **^** Alex Locay (2008). _Unveiling the Left_. Xulon Press. p. 187. ISBN 978-1-60266-869-0. Retrieved August 2, 2013. "To justify their decision the Court made up a new "right", not found in the Constitution: the right to privacy. The founders of course never intended for such rights to exists, as we know privacy is limited in many ways."
  73. **^** Reagan, Ronald. _Abortion and the Conscience of the Nation_ , (Nelson 1984): "If you don't know whether a body is alive or dead, you would never bury it. I think this consideration itself should be enough for all of us to insist on protecting the unborn." Retrieved January 26, 2007
  74. **^** Guttmacher Institute, "State Policies in Brief, An Overview of Abortion Laws (PDF)", published January 1, 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-26.
  75. **^** _Harris v. McRae_ , 448 U.S. 297 (1980).
  76. **^** _Doe v. Bolton_ , 410 U.S. 179 (1973).
  77. **^** McCorvey, Norma, with Andy Meisler (1994). _I Am Roe: My Life, Roe v. Wade, and Freedom of Choice._ New York: Harper-Collins.
  78. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Casey_ , 505 U.S. at 930–34 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("In sum, _Roe_ 's requirement of strict scrutiny as implemented through a trimester framework should not be disturbed.").
  79. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 183–206, 250
  80. **^** Balkin, Jack. Bush v. "Gore and the Boundary Between Law and Politics" Archived February 27, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, 110 _Yale Law Journal_ 1407 (2001): "Liberal and feminist legal scholars have spent decades showing that the result was correct even if Justice Blackmun's opinion seems to have been taken from the Court's Cubist period."
  81. **^** Cohen, Richard. "Support Choice, Not Roe", _Washington Post_ , (October 19, 2005): "If the best we can say for it is that the end justifies the means, then we have not only lost the argument – but a bit of our soul as well." Retrieved 2007-01-23.
  82. **^** Rosen, Jeffrey (September 23, 2007). "The Dissenter". _The New York Times Magazine_. Rosen notes that Stevens is "the oldest and arguably most liberal justice."
  83. **^** Ginsburg, Ruth. "Some Thoughts on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade", 63 _North Carolina Law Review_ 375 (1985): "The political process was moving in the early 1970s, not swiftly enough for advocates of quick, complete change, but majoritarian institutions were listening and acting. Heavy-handed judicial intervention was difficult to justify and appears to have provoked, not resolved, conflict." Retrieved January 23, 2007.
  84. **^** Bullington, Jonathan (May 11, 2013). "Justice Ginsburg: Roe v. Wade not 'woman-centered'". _Chicago Tribune_.
  85. **^** Cox, Archibald. _The Role of the Supreme Court in American Government_ , 113–14 (Oxford U. Press 1976), via Google Books. Retrieved January 26, 2007. Stuart Taylor has argued that " _Roe v. Wade_ was sort of conjured up out of very general phrases and was recorded, even by most liberal scholars like Archibald Cox at the time, John Harvey Link – just to name two Harvard scholars – as kind of made-up constitutional law." See Stuart Taylor Jr., Online News Hour, _PBS_ 2000-07-13.
  86. **^** Ely, John Hart. "The Wages of Crying Wolf Archived 2007-06-25 at the Wayback Machine", 82 _Yale Law Journal_ 920 (1973). Retrieved January 23, 2007. Professor Ely "supported the availability of abortion as a matter of policy." See Liptak, Adam. "John Hart Ely, a Constitutional Scholar, Is Dead at 64", _The New York Times_ (2003-10-27). Ely is generally regarded as having been a "liberal constitutional scholar." Perry, Michael (1999). _We the People: The Fourteenth Amendment and the Supreme Court_ at Google Books"Archived copy". Archived from the original on June 25, 2007. Retrieved October 5, 2009.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  87. **^** Tribe, Laurence (1973). "The Supreme Court, 1972 Term – Foreword: Toward a Model of Roles in the Due Process of Life and Law". _Harvard Law Review_. **87** (1): 1 [p. 7]. doi:10.2307/1339866. JSTOR 1339866. Quoted in Morgan, Richard Gregory (1979). " _Roe v. Wade_ and the Lesson of the Pre- _Roe_ Case Law". _Michigan Law Review_. **77** (7): 1724–48. doi:10.2307/1288040. JSTOR 1288040.
  88. **^** Dershowitz, Alan. _Supreme Injustice: How the High Court Hijacked Election 2000_ (Oxford U. Press 2001): "Judges have no special competence, qualifications, or mandate to decide between equally compelling moral claims (as in the abortion controversy)...." quoted by Green, "Bushed and Gored: A Brief Review of Initial Literature", in _The Final Arbiter: The Consequences of Bush V. Gore for Law And Politics_ , ed. Banks C, Cohen D  & Green J., editors, p. 14 (SUNY Press 2005), via Google Books. Retrieved January 26, 2007.
  89. **^** Sunstein, Cass. Quoted by McGuire, _New York Sun_ (November 15, 2005): "What I think is that it just doesn't have the stable status of _Brown_ or _Miranda_ because it's been under internal and external assault pretty much from the beginning....As a constitutional matter, I think Roe was way overreached." Retrieved 2007-01-23. Sunstein is a "liberal constitutional scholar." See Herman, Eric. "Former U of C law prof on everyone's short court list", _Chicago Sun-Times_ (2005-07-11). [ _dead link_ ]
  90. **^** Roosevelt, Kermit. "Shaky Basis for a Constitutional ‘Right’", _Washington Post_ , (January 22, 2003): "[I]t is time to admit in public that, as an example of the practice of constitutional opinion writing, Roe is a serious disappointment. You will be hard-pressed to find a constitutional law professor, even among those who support the idea of constitutional protection for the right to choose, who will embrace the opinion itself rather than the result….This is not surprising. As constitutional argument, Roe is barely coherent. The court pulled its fundamental right to choose more or less from the constitutional ether. It supported that right via a lengthy, but purposeless, cross-cultural historical review of abortion restrictions and a tidy but irrelevant refutation of the straw-man argument that a fetus is a constitutional ‘person’ entitled to the protection of the 14th Amendment....By declaring an inviolable fundamental right to abortion, Roe short-circuited the democratic deliberation that is the most reliable method of deciding questions of competing values." Retrieved 2007-01-23. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on March 19, 2007. Retrieved May 8, 2017.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  91. **^** Rosen, Jeffrey (February 24, 2003). "Why We'd Be Better off Without Roe: Worst Choice". _The New Republic_. Archived from the original on March 9, 2003. Retrieved January 23, 2007. "In short, 30 years later, it seems increasingly clear that this pro-choice magazine was correct in 1973 when it criticized _Roe_ on constitutional grounds. Its overturning would be the best thing that could happen to the federal judiciary, the pro-choice movement, and the moderate majority of the American people."
    * _See also_ : Rosen, Jeffrey (June 2006). "The Day After Roe". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved May 20, 2019.
  92. **^** Kinsley, Michael. "Bad choice", _The New Republic_ (June 13, 2004): "Against all odds (and, I'm afraid, against all logic), the basic holding of Roe v. Wade is secure in the Supreme Court....[A] freedom of choice law would guarantee abortion rights the correct way, democratically, rather than by constitutional origami." Retrieved 2007-01-23.
  93. **^** Saletan, William. "Unbecoming Justice Blackmun", _Legal Affairs_ , May/June 2005. Retrieved January 23, 2007. Saletan is a self-described liberal. See Saletan, William. "Rights and Wrongs: Liberals, progressives, and biotechnology", _Slate_ (2007-07-13).
  94. **^** Wittes, Benjamin. "Letting Go of Roe", _The Atlantic Monthly_ , Jan/Feb 2005. Retrieved January 23, 2007. Wittes also said, "I generally favor permissive abortion laws." He has elsewhere noted, "In their quieter moments, many liberal scholars recognize that the decision is a mess." See Wittes, Benjamin. "A Little Less Conversation", _The New Republic_ November 29, 2007
  95. **^** Lazarus, Edward. "The Lingering Problems with Roe v. Wade, and Why the Recent Senate Hearings on Michael McConnell's Nomination Only Underlined Them", _Findlaw's Writ_ (October 3, 2002). Retrieved 2007-01-23.
  96. **^** Forsythe, Clarke (2013). _Abuse of Discretion: The Inside Story of Roe v. Wade_. Encounter Books. p. 496. ISBN 978-1594036927.
  97. **^** Stith, Irene. _Abortion Procedures, CRS Report for Congress (PDF)_ (November 17, 1997). Retrieved 2007-02-02.
  98. **^** "Gallup: Abortion". Gallup poll.
  99. **^** Saad, Lydia. More Americans "Pro-Life" Than "Pro-Choice" for First Time, Gallup (May 15, 2009).
  100. **^** "Public Takes Conservative Turn on Gun Control, Abortion Americans Now Divided Over Both Issues", Pew Research Center (April 30, 2009).
  101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Harris Interactive, (November 9, 2007). "Support for Roe v. Wade Increases Significantly, Reaches Highest Level in Nine Years." Retrieved 2007-12-14.
  102. **^** Franz, Wanda. "The Continuing Confusion About Roe v. Wade" Archived May 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, _NRL News_ (June 2007).
  103. **^** Adamek, Raymond. "Abortion Polls", _Public Opinion Quarterly_ , Vol. 42, No. 3 (Autumn, 1978), pp. 411–13. Dr. Adamek is pro-life. Dr Raymond J Adamek, PhD _Pro-Life Science and Technology Symposium._
  104. **^** Harris Interactive. 'U.S. Attitudes Toward Roe v. Wade". _The Wall Street Journal Online_ , (May 4, 2006). Retrieved 2007-02-03.
  105. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ayres McHenry Poll Results on _Roe v. Wade_ Archived October 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine via Angus Reid Global Monitor (2007).
  106. **^** Gallagher, Maggie. "Pro-Life Voters are Crucial Component of Electability", Realclearpolitics.com (May 23, 2007).
  107. **^** Reagan, Ronald. _Interview With Eleanor Clift, Jack Nelson, and Joel Havemann of the Los Angeles Times_ (June 23, 1986). Retrieved 2007-01-23.
  108. **^** _City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health_ , 462 U.S. 416 (1983).
  109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists_ , 476 U.S. 747 (1986).
  110. **^** _R. v. Morgentaler_ Archived October 23, 2008, at the Wayback Machine _1 S.C.R. 30 (1988)._
  111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ , 492 U.S. 490 (1989).
  112. **^** Totenberg, Nina (March 4, 2004). "Documents Reveal Battle to Preserve 'Roe'; Court Nearly Reversed Abortion Ruling, Blackmun Papers Show". _Morning Edition_. NPR. Retrieved January 30, 2007.
  113. **^** Greenhouse 2005, pp. 203–06
  114. **^** _Casey_ , 505 U.S. at 851.
  115. **^** _Casey_ , 505 U.S. at 1002 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
  116. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _Stenberg v. Carhart_ , 530 U.S. 914, 958–59 (2000) ("The fetus, in many cases, dies just as a human adult or child would: It bleeds to death as it is torn from limb from limb. The fetus can be alive at the beginning of the dismemberment process and can survive for a time while its limbs are being torn off.").
  117. **^** "S.3 - Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003". Congress.gov. Retrieved May 20, 2019.
  118. **^** Green, Emma (November 13, 2015). "A New Supreme Court Challenge: The Erosion of Abortion Access in Texas". _Atlantic_. Retrieved January 26, 2016.
  119. **^** Hurley, Lawrence (June 28, 2016). "Supreme Court firmly backs abortion rights, tosses Texas law". _Reuters_. Retrieved June 29, 2016.
  120. **^** Ariane de Vogue, Tal Kopan and Dan Berman (June 27, 2015). "Supreme Court strikes down Texas abortion access law". CNN. Retrieved June 29, 2016.
  121. **^** Denniston, Lyle (June 27, 2016). "Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt – Opinion analysis: Abortion rights reemerge strongly". _SCOTUSblog_. Retrieved June 29, 2016.
  122. **^** "Roe v Wade: Woman in US abortion legal test case dies". _bbc.co.uk_. February 18, 2017.
  123. **^** _McCorvey v. Hill_ , 385 F.3d 846 (5th Cir. 2004). 
  124. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Valerie Lapinski, _Winning Roe v. Wade: Q &A with Sarah Weddington_, _Time_ (January 22, 2013), _available at_ http://nation.time.com/2013/01/22/winning-roe-v-wade-qa-with-sarah-weddington/.
  125. **^** Reeves, Richard (2001). _President Nixon: Alone in the White House_ (1st ed.). Simon  & Schuster. p. 563. ISBN 978-0-684-80231-2. "The President did not comment directly on the decision."
  126. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Savage, Charlie (June 23, 2009). "On Nixon Tapes, Ambivalence Over Abortion, Not Watergate". _The New York Times_. Retrieved July 18, 2009.
  127. **^** Harnden, Toby. "President Richard Nixon Said it Was 'Necessary' to Abort Mixed-Race Babies, Tapes Reveal," _The Daily Telegraph_ (June 24, 2009).
  128. **^** Ford, Gerald. Letter to the Archbishop of Cincinnati, published online by The American Presidency Project. Santa Barbara: University of California Press (September 10, 1976).
  129. **^** Reagan, Ronald. Abortion and the Conscience of the Nation (Nelson 1984).
  130. **^** Kornblut, Anne E. (January 22, 2000). "Bush Tells Addicts He Can Identify". _Boston Globe_. p. A12.
  131. **^** Fritz, Sara (August 18, 1992). "'92 Republican Convention: Rigid Anti-Abortion Platform Plank OKd Policy". _Los Angeles Times_. " President George Bush supported abortion rights until 1980, when he switched sides after Ronald Reagan picked Bush as his running mate."
  132. **^** Bush, George Herbert Walker.Remarks to Participants in the March for Life Rally (January 23, 1989): "I think the Supreme Court's decision in Roe versus Wade was wrong and should be overturned."
  133. **^** Carter, James Earl. _Larry King Live_ , CNN, Interview With Jimmy Carter (February 1, 2006). Also see Bourne, Peter, _Jimmy Carter: A Comprehensive Biography from Plains to Postpresidency_ : "Early in his term as governor, Carter had strongly supported family planning programs including abortion in order to save the life of a woman, birth defects, or in other extreme circumstances. Years later, he had written the foreword to a book, _Women in Need_ , that favored a woman's right to abortion. He had given private encouragement to the plaintiffs in a lawsuit, _Doe v. Bolton_ , filed against the state of Georgia to overturn its archaic abortion laws."
  134. **^** Clinton, Bill. _My Life_ , p. 229 (Knopf 2004).
  135. **^** Obama, Barack. "1998 Illinois State Legislative National Political Awareness Test", Project Vote Smart, via archive.org. Retrieved on January 21, 2007.
  136. **^** Foran, Clare (June 29, 2018). "The plan to overturn Roe v. Wade at the Supreme Court is already in motion". _CNN_. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018.
  137. **^** Green, Emma (October 10, 2018). "Susan Collins Gambles With the Future of Roe v. Wade". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
  138. **^** Litman, Leah (May 13, 2019). "Supreme Court Liberals Raise Alarm Bells About Roe v. Wade". _The New York Times_. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
  139. **^** Shaw, Lisa (October 24, 2018). "Planned Parenthood Prepares for Overturning of Roe v. Wade". _The New American_. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
  140. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Vestal, Christine. "States probe limits of abortion policy", Stateline.org (June 11, 2007).
  141. **^** Marcus, Frances Frank. "Louisiana Moves Against Abortion", _The New York Times_ (July 8, 1989).
  142. **^** LZ Granderson "Mississippi's end run around abortion", _CNN_ (July 12, 2012).
  143. **^** Stracqualursi, Veronica (May 1, 2019). "Alabama House passes bill that would make abortion a felony". _CNN_. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
  144. **^** Kelly, Caroline (May 15, 2019). "Alabama governor signs nation's most restrictive anti-abortion bill into law". _CNN_. Retrieved May 15, 2019.
  145. **^** Elliott, Debbie (May 1, 2019). "Alabama Lawmakers Move To Outlaw Abortion In Challenge To Roe V. Wade". _NPR.org_. Retrieved May 6, 2019.
  146. **^** Rambaran, Vandana (May 15, 2019). "Alabama 'has gone too far' with 'extreme' abortion bill, Pat Robertson says". _Fox News_. Retrieved May 15, 2019.

## References

  * Chemerinsky, Erwin (2015). _Constitutional Law: Principles and Policies_ (5th ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer. ISBN 978-1-4548-4947-6.
  * Garrow, David J. (1994). _Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade_. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-02-542755-6.
  * Greenhouse, Linda (2005). _Becoming Justice Blackmun: Harry Blackmun's Supreme Court Journey_. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-7791-9.
  * Malphurs, Ryan A. (2010). ""People Did Sometimes Stick Things in my Underwear": The Function of Laughter at the U.S. Supreme Court" (PDF). _Communication Law Review_. **10** (2): 48–75. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
  * Nowak, John E.; Rotunda, Ronald D. (2012). _Treatise on Constitutional Law: Substance and Procedure_ (5th ed.). Eagan, Minnesota: West Thomson/Reuters. OCLC 798148265.
  * Schwartz, Bernard (1988). _The Unpublished Opinions of the Burger Court_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505317-3.

## Further reading

  * Critchlow, Donald T. (1996). _The Politics of Abortion and Birth Control in Historical Perspective_. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01570-5.
  * Critchlow, Donald T. (1999). _Intended Consequences: Birth Control, Abortion, and the Federal Government in Modern America_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504657-1.
  * Hull, N. E. H. (2004). _The Abortion Rights Controversy in America: A Legal Reader_. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-2873-1.
  * Hull, N. E. H.; Peter Charles Hoffer (2001). _Roe v. Wade: The Abortion Rights Controversy in American History_. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1143-0.
  * Mohr, James C. (1979). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy, 1800–1900_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-502616-0.
  * Rubin, Eva R. [ed.] (1994). _The Abortion Controversy: A Documentary History_. Westport, CT: Greenwood. ISBN 978-0-313-28476-2.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
  * Staggenborg, Suzanne (1994). _The Pro-Choice Movement: Organization and Activism in the Abortion Conflict_. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-506596-1.

## External links

**Listen to this article** (info/dl)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-icon.svg/45px-

Sound-icon.svg.png)

This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Roe v. Wade" dated
2005-07-16, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

**More spoken articles**

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/15px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) Works related to _Roe v. Wade_ at Wikisource
  * Text of _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113 (1973) is available from: Cornell CourtListener Findlaw Google Scholar Justia Library of Congress .[ _clarify_ ]
  * The concurring opinions of Burger and Douglas, as well as White's dissenting opinion, were issued along with _Doe v. Bolton_ and may be found at: 
    * Cornell LLI
  * Audio of oral argument at www.oyez.org
  * Summary of _Roe v. Wade_ at Lawnix.com
  * Major Decisions – _Roe v Wade_
  * "Supreme Court Landmark Case _Roe v. Wade_ " from C-SPAN's _Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions_

  * v

  * t
  * e

United States Fourteenth Amendment case law

* * *

|

Citizenship Clause

* * *

  * _Slaughter-House Cases_ (1873)
  * _Elk v. Wilkins_ (1884)
  * _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898)
  * _Perez v. Brownell_ (1958)
  * _Afroyim v. Rusk_ (1967)
  * _Rogers v. Bellei_ (1971)
  * _Saenz v. Roe_ (1999)

|

Due Process Clause

* * *

| Economic substantive  
due process|

  * _Mugler v. Kansas_ (1887)
  * _Allgeyer v. Louisiana_ (1897)
  * _Lochner v. New York_ (1905)
  * _Coppage v. Kansas_ (1915)
  * _Adams v. Tanner_ (1917)
  * _Adkins v. Children's Hospital_ (1923)

---|---  
Right to privacy|

  * _Meyer v. Nebraska_ (1923)
  * _Pierce v. Society of Sisters_ (1925)
  * _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965)
  * _Doe v. Bolton_ (1973)
  * _Roe v. Wade_ (1973)
  * _Bowers v. Hardwick_ (1986)
  * _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ (1989)
  * _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)
  * _Lawrence v. Texas_ (2003)
  * _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ (2016)

Right to abortion|

  * _United States v. Vuitch_ (1971)
  * _Doe v. Bolton_ (1973)
  * _Roe v. Wade_ (1973)
  * _H. L. v. Matheson_ (1981)
  * _City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health_ (1983)
  * _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ (1989)
  * _Hodgson v. Minnesota_ (1990)
  * _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)
  * _Stenberg v. Carhart_ (2000)
  * _Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England_ (2006)
  * _Gonzales v. Carhart_ (2007)
  * _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ (2016)

Civil rights liability  
under Section 1983|

  * _Monroe v. Pape_ (1961)
  * _McNeese v. Board of Educ._ (1963)
  * _Pierson v. Ray_ (1967)
  * _Jenkins v. McKeithen_ (1969)
  * _Scheuer v. Rhodes_ (1974)
  * _Wood v. Strickland_ (1975)
  * _O'Connor v. Donaldson_ (1975)
  * _Paul v. Davis_ (1976)
  * _Imbler v. Pachtman_ (1976)
  * _Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York_ (1978)
  * _Procunier v. Navarette_ (1978)
  * _Owen v. City of Independence_ (1980)
  * _Harlow v. Fitzgerald_ (1982)
  * _Felder v. Casey_ (1988)
  * _Will v. Michigan Department of State Police_ (1989)
  * _Gonzaga University v. Doe_ (2002)
  * _Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community_ (2003)
  * _City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams_ (2005)
  * _Fitzgerald v. Barnstable School Committee_ (2009)
  * _Ashcroft v. Iqbal_ (2009)
  * _Los Angeles County v. Humphries_ (2010)
  * _Connick v. Thompson_ (2011)

Other|

  * _Holden v. Hardy_ (1898)
  * _Muller v. Oregon_ (1908)
  * _Buck v. Bell_ (1927)
  * _Powell v. Alabama_ (1932)
  * _West Coast Hotel v. Parrish_ (1937)
  * _NAACP v. Alabama_ (1958)
  * _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965)
  * _Loving v. Virginia_ (1967)
  * _Epperson v. Arkansas_ (1968)
  * _In re Winship_ (1971)
  * _Kolender v. Lawson_ (1983)
  * _Edwards v. Aguillard_ (1987)
  * _Troxel v. Granville_ (2000)
  * _Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co._ (2009)
  * _Obergefell v. Hodges_ (2015)

|

Equal Protection Clause

* * *

  * _United States v. Cruikshank_ (1876)
  * _Pace v. Alabama_ (1883)
  * _Civil Rights Cases_ (1883)
  * _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ (1886)
  * _Plessy v. Ferguson_ (1896)
  * _Buchanan v. Warley_ (1917)
  * _Lum v. Rice_ (1927)
  * _Skinner v. Oklahoma_ (1942)
  * _Perez v. Sharp_ (1948)
  * _Goesaert v. Cleary_ (1948)
  * _Shelley v. Kraemer_ (1948)
  * _Sipuel v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Okla._ (1948)
  * _Sweatt v. Painter_ (1950)
  * _McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents_ (1950)
  * _Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka_ (1954)
  * _Hernandez v. Texas_ (1954)
  * _Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County_ (1964)
  * _Katzenbach v. Morgan_ (1966)
  * _Loving v. Virginia_ (1967)
  * _Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education_ (1971)
  * _Guey Heung Lee v. Johnson_ (1971)
  * _Reed v. Reed_ (1971)
  * _Frontiero v. Richardson_ (1973)
  * _Craig v. Boren_ (1976)
  * _Milliken v. Bradley_ (1974)
  * _Rostker v. Goldberg_ (1981)
  * _Plyler v. Doe_ (1982)
  * _Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan_ (1982)
  * _United States v. Virginia_ (1996)
  * _Romer v. Evans_ (1996)
  * _Grutter v. Bollinger_ (2003)
  * _Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1_ (2007)
  * _Obergefell v. Hodges_ (2015)
  * _National Coalition for Men v. Selective Service System_ (S.D. Tex, 2019)

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roe_v._Wade&oldid=899773876"

Categories:

  * Spoken articles
  * United States Supreme Court cases
  * United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
  * United States abortion case law
  * Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
  * History of women's rights in the United States
  * United States substantive due process case law
  * 1973 in United States case law
  * American Civil Liberties Union litigation
  * United States mootness case law
  * Judicial activism
  * Medical lawsuits
  * United States privacy case law
  * Right to privacy under the United States Constitution

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
  * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2017
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from August 2016
  * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * Use mdy dates from September 2018
  * Articles with short description
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017
  * Articles needing additional references from January 2018
  * All articles needing additional references
  * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
  * Articles with hAudio microformats
  * All Wikipedia articles needing clarification
  * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2018

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikisource

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Čeština
  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * 한국어
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 07:58 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

