

skip to main content

Advertisement

                
                                      * AGU.org
                      * AGU Journals
                      * AGU Geocalendar
                      * Join AGU
                      * Donate to AGU
                      * Eos E-Alerts
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

![Eos Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

black-130x66.png) Earth & Space Science News

Search for:

__Search

                
                                      * __
                

![Eos Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

white-63x32.png)

                
                                      * __
                
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                
                      * __
                

Search for:

__Search

## __Menu

                
                                      * News __
                        * News & Features
                        * Project Updates
                        * Meeting Reports
                        * AGU News
                        * Postcards from the Field
                      * News from AGU Journals __
                        * Research Spotlights
                        * Editors’ Highlights
                        * Scientific Press Releases
                      * Topics & Disciplines __
                        * Topics
                          * Centennial Collection
                          * Climate Change
                          * Hazards & Disasters
                          * Natural Resources
                          * Science Policy
                          * Space & Planets
                          * Education
                          * Women in Geoscience
                        * Scientific Disciplines
                          * Atmospheric Sciences
                          * Biogeosciences
                          * Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology
                          * Geohealth
                          * Geology & Geophysics
                          * Global Change
                          * Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface
                          * Mathematical Geophysics
                          * Natural Hazards
                          * Ocean Sciences
                          * Planetary Sciences
                          * Science Policy & Funding
                          * Space Science & Space Physics
                      * Opinions __
                        * Opinions
                        * Editors' Vox
                        * GeoFIZZ
                      * Blogs
                      * AGU’s Centennial
                      * Jobs & Resources
                

# Editors' Vox

Perspectives on Earth and space science: A blog from AGU’s journal editors

Biogeosciences __Editors' Vox

* * *
                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

# Methane, Climate Change, and Our Uncertain Future

Methane is generally considered secondary to carbon dioxide in its importance
to climate change, but what role might methane play in the future if global
temperatures continue to rise?

Flooded permafrost tundra in northeast Siberia. Hydrology is a key control on
methane emissions in wetland and permafrost ecosystems. Credit: Joshua Dean

By Joshua Deanon 11 May 2018

The greenhouse gas, methane, is produced by both natural processes and human
activities. While there has been much attention paid to curbing anthropogenic
emissions, a changing climate will likely increase the production of natural
methane. In an open access article recently published in _Reviews of
Geophysics_ , Dean et al. [2018] describe the ways in which biological,
geochemical, and physical systems influence methane concentrations and explore
how methane levels in natural systems may alter in a warming climate. Here the
authors answer some questions about the sources and significance of methane,
and indicate some future research directions.

**How does methane effect the Earth’s climate?**

Methane (CH4) is a greenhouse gas that is much stronger than carbon dioxide
(CO2), 34 times stronger if compared over a 100-year period. While
concentrations of methane in the atmosphere are about 200 times lower than
carbon dioxide, methane was responsible for 60% of the equivalent radiative
forcing caused by carbon dioxide since the onset of the Industrial Revolution.
Methane’s presence in the atmosphere can also affect the abundance of other
greenhouse gases, such as ozone (O3), water vapor (H2O), and carbon dioxide.

**What are the primary natural and anthropogenic sources of methane?**

The main natural sources of methane are wetlands and freshwater systems
(rivers and lakes). The main sources of anthropogenic methane are agriculture
(such as cattle farming) and waste (such as landfills), and methane derived
from the fossil fuel industry. Anthropogenic sources are slightly larger
emitters of methane to the atmosphere compared to natural sources.

**How have methane levels in the atmosphere changed over time?**

Direct records of atmospheric methane concentrations only go back about
800,000 years. During this time methane concentrations have generally varied
between 300 and 800 parts per billion. Since the onset of the Industrial
Revolution in about 1750, however, atmospheric methane concentrations shot up
to about 1800 parts per billion and are continuing to rise.

Between 2000 and 2007, atmospheric methane concentrations appeared to
stabilize, leading to sustained debate regarding the main drivers of
atmospheric methane. Crucially, after 2007 atmospheric methane concentrations
began to rise again and current measurements suggest that atmospheric methane
concentrations will continue to increase.

It remains vital that we are able to identify the cause(s) of this rise in
order to address emissions of this critical greenhouse gas. Particularly
important is curbing emissions from human activities, namely agriculture and
the fossil fuel industries. One key example of this, currently, is the
identification and mitigation of leaking natural gas infrastructure.

**Which natural systems are most vulnerable to climate change and may
significantly influence methane emissions?**

The biggest natural emitters of methane are wetlands and lakes, both of which
are affected by the impacts of climate change, namely increased temperatures
and changing hydrology. The balance between methane production and its
oxidation within these environments before it can be released to the
atmosphere, both of which are affected by temperature and hydrology, is
crucial to understanding the response of these systems to climate change.

While not the largest emitters, permafrost systems (underlain by soils that
remain frozen throughout the year due to cold local temperatures) are highly
vulnerable to climate change. The proportion of methane emitted from such
systems may increase significantly in a warmer future as the previously frozen
organic carbon-rich soils are thawed out, making this material available for
methane producing microbes.

![](https://eos.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/2017RG000559-Figure-7-480x377.jpg)The methane climate
feedback loop. Credit: Dean et al., 2018, Figure 7

**What are some of the unresolved questions in this field where additional
research, data or modeling is needed?**

In the short-term, a key issue that needs resolving is the mismatch between
global methane budgets from top-down (derived from atmospheric measurements)
and bottom-up (derived from measurements of methane emissions at the land
surface from different methane producing environments) approaches. This
requires collecting more data at high resolution in time and space, and the
use of isotopes to bridge top-down and bottom-up observations to identify
methane sources across these measurement scales.

In the longer-term, a crucial question that remains is whether methane
oxidation in natural environments can match potentially increased methane
production in response to predicted climate change. Answering this question
requires observations and modeling at a wide range of scales from the
microbial- to the global-scale. This should also involve bringing together
researchers across these disciplines, particularly linking geophysicists and
geochemists with microbiologists.

—Joshua Dean, Department of Earth Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; email: [email protected]

**Citation:** Dean, J. (2018), Methane, climate change, and our uncertain
future, Eos, 99, https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EO095105. Published on 11 May
2018.

Text (C) 2018. The authors. CC BY-NC-ND 3.0  
Except where otherwise noted, images are subject to copyright. Any reuse
without express permission from the copyright owner is prohibited.

* * *
                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

Advertisement

## Related Articles

__Research Spotlight __5 June 2019

### The Tropical Atmosphere’s Balancing Act

__Research Spotlight __24 May 2019

### Shifting Winds Drive Ocean Temps Along South African Coast

__Research Spotlight __23 May 2019

### Celebrating a Century of Nonlinearity Across the Geosciences

__Research Spotlight __20 May 2019

### How Will the Jet Stream Respond to Future Warming?

This article does not represent the opinion of AGU, _Eos,_ or any of its
affiliates. It is solely the opinion of the author.

##

Advertisement

## Follow AGU Everywhere

## AGU News

__AGU News __3 June 2019

### Science in the Deep

__AGU News __30 May 2019

### In Appreciation of AGU’s Outstanding Reviewers of 2018

__Subscribe View More AGU News »

## From AGU Journals

Most Shared

__Geophysical Research Letters

### Variable solar irradiance as a plausible agent for multidecadal variations

in the Arctic‐wide surface air temperature record of the past 130 years

Willie W.‐H. Soon

Highly Cited

__G-Cubed

### Age, spreading rates, and spreading asymmetry of the world's ocean crust

R. Dietmar Müller et al.

Hot Article

__Earth’s Future

### Catalyzing Transformations to Sustainability in the World's Mountains

J. A. Klein et al.

View More Highlights »

##

Advertisement

## Current Print Magazine

![](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Jun-19_cover.jpg)  
__June 2019

Volume 100 Issue 6

View Issue »

View Archives »

## Most Popular

Ocean Sciences

__Feature __21 May 2019

### Mud on the Move

Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface

__Research Spotlight __30 May 2019

### Answer to California Landscape Riddle Lies Underground

Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology

__Research Spotlight __29 May 2019

### Big Data Help Paint a New Picture of Trace Element Cycling

## Most Commented

Climate Change

__News __8 April 2019

### European Contact with the Americas May Have Triggered Global Cooling

__ 9 Comments

Geology & Geophysics

__News __9 April 2019

### Secrets from the New Madrid Seismic Zone’s Quaking Past

__ 4 Comments

Climate Change

__Project Update __4 April 2019

### Bridging the Gap with the Science for Climate Action Network

__ 3 Comments

## You Might Have Missed

Ocean Sciences

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Sea Level Rise May Reactivate Growth of Some Reef Islands

Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Missing Lakes Under Antarctic Ice Sheets

Climate Change

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Improving Climate Predictions over Decades

![AGU Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

white-130x66.png)

_Eos_ is the leading source for trustworthy news and perspectives about the
Earth and space sciences and their impact. Its namesake is Eos, the Greek
goddess of the dawn, who represents the light shed on understanding our planet
and its environment in space by the Earth and space sciences.

### Connect with Eos

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

### I want to

                
                                      * Contact _Eos_
                      * View Commenting Policy
                      * Sign Up for E-Alerts
                      * View Editorial Policy
                      * Submit an Article or Idea
                      * Inquire About Advertising
                      * Learn More About _Eos_
                      * View Terms and Conditions
                      * Cite an Article
                      * View Privacy Policy
                

### Help us improve your Eos experience

Leave Feedback

![IMA 2014 awards logo](https://eos.org/wp-

content/themes/eos/dist/images/ima-2014.png) ![The logo for American

Geophysical Union](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/AGU100_logo_V-

WhiteTransparent-130x140.png)

(C) 2019 American Geophysical Union. All rights reserved.

![Creative Commons logo for the Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives

license.](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/cc-by-nc-nd.png)

                
                                      * News __
                        * News & Features
                        * Project Updates
                        * Meeting Reports
                        * AGU News
                        * Postcards from the Field
                      * News from AGU Journals __
                        * Research Spotlights
                        * Editors’ Highlights
                        * Scientific Press Releases
                      * Topics & Disciplines __
                        * Topics
                          * Centennial Collection
                          * Climate Change
                          * Hazards & Disasters
                          * Natural Resources
                          * Science Policy
                          * Space & Planets
                          * Education
                          * Women in Geoscience
                        * Scientific Disciplines
                          * Atmospheric Sciences
                          * Biogeosciences
                          * Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology
                          * Geohealth
                          * Geology & Geophysics
                          * Global Change
                          * Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface
                          * Mathematical Geophysics
                          * Natural Hazards
                          * Ocean Sciences
                          * Planetary Sciences
                          * Science Policy & Funding
                          * Space Science & Space Physics
                      * Opinions __
                        * Opinions
                        * Editors' Vox
                        * GeoFIZZ
                      * Blogs
                      * AGU’s Centennial
                      * Jobs & Resources
                      * AGU.org
                      * AGU Journals
                      * AGU Geocalendar
                      * Join AGU
                      * Donate to AGU
                      * Eos E-Alerts
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

