

NASA

Global Climate Change

Vital Signs of the Planet

![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

Skip Navigation

# Facts

                
                                      * Evidence 
                      * Causes 
                      * Effects 
                      * Scientific Consensus 
                      * Vital Signs 
                      * Questions (FAQ)
                

Evidence Causes Effects Scientific Consensus Vital Signs Questions (FAQ)

# Climate Change: How Do We Know?

![This graph, based on the comparison of atmospheric samples contained in ice

cores and more recent direct  measurements, provides evidence that atmospheric

CO2 has increased  since the Industrial Revolution.  \(Source:

\[\[LINK||http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/icecore/||NOAA\]\]\)](/system/content_pages/main_images/203_co2-graph-051619.jpg)

This graph, based on the comparison of atmospheric samples contained in ice
cores and more recent direct measurements, provides evidence that atmospheric
CO2 has increased since the Industrial Revolution. (Credit: Luthi, D., et al..
2008; Etheridge, D.M., et al. 2010; Vostok ice core data/J.R. Petit et al.;
NOAA Mauna Loa CO2 record.) Find out more about ice cores (external site).

The Earth's climate has changed throughout history. Just in the last 650,000
years there have been seven cycles of glacial advance and retreat, with the
abrupt end of the last ice age about 7,000 years ago marking the beginning of
the modern climate era -- and of human civilization. Most of these climate
changes are attributed to very small variations in Earth's orbit that change
the amount of solar energy our planet receives.

> Scientific evidence for warming of the climate system is unequivocal.

>

>           * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

The current warming trend is of particular significance because most of it is
extremely likely (greater than 95 percent probability) to be the result of
human activity since the mid-20th century and proceeding at a rate that is
unprecedented over decades to millennia.1

Earth-orbiting satellites and other technological advances have enabled
scientists to see the big picture, collecting many different types of
information about our planet and its climate on a global scale. This body of
data, collected over many years, reveals the signals of a changing climate.

The heat-trapping nature of carbon dioxide and other gases was demonstrated in
the mid-19th century.2 Their ability to affect the transfer of infrared energy
through the atmosphere is the scientific basis of many instruments flown by
NASA. There is no question that increased levels of greenhouse gases must
cause the Earth to warm in response.

Ice cores drawn from Greenland, Antarctica, and tropical mountain glaciers
show that the Earth's climate responds to changes in greenhouse gas levels.
Ancient evidence can also be found in tree rings, ocean sediments, coral
reefs, and layers of sedimentary rocks. This ancient, or paleoclimate,
evidence reveals that current warming is occurring roughly ten times faster
than the average rate of ice-age-recovery warming.3

### The evidence for rapid climate change is compelling:

* * *

## Global Temperature Rise

                
                                      * ![The planet's average surface temperature has risen about 2.0 degrees Fahrenheit \(1.1 degrees Celsius\) since the late 19th century](/internal_resources/38)
                

The planet's average surface temperature has risen about 1.62 degrees
Fahrenheit (0.9 degrees Celsius) since the late 19th century, a change driven
largely by increased carbon dioxide and other human-made emissions into the
atmosphere.4 Most of the warming occurred in the past 35 years, with the five
warmest years on record taking place since 2010. Not only was 2016 the warmest
year on record, but eight of the 12 months that make up the year -- from
January through September, with the exception of June -- were the warmest on
record for those respective months. 5

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An indicator of current global average temperature as measured by NASA; updated monthly.](/internal_resources/96)
                    

Earth's vital signs: Global temperature

An indicator of current global average temperature as measured by NASA;
updated annually.

                
                                      * ![An overview of the greenhouse effect and other contributors to abrupt climate change.](/internal_resources/94)
                

Global Climate Change: Causes

An overview of the greenhouse effect and other contributors to abrupt climate
change.

                
                                      * ![A visualization of global temperature changes since 1880 based on NASA GISS data.](/internal_resources/95)
                

Graphic: Global warming from 1880 to 2018

A visualization of global temperature changes since 1880 based on NASA GISS
data.

* * *

## Warming Oceans

                
                                      * ![The oceans have absorbed much of this increased heat, with the top 700 meters \(about 2,300 feet\) of ocean showing warming of more than 0.4 degrees Fahrenheit since 1969.](/internal_resources/39)
                

The oceans have absorbed much of this increased heat, with the top 700 meters
(about 2,300 feet) of ocean showing warming of more than 0.4 degrees
Fahrenheit since 1969.6

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An overview of the ocean’s role in climate change and how it stores and releases heat from the atmosphere.](/internal_resources/88)
                    

Climate Kids: What is happening in the ocean?

An overview of the ocean's role in climate change and how it stores and
releases heat from the atmosphere.

                
                                      * ![A lighthearted look at the effect of climate change on the world’s oceans and the heat capacity of water.](/internal_resources/101)
                

Video: Oceans of climate change

A lighthearted look at the effect of climate change on the world's oceans and
the heat capacity of water.

                
                                      * ![Ocean waters melting the undersides of Antarctic ice shelves are responsible for most of the continent's ice shelf mass loss, a new study by NASA and university researchers has found.](/internal_resources/169)
                

Article: Warming ocean causing most Antarctic ice shelf mass loss

Ocean waters melting the undersides of Antarctic ice shelves are responsible
for most of the continent's ice shelf mass loss, a new study by NASA and
university researchers has found.

* * *

## Shrinking Ice Sheets

                
                                      * ![The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have decreased in mass](/internal_resources/40)
                

The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have decreased in mass. Data from
NASA's Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment show Greenland lost an average
of 286 billion tons of ice per year between 1993 and 2016, while Antarctica
lost about 127 billion tons of ice per year during the same time period. The
rate of Antarctica ice mass loss has tripled in the last decade.7

_Image: Flowing meltwater from the Greenland ice sheet_

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An indicator of the current volume and the Antarctica and Greenland ice sheets using data from NASA’s Grace satellite.](/internal_resources/98)
                    

Vital Signs: Land Ice

An indicator of the current volume and the Antarctica and Greenland ice sheets
using data from NASA 's Grace satellite.

                
                                      * ![An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice, glaciers and continental ice sheets world wide.](/internal_resources/167)
                

Global Ice Viewer

An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice,
glaciers and continental ice sheets world wide.

* * *

## Glacial Retreat

                
                                      * ![Glaciers are retreating almost everywhere around the world — including in the Alps, Himalayas, Andes, Rockies, Alaska and Africa.](/internal_resources/42)
                

Glaciers are retreating almost everywhere around the world -- including in the
Alps, Himalayas, Andes, Rockies, Alaska and Africa.8

_Image: The disappearing snowcap of Mount Kilimanjaro, from space._

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An interactive exploration of how global warming is affect sea ice, glaciers and continental ice sheets worldwide.](/internal_resources/167)
                    

Interactive: Global ice viewer

An interactive exploration of how global warming is affect sea ice, glaciers
and continental ice sheets worldwide.

* * *

## Decreased Snow Cover

                
                                      * ![Satellite observations reveal that the amount of spring snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere has decreased over the past five decades and that the snow is melting earlier](/internal_resources/93)
                

Satellite observations reveal that the amount of spring snow cover in the
Northern Hemisphere has decreased over the past five decades and that the snow
is melting earlier. 9

          * more
                    
                                          * ![As an information and referral center in support of polar and cryospheric research,NSIDC archives and distributes digital and analog snow, ice](/internal_resources/168)
                    

National Snow and Ice Data Center

As an information and referral center in support of polar and cryospheric
research,NSIDC archives and distributes digital and analog snow, ice, and

                
                                      * ![Time series of global snow cover from NASA's Earth Observatory.](/internal_resources/166)
                

Earth Observatory: Snow Cover

Time series of global snow cover from NASA's Earth Observatory.

* * *

## Sea Level Rise

                
                                      * ![Global sea level rose about 8 inches in the last century. The rate in the last two decades, however, is nearly double that of the last century and is accelerating slightly every year](/internal_resources/37)
                

Global sea level rose about 8 inches in the last century. The rate in the last
two decades, however, is nearly double that of the last century and is
accelerating slightly every year.10

_Image: Republic of Maldives: Vulnerable to sea level rise_

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated monthly.](/internal_resources/841)
                    

Earth's vital signs: Sea Level

An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated
monthly.

                
                                      * ![Test your knowledge of sea level rise with this interactive quiz.](/internal_resources/101)
                

Quiz: Sea level

Test your knowledge of sea level rise with this interactive quiz.

* * *

## Declining Arctic Sea Ice

                
                                      * ![Both the extent and thickness of Arctic sea ice has declined rapidly over the last several decades](/system/internal_resources/details/original/1163_Annual_ArcticSeaIceMin_Still.2012_print-320x240.jpg)
                

Both the extent and thickness of Arctic sea ice has declined rapidly over the
last several decades. 11

_Image: Visualization of the 2012 Arctic sea ice minimum, the lowest on
record_

          * more
                    
                                          * ![An indicator of changes in the Arctic sea ice minimum over time. Arctic sea ice extent both affects and is affected by global climate change.](/internal_resources/99)
                    

Earth's vital signs: Sea ice

An indicator of changes in the Arctic sea ice minimum over time. Arctic sea
ice extent both affects and is affected by global climate change.

                
                                      * ![An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice, glaciers and continental ice sheets worldwide.](/internal_resources/167)
                

Interactive: Global ice viewer

An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice,
glaciers and continental ice sheets worldwide.

                
                                      * ![NASA’s Operation IceBridge images Earth's polar ice in unprecedented detail to better understand processes that connect the polar regions with the global climate system.](/internal_resources/97)
                

NASA's Operation Icebridge mission

NASA 's Operation IceBridge images Earth's polar ice in unprecedented detail
to better understand processes that connect the polar regions with the global
climate system.

* * *

## Extreme Events

                
                                      * ![Glaciers are retreating almost everywhere around the world — including in the Alps, Himalayas, Andes, Rockies, Alaska and Africa.](/internal_resources/43)
                

The number of record high temperature events in the United States has been
increasing, while the number of record low temperature events has been
decreasing, since 1950. The U.S. has also witnessed increasing numbers of
intense rainfall events.12

          * more
                    
                                          * ![The official website for NASA's fleet of Earth science missions that study rainfall and other types precipitation around the globe.](/internal_resources/91)
                    

Precipitation Measurement Missions

The official website for NASA's fleet of Earth science missions that study
rainfall and other types precipitation around the globe.

                
                                      * ![Earth’s water is stored in ice and snow, lakes and rivers, the atmosphere and the oceans. How much do you know about how water is cycled around our planet and the crucial role it plays in our climate?](/internal_resources/92)
                

Precipitation Quiz

Earth's water is stored in ice and snow, lakes and rivers, the atmosphere and
the oceans. How much do you know about how water is cycled around our planet
and the crucial role it plays in our climate?

* * *

## Ocean Acidification

                
                                      * ![Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, the acidity of surface ocean waters has increased by about 30 percent](/internal_resources/44)
                

Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, the acidity of surface ocean
waters has increased by about 30 percent.13,14 This increase is the result of
humans emitting more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and hence more being
absorbed into the oceans. The amount of carbon dioxide absorbed by the upper
layer of the oceans is increasing by about 2 billion tons per year.15,16

          * more
                    
                                          * ![Article about how global warming leads to coral bleaching and changes ocean chemistry, leading to acidification.](/internal_resources/88)
                    

How does climate change affect coral reefs?

Article about how global warming leads to coral bleaching and changes ocean
chemistry, leading to acidification.

                
                                      * ![NOAA page on ocean acidification.](/internal_resources/90)
                

The Other Carbon Dioxide Problem

NOAA page on ocean acidification.

* * *

### References

                
                                      1. IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Summary for Policymakers
                

B.D. Santer et.al., "A search for human influences on the thermal structure of
the atmosphere," Nature vol 382, 4 July 1996, 39-46

Gabriele C. Hegerl, "Detecting Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climate Change with an
Optimal Fingerprint Method," Journal of Climate, v. 9, October 1996, 2281-2306

V. Ramaswamy et.al., "Anthropogenic and Natural Influences in the Evolution of
Lower Stratospheric Cooling," Science 311 (24 February 2006), 1138-1141

B.D. Santer et.al., "Contributions of Anthropogenic and Natural Forcing to
Recent Tropopause Height Changes," Science vol. 301 (25 July 2003), 479-483.

                
                                      2. In the 1860s, physicist John Tyndall recognized the Earth's natural greenhouse effect and suggested that slight changes in the atmospheric composition could bring about climatic variations. In 1896, a seminal paper by Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius first predicted that changes in the levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could substantially alter the surface temperature through the greenhouse effect.
                
                      3. National Research Council (NRC), 2006. Surface Temperature Reconstructions For the Last 2,000 Years. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
                

http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GlobalWarming/page3.php

                
                                      4. https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/monitoring-references/faq/indicators.php
                

http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/temperature

http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp

                
                                      5. https://www.giss.nasa.gov/research/news/20170118/
                
                      6. Levitus, S.; Antonov, J.; Boyer, T.; Baranova, O.; Garcia, H.; Locarnini, R.; Mishonov, A.; Reagan, J.; Seidov, D.; Yarosh, E.; Zweng, M. (2017). NCEI ocean heat content, temperature anomalies, salinity anomalies, thermosteric sea level anomalies, halosteric sea level anomalies, and total steric sea level anomalies from 1955 to present calculated from in situ oceanographic subsurface profile data (NCEI Accession 0164586). Version 4.4. NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information. Dataset. doi:10.7289/V53F4MVP
                
                      7. https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?feature=7159
                
                      8. National Snow and Ice Data Center
                

World Glacier Monitoring Service

                
                                      9. National Snow and Ice Data Center
                

Robinson, D. A., D. K. Hall, and T. L. Mote. 2014. _MEaSUREs Northern
Hemisphere Terrestrial Snow Cover Extent Daily 25km EASE-Grid 2.0, Version 1_.
[Indicate subset used]. Boulder, Colorado USA. NASA National Snow and Ice Data
Center Distributed Active Archive Center. doi:
https://doi.org/10.5067/MEASURES/CRYOSPHERE/nsidc-0530.001. [Accessed
9/21/18].

http://nsidc.org/cryosphere/sotc/snow_extent.html

Rutgers University Global Snow Lab, Data History Accessed September 21, 2018.

                
                                      10. R. S. Nerem, B. D. Beckley, J. T. Fasullo, B. D. Hamlington, D. Masters and G. T. Mitchum. Climate-change-driven accelerated sea-level rise detected in the altimeter era. _PNAS_ , 2018 DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1717312115
                      11. https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/sotc/sea_ice.html
                      12. USGCRP, 2017: _Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I_ [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 470 pp, doi: 10.7930/J0J964J6
                
                      13. http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/co2/story/What+is+Ocean+Acidification%3F
                
                      14. http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/co2/story/Ocean+Acidification
                
                      15. C. L. Sabine et.al., "The Oceanic Sink for Anthropogenic CO2," Science vol. 305 (16 July 2004), 367-371
                
                      16. Copenhagen Diagnosis, p. 36.
                

## Scientific Consensus

Ninety-seven percent of climate scientists agree that climate-warming trends
over the past century are extremely likely due to human activities, and most
of the leading scientific organizations worldwide have issued public
statements endorsing this position.

**Click here** for a partial list of these public statements and related
resources.

## Latest resources

                
                                      * ![Video: Ozonewatch 2018](/system/resources/list_images/186_ozone_dec31_1979-2018_print-320x240.jpg)
                

Video: Ozonewatch 2018

                
                                      * ![Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science](/system/resources/list_images/184_list_call_of_science.jpg)
                

Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science

                
                                      * ![Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world](/system/resources/list_images/167_Screen-Shot-2018-05-16-at-12.37.30-PM.jpg)
                

Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world

# Explore

## Interactives, galleries and apps

![Images of Change](/system/feature_items/images/9_images_of_change.jpg)

##

# Images of Change

Explore a stunning gallery of before-and-after images of Earth from land and
space that reveal our home planet in a state of flux.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Mobile

Apps](/system/feature_items/images/26_climate_mobile_apps.jpg)

##

# Climate Mobile Apps

Keep track of Earth's vital signs, see the planet in a state of flux and slow
the pace of global warming with NASA's free mobile apps.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Time

Machine](/system/feature_items/images/27_climate_time_machine.jpg)

##

# Climate Time Machine

Travel through Earth's recent climate history and see how increasing carbon
dioxide, global temperature and sea ice have changed over time.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Eyes on the Earth](/system/feature_items/images/37_eyes_on_earth-2.jpg)

##

# Eyes on the Earth

Track Earth's vital signs from space and fly along with NASA's Earth-observing
satellites in an interactive 3D visualization.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Global Ice Viewer](/system/feature_items/images/28_global_ice_viewer.jpg)

##

# Global Ice Viewer

Earth's ice cover is shrinking. See how climate change has affected glaciers,
sea ice, and continental ice sheets.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

more multimedia

## Get the Newsletter

## Stay Connected

![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

### Facts

                
                                      *             * Evidence
                        * Causes
                        * Effects
                        * Scientific Consensus
                        * Vital Signs
                        * Questions (FAQ)
                

### Articles

                
                                      *             * News and Features
                        * Blog
                        * Fun Facts
                

### Solutions

                
                                      *             * Mitigation and Adaptation
                        * Government Resources
                

### Explore

                
                                      *             * Images of Change
                        * Earth Minute Videos
                        * Interactives
                        * Mobile Apps
                        * Beautiful Earth Gallery
                        * Earth 360
                

### Resources

                
                                      *             * Graphics and Multimedia
                        * For Educators
                        * Climate Kids
                        * About Global Warming
                        * About Climate Change
                

### NASA Science

                
                                      *             * Science Mission Directorate
                        * Earth System Science
                        * Earth Science Missions
                        * History
                
                      * About Us
                

|

                
                                      * Feedback
                

|

                
                                      * Awards
                

|

                
                                      * Earth Observatory
                

|

                
                                      * SEA LEVEL CHANGE
                

|

                
                                      * Privacy
                

|

                
                                      * Climate Data Initiative
                

|

                
                                      * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT
                

This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
Science Editor: Susan Callery

Site last updated: May 28, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

