

Jump to Content

Enter Search Terms

                
                                      * Weather
                      * Climate
                      * Oceans & Coasts
                      * Fisheries
                      * Satellites
                      * Research
                      * Marine & Aviation
                      * Charting
                      * Sanctuaries
                      * Education
                
                      * About our agency
                      * News and features
                      * Our work
                

MENU

CLOSE

![NOAA

Home](/sites/all/themes/custom/noaa/images/noaa_logo_circle_bw_72x72.svg)National
Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationU.S. Department of Commerce

Find your local weather

Enter your ZIP code

Enter Search Terms

Content

Home

Education

Resource Collections

Climate education resources

# Climate change impacts

Education

climate impacts

climate literacy

education

Share This

## SHARE

Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share by email Print

Impacts from climate change are happening now. These impacts extend well
beyond an increase in temperature, affecting ecosystems and communities in the
United States and around the world. Things that we depend upon and value --
water, energy, transportation, wildlife, agriculture, ecosystems, and human
health -- are experiencing the effects of a changing climate.

![Life-threatening storm surge was forecast for areas of the Florida

panhandle. This mobile home park north of the coastal highway in Mexico Beach,

Florida, was washed away from the storm surge and wave impacts of Hurricane

Michael, Nov. 2,

2018](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/scale_crop_1120x534/public/thumbnails/image/Storm%20surge%20and%20wave%20devastation%20at%20Mexico%20Beach%2C%20Fla..JPG?itok=OBNpTr3A)

Changes to water resources can have a big impact on people's lives. In some
regions, particularly in the western United States, drought is an important
factor affecting communities. Less snow accumulation in the mountains is
important in the West and Alaska, where the snowpack stores water for later
use. In the Midwest and northeastern states, the frequency of heavy downpours
has increased. In many regions, floods and water quality problems are likely
to be worse because of climate change.

![Changes in water stress to U.S. watersheds in the next 50 years due to

climate

change.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/round_180x180/public/thumbnails/image/water_stress_index.jpg?itok=iLame9zx)

Climate change to increase water stress

Few things are more important to human quality of life than easy access to
clean water. Understanding how stressed U.S. watersheds have been…

Read more

Our food supply depends on climate and weather conditions. Although
agricultural practices may be adaptable, changes like increased temperatures,
water stress, diseases, and weather extremes create challenges for the farmers
and ranchers who put food on our tables.

Human health is vulnerable to climate change. The changing environment is
expected to cause more heat stress, an increase in waterborne diseases, poor
air quality, and diseases transmitted by insects and rodents. Extreme weather
events can compound many of these health threats.

![Observed trend in temperature from 1900 to 2012; yellow to red indicates

warming, while shades of blue indicate cooling. Gray indicates areas for which

there are no data. There are substantial regional variations in trends across

the planet, though the overall trend is

warming.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/round_180x180/public/thumbnails/image/global_temperature_anomaly.png?itok=o1p_2rLa)

Does "global warming" mean it's warming everywhere?

Temperature trends across the entire globe aren’t uniform because of the
diverse geography on our planet — oceans versus...

Read more

Ecosystems are also affected by climate change. Habitats are being modified,
the timing of events such as flowering and egg laying are shifting, and
species are altering their home ranges.

Changes are also occurring to the ocean. The ocean absorbs about 30% of the
carbon dioxide that is released into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil
fuels. As a result, the ocean is becoming more acidic, affecting marine life.
Rising sea levels due to thermal expansion and melting land ice sheets and
glaciers put coastal areas at greater risk of erosion and storm surge.

![Ocean acidification makes it difficult for pteropods to form healthy, strong

shells.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/round_180x180/public/thumbnails/image/dissolvingpteropod.jpg?itok=yys1Ryxr)

Ocean acidity dissolving tiny snails' protective shell

Fifty-three percent of all pteropods sampled in the coastal region using a
fine mesh net had severely dissolved shells...

Read more

##### EDUCATION CONNECTION

This collection provides teachers and students with opportunities to explore
some of the environmental changes that are taking place. The Climate Literacy
Principles, developed by NOAA and our partners, provide educators with a
framework to help them use these lesson plans and other resources. New reports
are being released by the multiple federal agencies tasked with studying and
responding to climate change. The websites in the background section provide
access to the latest scientific information available. In addition to these
resources, NOAA offers professional development opportunities (including the
Planet Stewards Program) about climate and other topics.

Updated February 2019

Lesson plans & activities

Ocean acidification hands-on activities (MS)offsite link

Hands-on climate science activities (MS)

Multimedia

Measuring changes in an estuary (video)

The role of ice in the ocean (video)

Climate change in Alaska (videos)

Ocean acidification and shellfish farming (video)

Data resources

Drought data and projectionsoffsite link

U.S. and global climate data and maps

Sea level trends

Impacts on marine species distributionoffsite link

U.S. Drought Portal: maps, data and forecasts

Snow and Ice Data for Google Earthoffsite link

Sea ice: interactive mapsoffsite link

Regional Climate Centers

Extreme climate events

Background information

National climate assessment

U.S. climate resilience toolkit

Guide to teaching climate science

Long-term impacts by region and topic

Climate.gov

The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States

Quarterly regional impact reports and outlooks

Drought for kidsoffsite link

Career resources

Talking with IPCC vice-chair Ko Barrett: On climate change and consensus
building

Ocean acidification Q&A with NOAA scientist Shallin Buschoffsite link

Q&A with polar modeler Bob Grumbine

## More Collections

## Carbon Cycle

## Changing seasons

## Climate monitoring

Share This

## SHARE

Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share by email Print

                
                                      * About our agency
                      * News and features
                      * Our work
                

## Stay connected

Share to Twitter Share to Facebook NOAA on Instagram NOAA on YouTube

NOAA HomeScience. Service. Stewardship.

## How are we doing?

Feedbackopens in new window

                
                                      * Protecting Your Privacy
                      * FOIA
                      * Information Quality
                      * Accessibility
                      * Disclaimer
                      * USA.gov
                      * Ready.gov
                      * EEO
                      * Employee Check-In
                      * Contact us
                      * Staff Directory
                      * Need help?
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

