

# Greenpeace USA

                
                                      * What We're Doing
                

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/GP0STQA8Z_Medium_res-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Power the resistance with a gift to Greenpeace.

donate

                
                                        * Saving the Arctic
                        * Protecting Forests
                        * Fighting Global Warming
                        * Protecting Our Oceans
                        * Living Toxic-Free
                        * Promoting Sustainable Food
                        * Defending Democracy
                

Close X

                
                                      * How It Works
                

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/11/GP0STQT80_Medium_res-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Protect Our Oceans, Not Oil Profits

Take Action

                
                                        * Investigate
                        * Connect
                        * Act
                

Close X

                
                                      * Get Involved
                

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/peoplevoil_1024-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Say NO to Offshore Drilling

Take Action

                
                                        * Donate
                        * Volunteer
                        * Membership FAQ
                        * Take Action
                        * Careers
                        * Internships
                        * Frontline
                

Close X

Give to Greenpeace

Monthly Single

                
                                      * facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                

Global Africa Arabic Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria
Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Czech Republic Denmark East Asia EU
Finland France Germany Greece Greenland Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia
International Israel Italy Japan Korea Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands New
Zealand Norway Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia
Slovenia Southeast Asia Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey UK USA

Donate

Menu

                
                                      * About
                      * Stories & Victories
                      * News & Media
                      * Research
                      * Blog
                      * Contact
                

Search icon

                
                                      * What We're Doing
                
                        * Saving the Arctic
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Global Warming
                            * Oil Drilling
                
                          * Stopping Offshore Drilling
                          * Creating an Arctic Sanctuary
                
                        * Protecting Forests
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Agribusiness
                            * Illegal Logging
                
                          * Solutions to Deforestation
                          * Amazon
                          * Boreal Forest
                          * Congo Basin
                          * Great Bear Rainforest
                          * Indonesia
                          * Our Voices Are Vital
                
                        * Fighting Global Warming
                
                          * Energy Issues
                
                            * Coal
                            * Oil
                            * Fracking
                            * Natural Gas
                            * Nuclear Energy
                
                          * 100% Renewable Energy
                          * Keep It in the Ground
                          * #ExxonKnew
                
                            * Infographic: Exxonâ€™s Long History of Climate Denial
                
                          * Exposing Climate Deniers
                
                            * PolluterWatch Site
                            * Koch Industries
                            * Koch-funded Climate Denial Front Groups
                            * David H. Koch
                            * Charles G. Koch
                            * Bill Koch
                
                          * Click Clean
                          * Climate Science
                
                            * Extreme Weather & Climate Change
                
                          * Greenpeace v. Energy Transfer Partners: The Facts
                
                        * Protecting Our Oceans
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Overfishing & Destructive Fishing
                            * Commercial Whaling
                            * Human Rights
                            * Pollution & Climate Change
                
                          * Ocean Wildlife Facts
                          * Save the Whales
                
                            * Threats: Commercial Whaling
                            * Whale Facts
                            * International Whaling Commission
                            * Whaling Myths
                            * Seismic & Sonar Testing
                
                          * Sustainable Seafood
                
                            * Tuna Shopping Guide
                            * Sustainable Seafood Hub
                
                          * Marine Reserves Now
                          * Preventing Plastic Pollution
                
                            * Key Facts About Plastic Pollution
                            * Plastic Pollution FAQs
                
                        * Living Toxic-Free
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Chemical Disasters
                            * Industrial Pollution
                
                          * Preventing Chemical Disasters
                          * Green Electronics
                          * Go PVC-Free
                
                        * Promoting Sustainable Food
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Corporate Control
                            * GMOs & Pesticides
                            * More Meat
                            * Support Small Farmers
                
                          * An Eco-Farming Revolution
                
                            * Say No to Industrial Agriculture
                            * Buy Fresh Food
                            * Eat More Plants
                
                          * 12 Things You Can Do
                          * Bees in Crisis
                
                        * Defending Democracy
                
                          * Issues & Threats
                
                            * Money in Politics
                            * Voting Rights
                
                          * Kick Corporate Money Out of Politics
                          * The Democracy Initiative
                
                      * How It Works
                
                        * Investigate
                        * Connect
                        * Act
                
                      * Get Involved
                
                        * Donate
                        * Volunteer
                        * Membership FAQ
                        * Take Action
                        * Careers
                        * Internships
                        * Frontline
                
                      * About
                      * Stories & Victories
                      * News & Media
                      * Research
                      * Blog
                      * Contact
                

Search icon

Global Africa Arabic Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria
Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Czech Republic Denmark East Asia EU
Finland France Germany Greece Greenland Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia
International Israel Italy Japan Korea Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands New
Zealand Norway Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia
Slovenia Southeast Asia Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey UK USA

                
                                      * facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * What We're Doing
                        * Saving the Arctic
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Global Warming
                            * Oil Drilling
                          * Stopping Offshore Drilling
                          * Creating an Arctic Sanctuary
                        * Protecting Forests
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Agribusiness
                            * Illegal Logging
                          * Solutions to Deforestation
                          * Amazon
                          * Boreal Forest
                          * Congo Basin
                          * Great Bear Rainforest
                          * Indonesia
                          * Our Voices Are Vital
                        * Fighting Global Warming
                          * Energy Issues
                            * Coal
                            * Oil
                            * Fracking
                            * Natural Gas
                            * Nuclear Energy
                          * 100% Renewable Energy
                          * Keep It in the Ground
                          * #ExxonKnew
                            * Infographic: Exxonâ€™s Long History of Climate Denial
                          * Exposing Climate Deniers
                            * PolluterWatch Site
                            * Koch Industries
                            * Koch-funded Climate Denial Front Groups
                            * David H. Koch
                            * Charles G. Koch
                            * Bill Koch
                          * Click Clean
                          * Climate Science
                            * Extreme Weather & Climate Change
                          * Greenpeace v. Energy Transfer Partners: The Facts
                        * Protecting Our Oceans
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Overfishing & Destructive Fishing
                            * Commercial Whaling
                            * Human Rights
                            * Pollution & Climate Change
                          * Ocean Wildlife Facts
                          * Save the Whales
                            * Threats: Commercial Whaling
                            * Whale Facts
                            * International Whaling Commission
                            * Whaling Myths
                            * Seismic & Sonar Testing
                          * Sustainable Seafood
                            * Tuna Shopping Guide
                            * Sustainable Seafood Hub
                          * Marine Reserves Now
                          * Preventing Plastic Pollution
                            * Key Facts About Plastic Pollution
                            * Plastic Pollution FAQs
                        * Living Toxic-Free
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Chemical Disasters
                            * Industrial Pollution
                          * Preventing Chemical Disasters
                          * Green Electronics
                          * Go PVC-Free
                        * Promoting Sustainable Food
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Corporate Control
                            * GMOs & Pesticides
                            * More Meat
                            * Support Small Farmers
                          * An Eco-Farming Revolution
                            * Say No to Industrial Agriculture
                            * Buy Fresh Food
                            * Eat More Plants
                          * 12 Things You Can Do
                          * Bees in Crisis
                        * Defending Democracy
                          * Issues & Threats
                            * Money in Politics
                            * Voting Rights
                          * Kick Corporate Money Out of Politics
                          * The Democracy Initiative
                      * How It Works
                        * Investigate
                        * Connect
                        * Act
                      * Get Involved
                        * Donate
                        * Volunteer
                        * Membership FAQ
                        * Take Action
                        * Careers
                        * Internships
                        * Frontline
                

## About

                
                                      * facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Email
                

Our mission: Greenpeace is a global, independent campaigning organization that
uses peaceful protest and creative communication to expose global
environmental problems and promote solutions that are essential to a green and
peaceful future.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/03139f92-gp0struuo_medium_res_with_credit_line.jpg)

The Greenpeace Rainbow Warrior ship sails in the Bali sea after her visit to
the island.

Â© Rivan Hanggarai / Greenpeace

> "We 'bear witness' to environmental destruction in a peaceful, non-violent
manner. We use non-violent confrontation to raise the level and quality of
public debate. In exposing threats to the environment and finding solutions we
have no permanent allies or adversaries. We ensure our financial independence
from political or commercial interests."  
>  Annie Leonard, Greenpeace USA Executive Director

## Our History

A group of thoughtful, committed citizens came together in 1971 to create
Greenpeace. A handful of determined activists leased a small fishing vessel,
called the Phyllis Cormack, and set sail from Vancouver for Amchitka Island in
Alaska. Their mission was to protest U.S. nuclear testing off the coast of
Alaska with a brave act of defiance: to place themselves in harm's way.

Despite being intercepted by the U.S. Coast Guard, these daring activists
sailed into history by bringing worldwide attention to the dangers of nuclear
testing.

## Our Work

That was more than 40 years ago, and in that time, Greenpeace has indeed
changed the world. And we continue to make the world a better place. Our
committed activists and supporters have come together to ban commercial
whaling, convince the world's leaders to stop nuclear testing, protect
Antarctica, and so much more.

Today, we have grown from a small group of dedicated activists to an
international organization with offices in more than 50 countries. But our
spirit and our mission remain the same. Our fight to save the planet has grown
more serious -- the threat of global warming, destruction of ancient forests,
deterioration of our oceans, and the threat of a nuclear disaster loom large.

Greenpeace is actively working to address these and other threats.

## Our Commitment to Diversity and Inclusion

Greenpeace challenges the systems of power and privilege that destroy the
environment and place disproportionate burdens on vulnerable communities. As
Greenpeace, we know from nature that diversity is essential to life on the
planet and success in our organization.

We welcome, value, and rely on a diversity of people, cultural experiences,
and perspectives. We learn from one another. Through our campaigning, we
create solutions that promote environmental sustainability rooted in social
justice.

## Our Volunteers

We work with thousands of volunteers who are on the inside track of our
campaigns. Whether you've been an activist for decades or you're just starting
and want to learn how you can help, we have volunteer opportunities for you.

## Our Funding

Greenpeace does not solicit contributions from government or corporations, nor
will we endorse political candidates. Our 250,000 members in the United States
and 2.8 million members worldwide provide virtually all of our funding through
individual contributions. Your support provides the backbone of our
organization and is invaluable to our efforts.

## Learn More

                
                                      * ## Board Members
                
                      * ## Annual Reports & Financial Statements
                
                      * ![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/87a89c25-gp0str17m_medium_res_with_credit_line-150x150-c-default.jpg)
                

## Greenpeace USA Indigenous Peoples Policy

                
                                      * ![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/00cb4cb8-gp0strqhs_medium_res_with_credit_line-150x150-c-default.jpg)
                

## Ships, Inflatables & Vehicles

                
                                      * ![Vision for Black Lives Platform](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/demandsiconsshareable-150x150-c-default.png)
                

## Greenpeace USA Endorses the Vision for Black Lives Platform

## Take Action

                
                                      * ### Demand big corporations do their part to end plastic pollution!
                

take action

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/GP0STR221_Medium_res-340x330-c-default.jpg)

                
                                      * ### Protect Our Oceans, Not Oil Profits
                

Take Action

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/11/GP0STQT80_Medium_res-340x330-c-default.jpg)

## We Need Your Voice. Join Us!

## Want to learn more about tax-deductible giving, donating stock and estate

planning?

Visit Greenpeace Fund, a nonprofit, 501(c)(3) charitable entity created to
increase public awareness and understanding of environmental issues through
research, the media and educational programs.

Greenpeace

702 H Street, NW, STE 300, Washington, D.C. 20001 | 1-800-722-6995

Take action Donate

                
                                      * What Weâ€™re Doing
                        * Saving the Arctic
                        * Protecting Forests
                        * Fighting Global Warming
                        * Protecting Our Oceans
                        * Living Toxic-Free
                        * Promoting Sustainable Food
                        * Defending Democracy
                      * How It Works
                        * Investigate
                        * Connect
                        * Act
                      * Get Involved
                        * Make a Donation
                        * Take Action
                        * Volunteer
                        * Frontline
                      * About
                        * Board Members
                        * Leadership
                        * Issue Experts
                        * Careers
                        * Internship Opportunities
                      * News & Media
                        * Photos & Videos
                        * News Releases
                        * Media Contacts
                        * Publications
                        * Blog
                
                      * Stories & Victories 
                      * Research
                      * Contact
                      * facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Copyright
                      * Privacy Policy
                

Other Greenpeace USA Sites & Blogs Tuna Secrets Bering Sea Canyons Polluter
Watch

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/GP_CL_HP-

Assets_0519_Lightbox_720x375-720x375-c-default.jpg)

It's here! The Greenpeace #Climate2020 Candidate Scorecard

view scorecard

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

