  
                  
                                      *  
                      * Look up a Term Close Panel
                      *  
                      * CLAM Bake Close Clams
                      *
                

# Climate Science Glossary

## Term Lookup

Enter a term in the search box to find its definition.

## Settings

Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of
terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off).

# Term Lookup

Term:

Define

# Settings

Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life: 5 seconds 10
seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds 1 minute Until closed

* * *

_All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. 941-954.
Cambridge University Press._

![](images/_core/head/button_sks_200.jpg)
![](images/_core/head/button_sks2_200.jpg)

![](images/_core/head/wflag_english.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_chinese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_czech.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_croatian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_danish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_dutch.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_finnish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_french.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_german.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_israel.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_hungarian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_icelandic.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_indonesian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_italian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_japanese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_korean.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_norwegian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_polish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_portugese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_russian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovak.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovene.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_spanish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_swedish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_thai.gif)

* * *

Home ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) Arguments
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Software ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Resources
Comments ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)The Consensus Project
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Translations ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)About
Donate  
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![Twitter](images/_core/head/icon_twitter.gif)
![Facebook](images/_core/head/icon_facebook.gif)
![YouTube](images/_core/head/icon_youtube.gif)
![Pinterest](images/_core/head/icon_pinterest.gif)

![RSS Posts](images/_core/head/icon_rss_posts.gif) ![RSS

Comments](images/_core/head/icon_rss_comments.gif) ![Email

Subscribe](images/_core/head/icon_email2.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_header.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/left_1.gif) |
Climate's changed before  
---|---  
![](images/_core/head/left_2.gif) | It's the sun  
![](images/_core/head/left_3.gif) | It's not bad  
![](images/_core/head/left_4.gif) | There is no consensus  
![](images/_core/head/left_5.gif) | It's cooling  
![](images/_core/head/left_6.gif) | Models are unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_7.gif) | Temp record is unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_8.gif) | Animals and plants can adapt  
![](images/_core/head/left_9.gif) | It hasn't warmed since 1998  
![](images/_core/head/left_10.gif) | Antarctica is gaining ice  
![](images/_core/head/left_11.gif) | View All Arguments...  
![](images/_core/head/left_therm_bottom.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

![](images/_core/left_margin/IPCC_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/rcp_icon.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/theConsensusProject_88.png)
![](images/_core/left_margin/trend_button_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/pp88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/Predictions_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_oanotok_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/climate_myths88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_history.gif)
![](images/_core/left_margin/button_misinformers_88.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
Username| |  
---|---|---  
Password| |  
Keep me logged in  
| | New? Register here  
Forgot your password?  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

## Latest Posts

                
                                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Climate Change vs Cosmological Catastrophe
                      * Effects of Global Warming
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #22
                      * Humans and volcanoes caused nearly all of global heating in past 140 years
                      * Four scientists make creativity a key to communicating their research
                      * Beleaguered journalism interests seek to aid ailing planet
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #21
                      * New research, May 13-19, 2019
                      * Introducing a new citizens initiative for carbon pricing in Europe
                      * Deep sea carbon reservoirs once superheated the Earth – could it happen again?
                      * Climate Adam reacts to Bill Nye: "The planet's on f@*&ing; fire!"
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #20
                      * New research, May 6-12, 2019
                      * IPCC Updates Methodology for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                      * Inspiring, not depressing, film fest messages
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #19
                      * New research, April 29 - May 5, 2019
                      * Fox News made the US a hotbed of climate denial. Kids are the cure.
                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Nature’s Dangerous Decline ‘Unprecedented’; Species Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’
                      * Former climate 'denier' regrets 'how wrongheaded but certain I was'
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #18
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #18
                      * New research, April 22-28, 2019
                      * What's Earth's ideal temperature?
                      * Climate change could cost the U.S. economy hundreds of billions a year by 2090
                      * Rebellious Times
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #17
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #17
                

Archives

Climate Hustle

![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/flags/flag_czech.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_german.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_portugese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_russian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_italian.gif)

# Has the greenhouse effect been falsified?

Link to this page

## What the science says...

| Select a level...| ![](images/_core/other/level1.gif) **Basic** | |
![](images/_core/other/level2.gif) Intermediate | |  
---|---|---|---|---|--- 

The greenhouse effect is standard physics and confirmed by observations.

## Climate Myth...

Greenhouse effect has been falsified

"[T]he influence of so-called greenhouse gases on near-surface temperature -
is not yet absolutely proven. In other words, there is as yet no
incontrovertible proof either of the greenhouse effect, or its connection with
alleged global warming.

This is no surprise, because in fact there is no such thing as the greenhouse
effect: it is an impossibility. The statement that so-called greenhouse gases,
especially CO2, contribute to near-surface atmospheric warming is in glaring
contradiction to well-known physical laws relating to gas and vapour, as well
as to general caloric theory.' (Heinz Thieme)

Some climate change skeptics dispute the so-called 'greenhouse effect', which
keeps the surface temperature of the Earth approximately 33 degrees C warmer
than it would be if there were no greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. In other
words, without the greenhouse effect, the Earth would be largely
uninhabitable.

How do we know for sure this effect is real? The principle is demonstrated
through basic physics, because a bare rock orbiting the sun at the distance of
the Earth should be far colder than the Earth actually is. The explanation for
this observation was based on the work of John Tyndall, who discovered in 1859
that several gases, including carbon dioxide and water vapour, could trap
heat. This was the first evidence for what we know now as greenhouse gases.
Then, towards the end of the same century, a Swedish scientist named Svante
Arrhenius proved the relationship between greenhouse gas concentrations and
surface temperatures.

### **Empirical Evidence for the Greenhouse Effect**

We only have to look to our moon for evidence of what the Earth might be like
without an atmosphere that sustained the greenhouse effect. While the moon's
surface reaches 130 degrees C in direct sunlight at the equator (266 degrees
F), when the sun 'goes down' on the moon, the temperature drops almost
immediately, and plunges in several hours down to minus 110 degrees C (-166F).

Since the moon is virtually the same distance from the sun as we are, it is
reasonable to ask why at night the Earth doesn't get as cold as the moon. The
answer is that, unlike the Earth, the moon has no water vapour or other
greenhouse gases, because of course it has no atmosphere at all. Without our
protective atmosphere and the greenhouse effect, the Earth would be as barren
as our lifeless moon; without the heat trapped overnight in the atmosphere
(and in the ground and oceans) our nights would be so cold that few plants or
animals could survive even a single one.

The most conclusive evidence for the greenhouse effect - and the role CO2
plays - can be seen in data from the surface and from satellites. By comparing
the Sun's heat reaching the Earth with the heat leaving it, we can see that
less long-wave radiation (heat) is leaving than arriving (and since the 1970s,
that less and less radiation is leaving the Earth, as CO2 and equivalents
build up). Since all radiation is measured by its wavelength, we can also see
that the frequencies being trapped in the atmosphere are the same frequencies
absorbed by greenhouse gases.

**Disputing that the greenhouse effect is real is to attempt to discredit
centuries of science, laws of physics and direct observation. Without the
greenhouse effect, we would not even be here to argue about it.**

Basic rebuttal written by GPWayne

* * *

**Update July 2015** :

Here is a related lecture-video from Denial101x - Making Sense of Climate
Science Denial

Last updated on 7 July 2015 by MichaelK. View Archives

Printable Version | Offline PDF Version | Link to this page

## Comments

1 2 3 4 Next

Comments 1 to 50 out of 163:

                
                                      1. **Phil** at 06:43 AM on 24 August, 2010
                

In this thread user miekol is asked by the moderator to post a question about
this article in this thread. I thought I'd "jump the gun" and post a rebuttal
now!

The article states that O 2 and N2 are, despite claims by "warmists", Infra-
red **active** and links to some IR plots. These plots are, in fact all due to
molecules made up of different isotopes. Thus there are plots for 16O-17O,
16O-18O and 17O-18O and one for 14N-15N, but none for the symmetric
counterparts. Note that for some of the plots the isotope details have been
removed. Because these isotopic variants are very nearly symmetric, the
absorption is weak (see the very small numbers on the vertical axis). So these
isotopic variants make up a tiny percentage of the gases, and the small
percentage that do absorb only very weakly.

Moreover the O2 and N2 absorptions don't match the frequencies that earth
emits at, so there is nothing in "earth-light" for these gases to absorb.

Later in the page they state that because O2 and N2 melt at a lower
temperature, they are "most sensitive to heat absorption". This is completely
incorrect. The melting points of substances relate to the strength of the
forces _between_ molecules, which ultimately comes down to the distribution of
positive and negatives charges within the molecule. H 2O has a negative "end"
(the Oxygen) and a positive "end" (the Hydrogen) and this makes a powerful
attachment between the molecules. Symmetric molecules like O2 have much weaker
attractions and so take less energy to melt and vapourise

                
                                      2. **Will** at 19:37 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Which shows that O2 and N2, 99% of the atmosphere, are more **sensitive** to
heat absorption than CO2, 0.0385% of the atmosphere.

Also weight for weight O2 and N2 have a higher heat capacity than CO2 which
means that if the atmosphere consisted of 50% O2 and N2 and 50% CO2, then the
CO2 half of the atmosphere would still be less important with regards
atmospheric warming.

But the atmosphere is not 50% N2/O2 and 50% CO2, it is 99% N2/O2 and 0.0385%
CO2.

Ultimately the fallacious assertions in support of the bogus "greenhouse
effect" depend entirely on the ridiculous notion that the atmosphere is heated
bottom-up by OLR (outgoing Long-wave radiation). This in-turn requires that
the atmosphere is completely transparent to incoming full spectrum electro-
magnetic radiation, a large percentage of which is IR. Both of which are
false.

In the following links there is finally incontrovertible proof that the
atmosphere is radiatively heated from the top-down by incoming electromagnetic
radiation from the Sun. This fact destroys the "Greenhouse Effect" hypothesis
which stipulates, bottom-up atmospheric heating via outgoing infra-red.

**"The Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge, giant 1200º bulge of rapidly heated and
expanding gases circling the Globe 24/7."**

**"Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge, incontrovertible evidence of massive top down
radiative heating. "**

                
                                      3. **Rob Painting** at 20:16 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Will, if there's no Greenhouse Effect, why doesn't the Earth freeze over at
night?.

                
                                      4. **Rob Painting** at 20:50 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Another question Will - if there's no Greenhouse Effect, why was it warmer in
Earth's distant past at a time of reduced solar luminosity?.

                
                                      5. **Ned** at 21:26 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Will writes: _Ultimately the fallacious assertions in support of the bogus
"greenhouse effect" depend entirely on the ridiculous notion that the
atmosphere is heated bottom-up by OLR (outgoing Long-wave radiation). This in-
turn requires that the atmosphere is completely transparent to incoming full
spectrum electro-magnetic radiation, a large percentage of which is IR._

Either you're forgetting the inverse-square law, or you're confused about the
distinction between "near infrared" and "thermal infrared" wavelengths.

A large percentage of the total downwelling solar irradiance is in the near-
infrared range, but the atmosphere is mostly transparent in this part of the
spectrum. Only a very small fraction of solar irradiance is in the thermal
infrared region.

If we look just at thermal infrared radiation, how much of the radiant flux in
the atmosphere is from the sun and how much is from the earth? Obviously, the
sun is much hotter ... but it's also **much** further away. Thus, virtually
all the IR radiation in the atmosphere is coming from the earth, not the sun:

![](http://scienceofdoom.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/planck-300-to-5780-toa-

log.png)  
From **Science of Doom**

The yellow curve at the left is the blackbody radiation curve for the sun at a
temperature of 5780K and a distance of 150 million km. The variously colored
curves on the right are blackbody radiation curves for the earth at various
normal earth temperatures.

Note, first, that the Y axis is log-scaled. Note, second, that in the thermal
part of the spectrum (greater than 3 micrometers) **the area under the "earth"
curves is much, much larger than the area under the "sun" curve**.

Bottom line, the sun heats the earth via visible and near-infrared radiation.
The earth emits long-wave (thermal infrared) radiation. Increasing the
concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere traps more of that long-
wave radiation and raises the temperature of the earth system.

                
                                      6. **Ned** at 22:07 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Will, the "heat capacity" issue is irrelevant, too. CO2, methane, CFCs, etc.
absorb longwave IR radiation, but they then transfer that heat to the rest of
the atmosphere via collisions with other atmospheric molecules (roughly a
billion collisions per second per molecule).

                
                                      7. **Berényi Péter** at 23:09 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

# 5 **Ned at 21:26 PM on 25 August, 2010**

_A large percentage of the total downwelling solar irradiance is in the near-
infrared range, but the atmosphere is mostly transparent in this part of the
spectrum_

That's how transparent it is.

![](http://ber.parawag.net/images/Atmospheric_Absorption_Bands.jpg)

                
                                      8. **Will** at 23:18 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Sorry but these statements are nothing but semantics.

The Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge is incontrovertible proof of massive violent
top-down atmospheric heating. Please follow the link and read the paper.

A greenhouse with a full canopy of leaves completely shielding the ground from
direct Sunlight still functions normally. More proof that air is heated by
incoming full spectrum electro-magnetic radiation and **NOT** by OLR.

Therefore the "greenhouse effect" hypothesis is false.

Ned,

Air is rated as one of _the_ top insulators of all substances. That means that
air is a very poor conductor of energy compared to most substance. In fact it
is one of the poorest conductors of energy there is. What are you trying to
describe in your last statement?

Conduction or Radiation?

                
                                      9. **Will** at 23:22 PM on 25 August, 2010
                

Berényi Péter

This diagram of absorption bands is interesting for what it doesn't show.

79% of the atmosphere is completely missing.

                
                                      10. **Ned** at 00:02 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

These comments are a nice example of the problems I have raised many times on
this site, most recently here.

That is, we often get comments on this site from the more serious "skeptics"
accusing us of wasting time on straw-man arguments and of rebutting claims
that no one really believes.

So ... here we have another commenter claiming that the atmosphere is directly
heated by solar irradiance "top-down" and that the greenhouse effect does not
exist.

I could, of course, do what so many of us supporters of mainstream science
have done over and over again, and patiently work on responding to these
claims, explaining to Will why he misunderstands the physics of radiation in
the atmosphere.

It would be nice, though, if some of those supposedly serious, reasonable
skeptics would join in and help answer Will's claims.

If that were to happen, it might help me believe that there really are
"skeptics" who are serious about science.

So far, the only resident "skeptic" commenter to speak up has been Berényi
Péter ... who quibbles over my use of the word "transparent" but is apparently
unable or unwilling (or perhaps too busy) to contribute anything more directly
relevant to addressing Will's questions.

Is there anyone on the "skeptic" side here who understands what's wrong with
Will's claims and is actually willing to say so? Or, once again, will the job
of explaining Will's errors be left up to the rest of us?

Of course, this isn't the most recent or active thread, so I suppose it's
possible that many people might not notice these comments immediately.

                
                                      11. **adelady** at 00:02 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, if air is such a poor conductor of energy, how can the atmosphere
maintain its cool temperature in the face of (warming) radiation from any
direction, sun or earth.

Given that it is a poor conductor, the only way for the atmosphere to cool
must be by, you guessed it, radiation at the top of the atmosphere. If it's
radiating out at the top of the atmosphere, surely the molecules comprising
the atmosphere would also be radiating all the way through the atmosphere.
Unless there are GPS guided molecules that can work out where they are to
start radiating in only one place?

                
                                      12. **Will** at 00:33 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

adelady:

You are correct, it is of course radiation. Which is why I asked Ned to
clarify if he was describing conduction or radiation. Assuming he even knows
of course.

Ned has opted to go on the attack instead of answering the question.

I repeat to Ned, please follow the links and read my article. Then explain how
an area with a circumference of 25% of the entire surface of the atmosphere
can bulge up to an altitude of more than 600 km altitude **under the solar
point** at around 2 pm in the sky, yet at 4 am on the dark side of the Earth
this bulge completely collapses bellow the Mesosphere at under 90 km, if the
atmosphere is so transparent to incoming full spectrum electro-magnetic
energy.

                
                                      13. **Ned** at 01:24 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Of course the thermosphere and to a lesser extent the mesosphere are heated by
the sun, mostly via UV absorption. But they're not that far from vacuum --
less than 1% of the mass of the atmosphere.

And this is completely irrelevant to the greenhouse effect. There's simply no
connection whatsoever.

The situation in the troposphere -- the layer of the atmosphere closest to the
surface, including most of the mass of the atmosphere -- is entirely
different. Longwave radiation from the surface is absorbed by molecules of CO2
and other greenhouse gases, which in turn heat the more numerous N2 and O2
molecules kinetically, via intermolecular collisions. Thus, the entire mass of
a given "parcel" of the atmosphere shares a single temperature -- you don't
have different temperatures for CO2, O2, N2, etc. CO2 and the other greenhouse
gases then radiate in all directions. Thus, the presence of GHG molecules
warms the troposphere, and increasing the concentration of those molecules
increases the efficiency of this warming.

Keep in mind that the vast majority of solar irradiance is at relatively short
wavelengths (visible and near-infrared) where atmospheric transmittance is
**relatively** high. The solar flux at thermal IR wavelengths (over 3
micrometers) is minuscule in comparison to the terrestrial outgoing thermal IR
flux.

If you would like a good overview of the physics of the greenhouse effect, I
would **highly** recommend the series of posts on "CO2: An Insignificant Trace
Gas?" over at **Science of Doom**.

Hope this helps.

                
                                      14. **KR** at 01:32 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will - There's definitely heating from the sun _involved_ in atmospheric
expansion. Looking at the energy balances from Trenberth 2009 roughly 78 W/m^2
of sunlight are directly absorbed by the atmosphere. Another 161 get absorbed
by the ground/water.

However, what's emitted by the top of the atmosphere (as LW radiation) is ~169
W/m^2 - partly re-emission of atmospheric energy, mostly emission from
ground/water thermal energy that has percolated up through multiple
absorption/emission events.

And the temperature profile of the atmosphere shows warming of the troposphere
and cooling of the stratosphere - if this was all top-down warming you would
see a hot stratosphere and colder troposphere, relatively speaking. The
observed temp profile is one of the fingerprints of the greenhouse gas effect.

So yes, some top-down heating does occur. But it's mostly bottom-up, as most
of the solar irradiation goes through the atmosphere to the ground, only
returning as IR.

I would say that the diurnal bulging of the atmosphere is due to the
atmosphere warming - because days are warmer than nights. But the temp profile
clearly shows that it's warming from the bottom (IR), not the top (solar).

                
                                      15. **KR** at 01:40 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will - on your note that 79% of the atmosphere is completely missing: I assume
you mean N2? Nitrogen doesn't absorb/emit in the IR, and in fact most of it's
absorption is in the UV. Hence it's usually not shown on most charts of
greenhouse gases - it's irrelevant to the IR spectra.

                
                                      16. **Will** at 03:30 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Ned:

The Thermosphere is not a sphere it is a bulge. The Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge
and the Thermosphere are one and the same.

The Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge (Thermosphere) is caused entirely by incoming
EMR.

I never said there was a connection between the "greenhouse effect" and the
Thermosphere. I said there is no "greenhouse effect". I have proven this with
experimental verification on my website at the following link:

**"The Diurnal Atmospheric Bulge, giant 1200º bulge of rapidly heated and
expanding gases circling the Globe 24/7."**

KR:

The atmosphere (air) is a excellent insulator and therefore a poor conductor.
It exhibits various temperature gradient inversions. Partly because it is such
a good insulator and partly because it is heated from the top-down by incoming
EMR. All mysteries explained.

Which way up is the temperature gradient in a greenhouse?

Like I said before, a greenhouse still functions perfectly well with a full
canopy of leaves shielding the ground completely from direct sunlight. 40-50%
of the incoming sunlight hitting the leaves is locked in by photosynthesis and
the rest is reflected as short-wave.

No direct sunlight reaches the ground yet the greenhouse still warms that same
as an empty one would.

Where is the "greenhouse effect" bottom-up warming in this scenario?

When your theory generates more questions than it answers, this is a clue that
you are traveling away from the truth.

When your theory is still awaiting experimental verification after 200 years .
. . . . ?

                
                                      17. **Ned** at 03:50 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, the troposphere is mostly heated from below, not from above, as KR notes
above.

The use of a glass greenhouse to illustrate the greenhouse effect is only
appropriate at a coarse "end result" level, not as an actual model of how the
CO2-induced GHE actually works. But in any case, the sunlight entering a
(glass) greenhouse warms all dark surfaces within the space (floor, plant
leaves, whatever). It doesn't significantly provide any direct warming of the
air molecules inside the greenhouse. The air is warmed by contact with the
various surfaces that _are_ absorbing sunlight.

Photosynthetic efficiency for most plants is less than 2%, and less than 10%
in virtually all cases. Most of the sunlight absorbed by plant leaves just
raises their temperature (directly) and that of the air around them
(indirectly).

Finally, there's experimental verification of the CO2 greenhouse effect -- see
here or here (and continue on to parts two and three as well).

                
                                      18. **Ned** at 03:55 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

And, of course, Figure 1 in the very post at the top of this thread is direct
evidence of the CO2 greenhouse effect.

                
                                      19. **Tom Dayton** at 03:59 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, please look up the definition of thermosphere. It is a layer of the
atmosphere.

The atmosphere is a poor conductor only relative to other substances (e.g.,
solid metal). That is irrelevant to this topic. What is relevant is the
atmosphere's absolute conductivity.

In a greenhouse or anywhere else, sunlight hitting leaves heats the leaves. Go
find a plant that is exposed to sun. Put your hand on a leaf that is exposed
to sun and compare its temperature to that of a leaf that is in the shade. You
are correct that some of the sunlight hitting the leaf is consumed by
photosynthesis, and that some is reflected, but some is absorbed as heat.

                
                                      20. **Berényi Péter** at 04:08 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

# 15 **KR at 01:40 AM on 26 August, 2010**

_Nitrogen doesn't absorb/emit in the IR, and in fact most of it's absorption
is in the UV_

True. It has no _"greenhouse effect"_ whatsoever. Still, if you removed half
the nitrogen from the atmosphere, the Earth would freeze over completely down
to the very bottom of oceans. And if you raised its quantity twofold, global
temperatures would go up by 40°C, cooking all of us for good.

That much about the alleged 33°C warming from GHGs.

                
                                      21. **KR** at 04:12 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will - An important point in the atmospheric greenhouse effect (which as Ned
notes is **not** the same thing as a glass greenhouse in operation) is that
GHG's aren't opaque to IR.

They absorb thermal IR from the ground as per Berényi's post, and emit it
again spherically distributed. This causes half of what they absorb to go back
to the ground, which shows up clearly in the notches of the first chart of
Figure 1.

                
                                      22. **KR** at 04:18 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Berényi - "...if you removed half the nitrogen from the atmosphere, the Earth
would freeze over completely...".

Really? Are you talking about the _lapse rate_? If's just the lapse rate you
could swap nitrogen for argon or krypton (distinctly NOT greenhouse gases)
with no effect.

I would love to see your reasoning (and math) for this non-GHG effect, as I
don't see how that would occur.

                
                                      23. **Will** at 05:08 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Ned

I think I said EXPERIMENTAL verification! Please don't "Science of Doom" me.

As for Photosynthetic efficiency which is just one part of the effect I'm
referring to,  
2% is a stab in the dark. While it is claimed that crops such as wheat may
achieve low efficiency of between 1-4%, sugar cain can achieve 7%, but
photosynthesis is just one process plants use energy for. Oxygen production is
another.

The point is that very little of the energy is converted to IR compared to say
concrete slabs or Earth.

At my site you find direct reproducible experimental evidence that pure CO2
causes less warming than ordinary air.

Tom Dayton

Wikipedia, please ? !

Go to the two links I have given above. The DIurnal Bulge has been
deliberately hidden in plain view by renaming it as the Thermosphere.

On the dark side of the Earth there is no Thermosphere. Therefore the
Thermosphere is not a layer, it is a giant bulge on the sunny side.

                
                                      24. **Will** at 05:11 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

KR

Glass is not opaque to IR either.

See here:

**"The Diurnal Bulge and the Fallacies of the Greenhouse Effect."**

**Response:** To save us the trouble of editing your links, be sure not to
include an extra space and line-break inside the quotation marks with the link
URL. For example, use

![](http://image_url/)

rather than

![](http://image_url/<br />)

                
                                      25. **Berényi Péter** at 05:12 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

# 22 **KR at 04:18 AM on 26 August, 2010**

_If's just the lapse rate you could swap nitrogen for argon or krypton
(distinctly NOT greenhouse gases) with no effect_

No, you could not. These are monatomic gases (unlike nitrogen), therefore
their adiabatic index is not the same (5/3 vs. 7/5). Dry adiabatic lapse rate
would be higher.

                
                                      26. **Tom Dayton** at 05:13 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

You're right, Will, I should not have pointed you to Wikipedia for the
definition of thermosphere. So let's use NASA. Or you could just search the
internet for "thermosphere" and look at hundreds of definitions of it as a
layer of the atmosphere.

                
                                      27. **Ned** at 05:16 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, glass is transparent to **near-infrared** wavelengths. It's opaque to
**thermal infrared** wavelengths. See figure 2-3 here for an example.

Lots of people get confused about this distinction, but if you're going to
write about the earth's radiation budget you absolutely have to understand it.

                
                                      28. **Ned** at 05:25 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will writes: _As for Photosynthetic efficiency which is just one part of the
effect I'm referring to,  
2% is a stab in the dark. While it is claimed that crops such as wheat may
achieve low efficiency of between 1-4%, sugar cain can achieve 7%, but
photosynthesis is just one process plants use energy for. Oxygen production is
another. _

Photosynthesis **is** how plants produce oxygen. It's the same process!

A moment ago you were claiming that "40-50% of the incoming sunlight hitting
the leaves is locked in by photosynthesis and the rest is reflected as short-
wave".

Healthy green plants absorb 90% or more of visible wavelengths of light, quite
a bit less in the near-infrared. Only a small part of that, less than 10%, is
converted by photosynthesis. The remainder warms the plant, and indirectly
warms its environment.

This is all irrelevant, though, since **the analogy to a glass greenhouse is
not intended as (nor appropriate as) a description of the physical mechanism
by which CO2 warms the earth system**.

**Response:** Indeed. Will, in the post at the top of this page, see the
section titled "The Term 'Greenhouse.'"

                
                                      29. **KR** at 05:37 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Berényi - So, you _are_ just talking about the lapse rate here? Your comments
seemed to involve nitrogen as a _greenhouse gas_ , which I found quite
confusing.

Certainly, if you remove **half the atmosphere** , the dynamics and
equilibrium of the Earth would be different - much as it would be if you
removed **all** of it. I was under the _impression_ , however, that we were
discussing _greenhouse gasses and the greenhouse effect_ , with only a few %
of the atmosphere in question. Not wholesale planetary engineering or
hypothetical worlds...

                
                                      30. **KR** at 05:50 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Just an overall note on topics, Berényi - your half/double N2 comment really
represents a red herring with respect to a conversation on the greenhouse
effect. It's not helpful, and doesn't advance the discussion in any way.

                
                                      31. **Ned** at 06:06 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will writes: _Please don't "Science of Doom" me._

I'm not sure what you mean by that. **Science of Doom** offers admirably
lucid, accurate, and detailed explanations of the physical basis for the
greenhouse effect. They also manage to do so in a polite and respectful
environment.

It's hard to imagine a more appropriate resource for this particular thread.

                
                                      32. **Phil** at 06:20 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will,

The article on your web site that you've linked to includes serious factual
errors. Diffusion of light by the atmosphere does not cause "the molecules
also absorb some of that energy from the photon", and does not cause the
molecules to vibrate.  
This is because, as has been explained to you above incoming solar radiation
does not match the vibrational frequencies of the IR active vibrations - in
visible light is too high a frequency for any molecular vibrations. Electron
transitions do occur due to UV light, but the atmosphere is largely
transparent to visible light.

O 2 and N2 are completely inactive to IR radiation, except for the tiny amount
of isotopic variation which, as your own graphs show, are 1x10-30 less
powerful than CO2 and are the wrong frequency for both incoming solar and
outgoing earthlight.

You should also be aware that the energy in photons is related to their
frequency, not as you seem to assume, their intensity. Or do you really not
believe Albert ?

You are wrong to say all substances absorb IR radiation: use the search engine
of your choice to look for "Dipole Moment" and "Vibration" and take your pick

                
                                      33. **Rob Painting** at 06:23 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Hey Will, still no answer to post #3 & 4. At least the hypotheses put forward
by climate scientists match real world observations and measurements. Which is
kind of the whole point isn't it?.

                
                                      34. **Will** at 06:50 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Ned

_"Will, glass is transparent to near-infrared wavelengths. It's opaque to
thermal infrared wavelengths. See figure 2-3 here for an example."_

Lets just look at this statement for a minute.

Thermal radiation is heat. Vibrating matter. Gas molecules are vibrating
matter. They cannot pass through solid glass. You are confusing matter with
energy. It is the energy which passes through the glass not the vibrating
molecules which cause heat.

In the vacuum of space full spectrum EMR produces no thermal radiation, heat.
It is you who is confused or rather attempting to confuse.

As for your comment about healthy green plants absorbing 90% of visible
wavelengths, this is yet another stab in the dark generalisation. Some leaves
are highly glossy/reflective and others are completely mat. It depends on the
plant.

Above all plants do not warm environments, they cool them, as per the urban
heat island effect.

Even in direct sunlight the top canopy of leaves on any plants will be much
cooler than bare earth, and that is my point.

So the point is, according to the bottom-up warming "greenhouse effect"
hypothesis, an empty greenhouse should be considerably warmer than a full one,
as attested to by the urban heat island effect, but this is not the case.

With regards to false analogies, try implementing cap and trade without using
the words **_"greenhouse gas emissions"_**.

                
                                      35. **Tom Dayton** at 06:55 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, your experiment that you describe on your web site is not novel.
Students have been doing similar experiments for years. Maybe there is a flaw
in your experimental design, or the effect you created was too small to be
detectable by your temperature measuring apparatus.

I've got relevant links on this comment.

                
                                      36. **Will** at 06:59 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Phil

_"This is because, as has been explained to you above incoming solar radiation
does not match the vibrational frequencies of the IR active vibrations - **in
visible light is too high** a frequency for any molecular vibrations. Electron
transitions do occur due to **UV light** , but the atmosphere is largely
transparent to visible light._

You have contradicted yourself here.

                
                                      37. **Tom Dayton** at 07:00 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will, you are incorrect. Thermal radiation is _not_ vibrating matter, because
"radiation" is not vibrating matter, it is instead electromagnetic energy. Use
the internet to search for definitions of "thermal radiation." An example is a
definition by the University of California San Diego Center for Astrophysics
and Space Sciences.

                
                                      38. **Will** at 07:03 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Tom

Why don't you try it for yourself. The point is not to take my word for it.
Its a simple test and yes children have done it and achieved the same results
as I do.

                
                                      39. **muoncounter** at 07:07 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

# 34: "Above all plants do not warm environments, they cool them"

And here in plain English is why:

_Plants give off water through tiny pores in their leaves, a process called
evapotranspiration that cools the plant, just as perspiration cools our
bodies. On a hot day, a tree can release tens of gallons of water into the
air, acting as a natural air conditioner for its surroundings._

And that's why plants cool their surrroundings, which has nothing to do with
UHI.

But here is why this may be a new problem:

_"There is no longer any doubt that carbon dioxide decreases evaporative
cooling by plants and that this decreased cooling adds to global warming,"
says Cao. "This effect would cause significant warming even if carbon dioxide
were not a greenhouse gas."_

Its a double-whammy. CO2 traps heat requiring plants to do more evaporative
cooling, but CO2 acts to decrease a plant's ability to cool itself.

                
                                      40. **KR** at 07:15 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will - in your experiment you lack the black cardboard representing the Earth.
Therefore you don't have the visible light changing to IR and attempting to
leave back through the air or CO2, hence your experiment isn't set up
correctly, and hence your results aren't going to show anything.

I'm also not certain you're going to have sufficient CO2 in your quite small
sample from soda water fizz; I would try it with an empty soda bottle full of
air, and another where you fill it with CO2, either from a tank or using a
piece of dry ice (vented until the ice sublimates, to keep pressure the same).
Otherwise the effect may be too small to show up on simple (and rather
inaccurate) thermometers like the liquid crystal ones you show.

                
                                      41. **Will** at 07:19 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Tom

I should have said _"caused by"_ vibrating matter are you happy now?

The point I am making is that Ned is wrong about glass being opaque to thermal
radiation because if it were, why would we need double glazing with reflective
coatings?

                
                                      42. **Phil** at 07:22 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will #36

Read it again; the first sentence refers to molecular vibrations, and visible
radiation, the second to electronic absorbtion and UV (i.e non-visble)
radiation. No contradiction

                
                                      43. **Will** at 07:36 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

KR

You are wrong, I have conducted these experiments on multiple surfaces.

The CO2 bottle contains almost pure CO2. Enough to extinguish a burning match,
see here:  
**spinonthat.com/CO2.html**

At the end of the last video at the bottom of the page I demonstrate how much
CO2 with a burning match.

Still I am impressed at how you can convince yourself of almost anything based
on pure guess work. Well done to you!

                
                                      44. **Phil** at 07:41 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Just to expand a bit more on my previous post.

Molecules absorb EM radiation (sometimes loosely called "light" by lazy people
like me - gulp!) by three mechanisms  
1. Changes to Rotational Quantum states - in the microwave and low infra-red EM region. Molecules need a permanent dipole moment to absorb radiation. (N 2 for example cannot, neither can CO2)  
2. Changes to Vibration (of the nuclei against each other) - in the infra-red region. The vibration needs to _change_ the dipole moment to absorb radiation (The one vibration in N 2 cannot, 3 of the 4 vibrations in CO2 can)  
3. Changes to Electron orbits - in visible and UV EM region. Again a change in dipole moment is required for absorption. This will depend on the lower and upper orbit, some N2 transitions will be allowed, and these occur in the UV region 45. **Berényi Péter** at 08:43 AM on 26 August, 2010

# 30 **KR at 05:50 AM on 26 August, 2010**

_yourhalf/double N2 comment really represents a red herring with respect to a
conversation on the greenhouse effect._

Not really. For example World Book at NASA - Venus has the following
"explanation":

_"Most astronomers believe that Venus's high surface temperature can be
explained by what is known as the greenhouse effect"_.

Surface temperature on Venus is about 458°C and if an astronomer _believes_ it
is so high because of the _greenhouse effect_ , he is not an astronomer at
all, but a crackpot. It is a shame National Aeronautics and Space
Administration of the US disseminates such nonsense.

At the 1 atm level temperature of Venus is only 71°C, that is, 387°C cooler
than at the surface. If you'd put the Earth at the same orbit, its average
surface temperature would go as high as 66°C. The difference is only 5°C, that
could be called the _additional_ greenhouse effect due to an atmosphere almost
entirely made of CO 2 and covered by clouds of sulfuric acid droplets above
haze of the same stuff. You get it for doubling the amount of CO2 almost 11
times relative to Earth.

The rest is pressure (92 bar at the surface), this is what makes Venus so hot,
not the "greenhouse effect".

                
                                      46. **Berényi Péter** at 09:23 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

# 34 **Will at 06:50 AM on 26 August, 2010**

_Even in direct sunlight the top canopy of leaves on any plants will be much
cooler than bare earth_

That's true. Not because they reflect much light, but because of evaporation
of water through pores on the back of leaves called stomata.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Tomato_leaf_stomate_1-color.jpg/585px-

Tomato_leaf_stomate_1-color.jpg)

If this vapor laden air rose high enough, it would cool by adiabatic expansion
releasing the latent heat eventually by phase transition, producing rain and
(relatively) hot dry air which leaves the cloud and radiates this heat into
space. Cooling itself this way it sinks again, ready to take up some more
moisture.

GHGs are very important ingredients in this process, for due to Kirchhoff's
law of thermal radiation in local thermodynamic equilibrium (which holds up tu
50 km in the atmosphere) emissivity of stuff is the same as its absorptivity.
That is, if a gas does not absorb thermal radiation (like nitrogen) it can't
get rid of heat by radiation either.

                
                                      47. **dsleaton** at 10:50 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

I suggest a new way of trying to start a learning dialogue with Will. Assume
he is right in the findings of his backyard experiment. What, then, happens to
our scientific understanding and the engineering that has been developed from
that science? What do we have to unlearn about the universe due to Will's
discoveries?

Will, you seem very invested, psychologically, in your experiments. I wonder
if you are capable of accepting constructive criticism. If not, then you are
incapable of actual dialogue, and it would be worthless for anyone here to
continue to engage with you. A number of posters have challenged your
understanding of physics, and they have presented research that has been done
with much greater rigor and care than has yours, yet you reject their findings
out of hand. And then you expect them to accept your findings without
question.

                
                                      48. **scaddenp** at 11:29 AM on 26 August, 2010
                

Hmm. So we have expensive experimental setups for quantifying greenhouse
response of various gases to high degree of precision being invalidated by
backyard experiement with cheap thermometers. I dont think so. I think this is
a common experiment but the setup is difficult so you get "prove" or
"disprove" greenhouse gas theory from physical processes that dont actually
have anything to do with it. I prefer this setup for eliminating other
possible effects.

                
                                      49. **Rob Painting** at 12:39 PM on 26 August, 2010
                

Will @23 - "At my site you find direct reproducible experimental evidence that
pure CO2 causes less warming than ordinary air."

Interesting, this experiment indicates otherwise

                
                                      50. **Tom Dayton** at 13:04 PM on 26 August, 2010
                

In addition to that video linked by Dappledwater, there are many more
successful such experiments, Will. Look at the sample at the right side of the
YouTube page after you click on Dappledwater's link. Here's an example of a
child's experiment:

1 2 3 4 Next

## Post a Comment

Political, off-topic or ad hominem comments will be deleted. Comments
Policy...

You need to be logged in to post a comment. Login via the left margin or if
you're new, register here.

Link to this page ![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/eureka.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/protruth_pledge.gif)

![](https://www.skepticalscience.com//pics/crowdsourcing.png)

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Denial101x_ad.png)

:

:

![](images/_core/foot/tcpsite.png)  
The Consensus Project Website

THE ESCALATOR  
![](images/_core/foot/SkepticsvRealists_180.gif)  
(free to republish)

(C) Copyright 2019 John Cook | |  
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)  
Home | Links | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

