

# Snowball Earth

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Worldwide glaciation episodes during the Neoproterozoic Era

Proterozoic snowball periods

-1000 --

-

-950 --

-

-900 --

-

-850 --

-

-800 --

-

-750 --

-

-700 --

-

-650 --

-

-600 --

-

-550 --

Tonian

Cryogenian

Ediacaran

Sturtian[1]

Marinoan[1]

← Gaskiers

Kaigas?

(millions of years)

Baykonurian

Neoproterozoic era

Snowball Earth

Estimate of Proterozoic glacial periods.[2][1] Dating of pre-Gaskiers
glaciations is uncertain. As for the Kaigas, its very existence is doubted by
some. An earlier and longer possible snowball phase, the Huronian glaciation,
is not shown.

The **Snowball Earth** hypothesis proposes that during one or more of Earth's
icehouse climates, Earth's surface became entirely or nearly entirely frozen
at least once, sometime earlier than 650 Mya (million years ago). Proponents
of the hypothesis argue that it best explains sedimentary deposits generally
regarded as of glacial origin at tropical palaeolatitudes and other enigmatic
features in the geological record. Opponents of the hypothesis contest the
implications of the geological evidence for global glaciation and the
geophysical feasibility of an ice- or slush-covered ocean[3][4] and emphasize
the difficulty of escaping an all-frozen condition. A number of unanswered
questions remain, including whether the Earth was a full snowball, or a
"slushball" with a thin equatorial band of open (or seasonally open) water.

The snowball-Earth episodes are proposed to have occurred before the sudden
radiation of multicellular bioforms, known as the Cambrian explosion. The most
recent snowball episode may have triggered the evolution of multicellularity.
Another, much earlier and longer snowball episode, the Huronian glaciation,
which would have occurred 2400 to 2100 Mya, may have been triggered by the
first appearance of oxygen in the atmosphere, the "Great Oxygenation Event".

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 History
                        * 1.1 Evidence for ancient glaciation mounts
                        * 1.2 Global glaciation proposed
                      * 2 Evidence
                        * 2.1 Palaeomagnetism
                        * 2.2 Low-latitude glacial deposits
                        * 2.3 Open-water deposits
                        * 2.4 Carbon isotope ratios
                        * 2.5 Banded iron formations
                        * 2.6 Cap carbonate rocks
                        * 2.7 Changing acidity
                        * 2.8 Space dust
                        * 2.9 Cyclic climate fluctuations
                      * 3 Mechanisms
                        * 3.1 Continental distribution
                        * 3.2 During the frozen period
                        * 3.3 Breaking out of global glaciation
                        * 3.4 Slushball Earth hypothesis
                      * 4 Scientific dispute
                        * 4.1 "Zipper rift" hypothesis
                        * 4.2 High-obliquity hypothesis
                        * 4.3 Inertial interchange true polar wander
                      * 5 Survival of life through frozen periods
                      * 6 Implications
                        * 6.1 Effect on early evolution
                        * 6.2 Effects on ocean circulation
                      * 7 Occurrence and timing
                        * 7.1 Neoproterozoic
                        * 7.2 Palaeoproterozoic
                        * 7.3 Karoo Ice Age
                      * 8 See also
                      * 9 References
                      * 10 Further reading
                      * 11 External links
                

## History[edit]

Life timeline

This box:

                
                                      * view
                      * talk
                      * edit
                

-4500 --

-

-4000 --

-

-3500 --

-

-3000 --

-

-2500 --

-

-2000 --

-

-1500 --

-

-1000 --

-

-500 --

-

0 --

_ **water** _

**Single-celled  
life**

_ **photosynthesis** _

**Eukaryotes**

**Multicellular  
life**

Arthropods Molluscs

**Plants**

**Dinosaurs**

**Mammals**

**Flowers**

**Birds**

**Primates**

←

Earth (−4540)

←

Earliest water

←

Earliest life

←

Earliest oxygen

←

Atmospheric oxygen

←

Oxygen crisis

←

Sexual reproduction

←

Earliest plants

←

Ediacara biota

←

Cambrian explosion

←

Tetrapoda

←

Earliest apes

P  
h  
a  
n  
e  
r  
o  
z  
o  
i  
c

P  
r  
o  
t  
e  
r  
o  
z  
o  
i  
c

A  
r  
c  
h  
e  
a  
n

H  
a  
d  
e  
a  
n

Pongola

Huronian

Cryogenian

Andean

Karoo

Quaternary

**Ice Ages**

Axis scale: million years

![The image above contains clickable

links](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Interactive_icon.svg/18px-

Interactive_icon.svg.png)

(See also: Human timeline, and Nature timeline.)

### Evidence for ancient glaciation mounts[edit]

Long before the idea of a global glaciation was established, a series of
discoveries began to accumulate evidence for ancient Precambrian glaciations.
The first of these discoveries was published in 1871 by J. Thomson who found
ancient glacier-reworked material (tillite) in Islay, Scotland. Similar
findings followed in Australia (1884) and India (1887). A fourth and very
illustrative finding that came to be known as "Reusch's Moraine" was reported
by Hans Reusch in northern Norway in 1891. Many other findings followed, but
their understanding was hampered by the rejection of continental drift.[5]

### Global glaciation proposed[edit]

Sir Douglas Mawson (1882–1958), an Australian geologist and Antarctic
explorer, spent much of his career studying the Neoproterozoic stratigraphy of
South Australia, where he identified thick and extensive glacial sediments and
late in his career speculated about the possibility of global glaciation.[6]

Mawson's ideas of global glaciation, however, were based on the mistaken
assumption that the geographic position of Australia, and that of other
continents where low-latitude glacial deposits are found, has remained
constant through time. With the advancement of the continental drift
hypothesis, and eventually plate tectonic theory, came an easier explanation
for the glaciogenic sediments—they were deposited at a point in time when the
continents were at higher latitudes.

In 1964, the idea of global-scale glaciation reemerged when W. Brian Harland
published a paper in which he presented palaeomagnetic data showing that
glacial tillites in Svalbard and Greenland were deposited at tropical
latitudes.[7] From this palaeomagnetic data, and the sedimentological evidence
that the glacial sediments interrupt successions of rocks commonly associated
with tropical to temperate latitudes, he argued for an ice age that was so
extreme that it resulted in the deposition of marine glacial rocks in the
tropics.

In the 1960s, Mikhail Budyko, a Russian climatologist, developed a simple
energy-balance climate model to investigate the effect of ice cover on global
climate. Using this model, Budyko found that if ice sheets advanced far enough
out of the polar regions, a feedback loop ensued where the increased
reflectiveness (albedo) of the ice led to further cooling and the formation of
more ice, until the entire Earth was covered in ice and stabilized in a new
ice-covered equilibrium.[8]

While Budyko's model showed that this ice-albedo stability could happen, he
concluded that it had in fact never happened, because his model offered no way
to escape from such a feedback loop. In 1971, Aron Faegre, an American
physicist, showed that a similar energy-balance model predicted three stable
global climates, one of which was snowball earth.[9]

This model introduced Edward Norton Lorenz's concept of intransitivity
indicating that there could be a major jump from one climate to another,
including to snowball earth.

The term "snowball Earth" was coined by Joseph Kirschvink in a short paper
published in 1992 within a lengthy volume concerning the biology of the
Proterozoic eon.[10] The major contributions from this work were: (1) the
recognition that the presence of banded iron formations is consistent with
such a global glacial episode, and (2) the introduction of a mechanism by
which to escape from a completely ice-covered Earth—specifically, the
accumulation of CO  
2 from volcanic outgassing leading to an ultra-greenhouse effect.

Franklyn Van Houten's discovery of a consistent geological pattern in which
lake levels rose and fell is now known as the "Van Houten cycle". His studies
of phosphorus deposits and banded iron formations in sedimentary rocks made
him an early adherent of the "snowball Earth" hypothesis postulating that the
planet's surface froze more than 650 million years ago.[11]

Interest in the notion of a snowball Earth increased dramatically after Paul
F. Hoffman and his co-workers applied Kirschvink's ideas to a succession of
Neoproterozoic sedimentary rocks in Namibia and elaborated upon the hypothesis
in the journal _Science_ in 1998 by incorporating such observations as the
occurrence of cap carbonates.[12]

In 2010, Francis MacDonald reported evidence that Rodinia was at equatorial
latitude during the Cryogenian period with glacial ice at or below sea level,
and that the associated Sturtian glaciation was global.[13]

## Evidence[edit]

The snowball Earth hypothesis was originally devised to explain geological
evidence for the apparent presence of glaciers at tropical latitudes.[14]
According to modelling, an ice–albedo feedback would result in glacial ice
rapidly advancing to the equator once the glaciers spread to within 25°[15] to
30°[16] of the equator. Therefore, the presence of glacial deposits within the
tropics suggests global ice cover.

Critical to an assessment of the validity of the theory, therefore, is an
understanding of the reliability and significance of the evidence that led to
the belief that ice ever reached the tropics. This evidence must prove two
things:

                
                                      1. that a bed contains sedimentary structures that could have been created only by glacial activity;
                      2. that the bed lay within the tropics when it was deposited.
                

During a period of global glaciation, it must also be demonstrated that
glaciers were active at different global locations at the same time, and that
no other deposits of the same age are in existence.

This last point is very difficult to prove. Before the Ediacaran, the
biostratigraphic markers usually used to correlate rocks are absent; therefore
there is no way to prove that rocks in different places across the globe were
deposited at precisely the same time. The best that can be done is to estimate
the age of the rocks using radiometric methods, which are rarely accurate to
better than a million years or so.[17]

The first two points are often the source of contention on a case-to-case
basis. Many glacial features can also be created by non-glacial means, and
estimating the approximate latitudes of landmasses even as recently as 200
million years ago can be riddled with difficulties.[18]

### Palaeomagnetism[edit]

The snowball Earth hypothesis was first posited to explain what were then
considered to be glacial deposits near the equator. Since tectonic plates move
slowly over time, ascertaining their position at a given point in Earth's long
history is not easy. In addition to considerations of how the recognizable
landmasses could have fit together, the latitude at which a rock was deposited
can be constrained by palaeomagnetism.

When sedimentary rocks form, magnetic minerals within them tend to align
themselves with the Earth's magnetic field. Through the precise measurement of
this palaeomagnetism, it is possible to estimate the latitude (but not the
longitude) where the rock matrix was formed. Palaeomagnetic measurements have
indicated that some sediments of glacial origin in the Neoproterozoic rock
record were deposited within 10 degrees of the equator,[19] although the
accuracy of this reconstruction is in question.[17] This palaeomagnetic
location of apparently glacial sediments (such as dropstones) has been taken
to suggest that glaciers extended from land to sea level in tropical latitudes
at the time the sediments were deposited. It is not clear whether this implies
a global glaciation, or the existence of localized, possibly land-locked,
glacial regimes.[20] Others have even suggested that most data do not
constrain any glacial deposits to within 25° of the equator.[21]

Skeptics suggest that the palaeomagnetic data could be corrupted if Earth's
ancient magnetic field was substantially different from today's. Depending on
the rate of cooling of Earth's core, it is possible that during the
Proterozoic, the magnetic field did not approximate a simple dipolar
distribution, with north and south magnetic poles roughly aligning with the
planet's axis as they do today. Instead, a hotter core may have circulated
more vigorously and given rise to 4, 8 or more poles. Palaeomagnetic data
would then have to be re-interpreted, as the sedimentary minerals could have
aligned pointing to a 'West Pole' rather than the North Pole. Alternatively,
Earth's dipolar field could have been oriented such that the poles were close
to the equator. This hypothesis has been posited to explain the
extraordinarily rapid motion of the magnetic poles implied by the Ediacaran
palaeomagnetic record; the alleged motion of the north pole would occur around
the same time as the Gaskiers glaciation.[22]

Another weakness of reliance on palaeomagnetic data is the difficulty in
determining whether the magnetic signal recorded is original, or whether it
has been reset by later activity. For example, a mountain-building orogeny
releases hot water as a by-product of metamorphic reactions; this water can
circulate to rocks thousands of kilometers away and reset their magnetic
signature. This makes the authenticity of rocks older than a few million years
difficult to determine without painstaking mineralogical observations.[15]
Moreover, further evidence is accumulating that large-scale remagnetization
events have taken place which may necessitate revision of the estimated
positions of the palaeomagnetic poles.[23][24]

There is currently only one deposit, the Elatina deposit of Australia, that
was indubitably deposited at low latitudes; its depositional date is well-
constrained, and the signal is demonstrably original.[25]

### Low-latitude glacial deposits[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/PocatelloFm.JPG/220px-

PocatelloFm.JPG)

Diamictite of the Neoproterozoic Pocatello Formation, a "snowball Earth"-type
deposit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/86/Elatina_Fm_diamictite.JPG/220px-

Elatina_Fm_diamictite.JPG)

Elatina Fm diamictite below Ediacaran GSSP site in the Flinders Ranges NP,
South Australia. A$1 coin for scale.

Sedimentary rocks that are deposited by glaciers have distinctive features
that enable their identification. Long before the advent of the _snowball
Earth_ hypothesis many Neoproterozoic sediments had been interpreted as having
a glacial origin, including some apparently at tropical latitudes at the time
of their deposition. However, it is worth remembering that many sedimentary
features traditionally associated with glaciers can also be formed by other
means.[26] Thus the glacial origin of many of the key occurrences for snowball
Earth has been contested.[17] As of 2007, there was only one "very
reliable"—still challenged[17] —datum point identifying tropical tillites,[19]
which makes statements of equatorial ice cover somewhat presumptuous. However,
evidence of sea-level glaciation in the tropics during the Sturtian is
accumulating.[27][28] Evidence of possible glacial origin of sediment
includes:

                
                                      * Dropstones (stones dropped into marine sediments), which can be deposited by glaciers or other phenomena.[29]
                      * Varves (annual sediment layers in periglacial lakes), which can form at higher temperatures.[30]
                      * Glacial striations (formed by embedded rocks scraped against bedrock): similar striations are from time to time formed by mudflows or tectonic movements.[31]
                      * Diamictites (poorly sorted conglomerates). Originally described as glacial till, most were in fact formed by debris flows.[17]
                

### Open-water deposits[edit]

It appears that some deposits formed during the snowball period could only
have formed in the presence of an active hydrological cycle. Bands of glacial
deposits up to 5,500 meters thick, separated by small (meters) bands of non-
glacial sediments, demonstrate that glaciers melted and re-formed repeatedly
for tens of millions of years; solid oceans would not permit this scale of
deposition.[32] It is considered[ _by whom?_ ] possible that ice streams such
as seen in Antarctica today could have caused these sequences. Further,
sedimentary features that could only form in open water (for example: wave-
formed ripples, far-traveled ice-rafted debris and indicators of
photosynthetic activity) can be found throughout sediments dating from the
snowball-Earth periods. While these may represent "oases" of meltwater on a
completely frozen Earth,[33] computer modelling suggests that large areas of
the ocean must have remained ice-free; arguing that a "hard" snowball is not
plausible in terms of energy balance and general circulation models.[34]

### Carbon isotope ratios[edit]

There are two stable isotopes of carbon in sea water: carbon-12 (12C) and the
rare carbon-13 (13C), which makes up about 1.109 percent of carbon atoms.

Biochemical processes, of which photosynthesis is one, tend to preferentially
incorporate the lighter 12C isotope. Thus ocean-dwelling photosynthesizers,
both protists and algae, tend to be very slightly depleted in 13C, relative to
the abundance found in the primary volcanic sources of Earth's carbon.
Therefore, an ocean with photosynthetic life will have a lower 13C/12C ratio
within organic remains, and a higher ratio in corresponding ocean water. The
organic component of the lithified sediments will remain very slightly, but
measurably, depleted in 13C.

During the proposed episode of snowball Earth, there are rapid and extreme
negative excursions in the ratio of 13C to 12C.[35] Close analysis of the
timing of 13C 'spikes' in deposits across the globe allows the recognition of
four, possibly five, glacial events in the late Neoproterozoic.[36]

### Banded iron formations[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Black-

band_ironstone_%28aka%29.jpg/220px-Black-band_ironstone_%28aka%29.jpg)

2.1 billion-year-old rock with black-band ironstone

Banded iron formations (BIF) are sedimentary rocks of layered iron oxide and
iron-poor chert. In the presence of oxygen, iron naturally rusts and becomes
insoluble in water. The banded iron formations are commonly very old and their
deposition is often related to the oxidation of the Earth's atmosphere during
the Palaeoproterozoic era, when dissolved iron in the ocean came in contact
with photosynthetically produced oxygen and precipitated out as iron oxide.

The bands were produced at the tipping point between an anoxic and an
oxygenated ocean. Since today's atmosphere is oxygen-rich (nearly 21% by
volume) and in contact with the oceans, it is not possible to accumulate
enough iron oxide to deposit a banded formation. The only extensive iron
formations that were deposited after the Palaeoproterozoic (after 1.8 billion
years ago) are associated with Cryogenian glacial deposits.

For such iron-rich rocks to be deposited there would have to be anoxia in the
ocean, so that much dissolved iron (as ferrous oxide) could accumulate before
it met an oxidant that would precipitate it as ferric oxide. For the ocean to
become anoxic it must have limited gas exchange with the oxygenated
atmosphere. Proponents of the hypothesis argue that the reappearance of BIF in
the sedimentary record is a result of limited oxygen levels in an ocean sealed
by sea-ice,[10] while opponents suggest that the rarity of the BIF deposits
may indicate that they formed in inland seas.

Being isolated from the oceans, such lakes could have been stagnant and anoxic
at depth, much like today's Black Sea; a sufficient input of iron could
provide the necessary conditions for BIF formation.[17] A further difficulty
in suggesting that BIFs marked the end of the glaciation is that they are
found interbedded with glacial sediments.[20] BIFs are also strikingly absent
during the Marinoan glaciation.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Cap carbonate rocks[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/12/Grosser_Aletschgletscher_3178.JPG/220px-

Grosser_Aletschgletscher_3178.JPG)

A present-day glacier

Around the top of Neoproterozoic glacial deposits there is commonly a sharp
transition into a chemically precipitated sedimentary limestone or dolomite
metres to tens of metres thick.[37] These cap carbonates sometimes occur in
sedimentary successions that have no other carbonate rocks, suggesting that
their deposition is result of a profound aberration in ocean chemistry.[38]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Mahameru-

volcano.jpeg/220px-Mahameru-volcano.jpeg)

Volcanoes may have had a role in replenishing CO  
2, possibly ending the global ice age of the Cryogenian Period.

These cap carbonates have unusual chemical composition, as well as strange
sedimentary structures that are often interpreted as large ripples.[39] The
formation of such sedimentary rocks could be caused by a large influx of
positively charged ions, as would be produced by rapid weathering during the
extreme greenhouse following a snowball Earth event. The δ13C isotopic
signature of the cap carbonates is near −5 ‰, consistent with the value of the
mantle—such a low value is usually/could be taken to signify an absence of
life, since photosynthesis usually acts to raise the value; alternatively the
release of methane deposits could have lowered it from a higher value, and
counterbalance the effects of photosynthesis.

The precise mechanism involved in the formation of cap carbonates is not
clear, but the most cited explanation suggests that at the melting of a
snowball Earth, water would dissolve the abundant CO  
2 from the atmosphere to form carbonic acid, which would fall as acid rain.
This would weather exposed silicate and carbonate rock (including readily
attacked glacial debris), releasing large amounts of calcium, which when
washed into the ocean would form distinctively textured layers of carbonate
sedimentary rock. Such an abiotic "cap carbonate" sediment can be found on top
of the glacial till that gave rise to the snowball Earth hypothesis.

However, there are some problems with the designation of a glacial origin to
cap carbonates. Firstly, the high carbon dioxide concentration in the
atmosphere would cause the oceans to become acidic, and dissolve any
carbonates contained within—starkly at odds with the deposition of cap
carbonates. Further, the thickness of some cap carbonates is far above what
could reasonably be produced in the relatively quick deglaciations. The cause
is further weakened by the lack of cap carbonates above many sequences of
clear glacial origin at a similar time and the occurrence of similar
carbonates within the sequences of proposed glacial origin.[17] An alternative
mechanism, which may have produced the Doushantuo cap carbonate at least, is
the rapid, widespread release of methane. This accounts for incredibly low—as
low as −48 ‰—δ13C values—as well as unusual sedimentary features which appear
to have been formed by the flow of gas through the sediments.[40]

### Changing acidity[edit]

Isotopes of the element boron suggest that the pH of the oceans dropped
dramatically before and after the Marinoan glaciation.[41] This may indicate a
buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, some of which would dissolve into
the oceans to form carbonic acid. Although the boron variations may be
evidence of extreme climate change, they need not imply a global glaciation.

### Space dust[edit]

Earth's surface is very depleted in the element iridium, which primarily
resides in the Earth's core. The only significant source of the element at the
surface is cosmic particles that reach Earth. During a snowball Earth, iridium
would accumulate on the ice sheets, and when the ice melted the resulting
layer of sediment would be rich in iridium. An iridium anomaly has been
discovered at the base of the cap carbonate formations, and has been used to
suggest that the glacial episode lasted for at least 3 million years,[42] but
this does not necessarily imply a _global_ extent to the glaciation; indeed, a
similar anomaly could be explained by the impact of a large meteorite.[43]

### Cyclic climate fluctuations[edit]

Using the ratio of mobile cations to those that remain in soils during
chemical weathering (the chemical index of alteration), it has been shown that
chemical weathering varied in a cyclic fashion within a glacial succession,
increasing during interglacial periods and decreasing during cold and arid
glacial periods.[44] This pattern, if a true reflection of events, suggests
that the "snowball Earths" bore a stronger resemblance to Pleistocene ice age
cycles than to a completely frozen Earth.

In addition, glacial sediments of the Port Askaig Tillite Formation in
Scotland clearly show interbedded cycles of glacial and shallow marine
sediments.[45] The significance of these deposits is highly reliant upon their
dating. Glacial sediments are difficult to date, and the closest dated bed to
the Portaskaig group is 8 km stratigraphically above the beds of interest. Its
dating to 600 Ma means the beds can be tentatively correlated to the Sturtian
glaciation, but they may represent the advance or retreat of a snowball Earth.

## Mechanisms[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/d/dc/SnowballSimulations.jpg)

One computer simulation of conditions during a snowball Earth period[46]

The initiation of a snowball Earth event would involve some initial cooling
mechanism, which would result in an increase in Earth's coverage of snow and
ice. The increase in Earth's coverage of snow and ice would in turn increase
Earth's albedo, which would result in positive feedback for cooling. If enough
snow and ice accumulates, run-away cooling would result. This positive
feedback is facilitated by an equatorial continental distribution, which would
allow ice to accumulate in the regions closer to the equator, where solar
radiation is most direct.

Many possible triggering mechanisms could account for the beginning of a
snowball Earth, such as the eruption of a supervolcano, a reduction in the
atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases such as methane and/or carbon
dioxide, changes in Solar energy output, or perturbations of Earth's orbit.
Regardless of the trigger, initial cooling results in an increase in the area
of Earth's surface covered by ice and snow, and the additional ice and snow
reflects more Solar energy back to space, further cooling Earth and further
increasing the area of Earth's surface covered by ice and snow. This positive
feedback loop could eventually produce a frozen equator as cold as modern
Antarctica.

Global warming associated with large accumulations of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere over millions of years, emitted primarily by volcanic activity, is
the proposed trigger for melting a snowball Earth. Due to positive feedback
for melting, the eventual melting of the snow and ice covering most of Earth's
surface would require as little as a millennium.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Continental distribution[edit]

A tropical distribution of the continents is, perhaps counter-intuitively,
necessary to allow the initiation of a snowball Earth.[47] Firstly, tropical
continents are more reflective than open ocean, and so absorb less of the
Sun's heat: most absorption of Solar energy on Earth today occurs in tropical
oceans.[48]

Further, tropical continents are subject to more rainfall, which leads to
increased river discharge—and erosion. When exposed to air, silicate rocks
undergo weathering reactions which remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
These reactions proceed in the general form: Rock-forming mineral + CO2 + H2O
→ cations + bicarbonate + SiO2. An example of such a reaction is the
weathering of wollastonite:

                
                                CaSiO3 + 2CO2 + H2O → Ca2+ + SiO2 + 2HCO3−
                

The released calcium cations react with the dissolved bicarbonate in the ocean
to form calcium carbonate as a chemically precipitated sedimentary rock. This
transfers carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, from the air into the geosphere,
and, in steady-state on geologic time scales, offsets the carbon dioxide
emitted from volcanoes into the atmosphere.

As of 2003, a precise continental distribution during the Neoproterozoic was
difficult to establish because there were too few suitable sediments for
analysis.[49] Some reconstructions point towards polar continents—which have
been a feature of all other major glaciations, providing a point upon which
ice can nucleate. Changes in ocean circulation patterns may then have provided
the trigger of snowball Earth.[50]

Additional factors that may have contributed to the onset of the
Neoproterozoic snowball include the introduction of atmospheric free oxygen,
which may have reached sufficient quantities to react with methane in the
atmosphere, oxidizing it to carbon dioxide, a much weaker greenhouse gas,[51]
and a younger—thus fainter—Sun, which would have emitted 6 percent less
radiation in the Neoproterozoic.[17]

Normally, as Earth gets colder due to natural climatic fluctuations and
changes in incoming solar radiation, the cooling slows these weathering
reactions. As a result, less carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere and
Earth warms as this greenhouse gas accumulates—this 'negative feedback'
process limits the magnitude of cooling. During the Cryogenian period,
however, Earth's continents were all at tropical latitudes, which made this
moderating process less effective, as high weathering rates continued on land
even as Earth cooled. This let ice advance beyond the polar regions. Once ice
advanced to within 30° of the equator,[52] a positive feedback could ensue
such that the increased reflectiveness (albedo) of the ice led to further
cooling and the formation of more ice, until the whole Earth is ice-covered.

Polar continents, due to low rates of evaporation, are too dry to allow
substantial carbon deposition—restricting the amount of atmospheric carbon
dioxide that can be removed from the carbon cycle. A gradual rise of the
proportion of the isotope carbon-13 relative to carbon-12 in sediments pre-
dating "global" glaciation indicates that CO  
2 draw-down before snowball Earths was a slow and continuous process.[53]

The start of snowball Earths are always marked by a sharp downturn in the δ13C
value of sediments,[54] a hallmark that may be attributed to a crash in
biological productivity as a result of the cold temperatures and ice-covered
oceans.

In January 2016, Gernon et al. proposed a "shallow-ridge hypothesis" involving
the breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia, linking the eruption and rapid
alteration of hyaloclastites along shallow ridges to massive increases in
alkalinity in an ocean with thick ice cover. Gernon et al. demonstrated that
the increase in alkalinity over the course of glaciation is sufficient to
explain the thickness of cap carbonates formed in the aftermath of Snowball
Earth events.[55]

### During the frozen period[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/AntarcticaDomeCSnow.jpg/250px-

AntarcticaDomeCSnow.jpg)

Global ice sheets may have created the bottleneck required for the evolution
of multicellular life.[3]

Global temperature fell so low that the equator was as cold as modern-day
Antarctica.[56] This low temperature was maintained by the high albedo of the
ice sheets, which reflected most incoming solar energy into space. A lack of
heat-retaining clouds, caused by water vapor freezing out of the atmosphere,
amplified this effect.

### Breaking out of global glaciation[edit]

The carbon dioxide levels necessary to unfreeze Earth have been estimated as
being 350 times what they are today, about 13% of the atmosphere.[57] Since
the Earth was almost completely covered with ice, carbon dioxide could not be
withdrawn from the atmosphere by release of alkaline metal ions weathering out
of siliceous rocks. Over 4 to 30 million years, enough CO  
2 and methane, mainly emitted by volcanoes but also produced by microbes
converting organic carbon trapped under the ice into the gas,[58] would
accumulate to finally cause enough greenhouse effect to make surface ice melt
in the tropics until a band of permanently ice-free land and water
developed;[59] this would be darker than the ice, and thus absorb more energy
from the Sun—initiating a "positive feedback".

Destabilization of substantial deposits of methane hydrates locked up in low-
latitude permafrost may also have acted as a trigger and/or strong positive
feedback for deglaciation and warming.[60]

On the continents, the melting of glaciers would release massive amounts of
glacial deposit, which would erode and weather. The resulting sediments
supplied to the ocean would be high in nutrients such as phosphorus, which
combined with the abundance of CO  
2 would trigger a cyanobacteria population explosion, which would cause a
relatively rapid reoxygenation of the atmosphere, which may have contributed
to the rise of the Ediacaran biota and the subsequent Cambrian explosion—a
higher oxygen concentration allowing large multicellular lifeforms to develop.
Although the positive feedback loop would melt the ice in geological short
order, perhaps less than 1,000 years, replenishment of atmospheric oxygen and
depletion of the CO  
2 levels would take further millennia.

It is possible that carbon dioxide levels fell enough for Earth to freeze
again; this cycle may have repeated until the continents had drifted to more
polar latitudes.[61]

More recent evidence suggests that with colder oceanic temperatures, the
resulting higher ability of the oceans to dissolve gases led to the carbon
content of sea water being more quickly oxidized to carbon dioxide. This leads
directly to an increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide, enhanced greenhouse
warming of Earth's surface, and the prevention of a total snowball state.[62]

During millions of years, cryoconite would have accumulated on and inside the
ice. Psychrophilic microorganisms, volcanic ash and dust from ice-free
locations would settle on ice covering several million square kilometers. Once
the ice started to melt, these layers would become visible and coloring the
icy surfaces dark, helping to accelerate the process.[63]

Ultraviolet light from the Sun would also produce hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
when it hits water molecules. Normally hydrogen peroxide is broken down by
sunlight, but some would have been trapped inside the ice. When the glaciers
started to melt, it would have been released in both the ocean and the
atmosphere, where it was split into water and oxygen molecules, leading to an
increase in atmospheric oxygen.[64]

### Slushball Earth hypothesis[edit]

While the presence of glaciers is not disputed, the idea that the entire
planet was covered in ice is more contentious, leading some scientists to
posit a "slushball Earth", in which a band of ice-free, or ice-thin, waters
remains around the equator, allowing for a continued hydrologic cycle.

This hypothesis appeals to scientists who observe certain features of the
sedimentary record that can only be formed under open water, or rapidly moving
ice (which would require somewhere ice-free to move to). Recent research
observed geochemical cyclicity in clastic rocks, showing that the "snowball"
periods were punctuated by warm spells, similar to ice age cycles in recent
Earth history. Attempts to construct computer models of a snowball Earth have
also struggled to accommodate global ice cover without fundamental changes in
the laws and constants which govern the planet.

A less extreme snowball Earth hypothesis involves continually evolving
continental configurations and changes in ocean circulation.[65] Synthesised
evidence has produced models indicating a "slushball Earth",[66] where the
stratigraphic record does not permit postulating complete global
glaciations.[65] Kirschivink's original hypothesis[10] had recognised that
warm tropical puddles would be expected to exist in a snowball earth.

The snowball Earth hypothesis does not explain the alternation of glacial and
interglacial events, nor the oscillation of glacial sheet margins.[67]

## Scientific dispute[edit]

The argument against the hypothesis is evidence of fluctuation in ice cover
and melting during "snowball Earth" deposits. Evidence for such melting comes
from evidence of glacial dropstones,[32] geochemical evidence of climate
cyclicity,[44] and interbedded glacial and shallow marine sediments.[45] A
longer record from Oman, constrained to 13°N, covers the period from 712 to
545 million years ago—a time span containing the Sturtian and Marinoan
glaciations—and shows both glacial and ice-free deposition.[68]

There have been difficulties in recreating a snowball Earth with global
climate models. Simple GCMs with mixed-layer oceans can be made to freeze to
the equator; a more sophisticated model with a full dynamic ocean (though only
a primitive sea ice model) failed to form sea ice to the equator.[69] In
addition, the levels of CO  
2 necessary to melt a global ice cover have been calculated to be 130,000
ppm,[57] which is considered by to be unreasonably large.[70]

Strontium isotopic data have been found to be at odds with proposed snowball
Earth models of silicate weathering shutdown during glaciation and rapid rates
immediately post-glaciation. Therefore, methane release from permafrost during
marine transgression was proposed to be the source of the large measured
carbon excursion in the time immediately after glaciation.[71]

### "Zipper rift" hypothesis[edit]

Nick Eyles suggest that the Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth was in fact no
different from any other glaciation in Earth's history, and that efforts to
find a single cause are likely to end in failure.[17] The "Zipper rift"
hypothesis proposes two pulses of continental "unzipping"—first, the breakup
of the supercontinent Rodinia, forming the proto-Pacific Ocean; then the
splitting of the continent Baltica from Laurentia, forming the proto-
Atlantic—coincided with the glaciated periods. The associated tectonic uplift
would form high plateaus, just as the East African Rift is responsible for
high topography; this high ground could then host glaciers.

Banded iron formations have been taken as unavoidable evidence for global ice
cover, since they require dissolved iron ions and anoxic waters to form;
however, the limited extent of the Neoproterozoic banded iron deposits means
that they may not have formed in frozen oceans, but instead in inland seas.
Such seas can experience a wide range of chemistries; high rates of
evaporation could concentrate iron ions, and a periodic lack of circulation
could allow anoxic bottom water to form.

Continental rifting, with associated subsidence, tends to produce such
landlocked water bodies. This rifting, and associated subsidence, would
produce the space for the fast deposition of sediments, negating the need for
an immense and rapid melting to raise the global sea levels.

### High-obliquity hypothesis[edit]

A competing hypothesis to explain the presence of ice on the equatorial
continents was that Earth's axial tilt was quite high, in the vicinity of 60°,
which would place Earth's land in high "latitudes", although supporting
evidence is scarce.[72] A less extreme possibility would be that it was merely
Earth's magnetic pole that wandered to this inclination, as the magnetic
readings which suggested ice-filled continents depends on the magnetic and
rotational poles being relatively similar. In either of these two situations,
the freeze would be limited to relatively small areas, as is the case today;
severe changes to Earth's climate are not necessary.

### Inertial interchange true polar wander[edit]

The evidence for low-latitude glacial deposits during the supposed snowball
Earth episodes has been reinterpreted via the concept of inertial interchange
true polar wander (IITPW).[73][74] This hypothesis, created to explain
palaeomagnetic data, suggests that Earth's axis of rotation shifted one or
more times during the general time-frame attributed to snowball Earth. This
could feasibly produce the same distribution of glacial deposits without
requiring any of them to have been deposited at equatorial latitude.[75] While
the physics behind the proposition is sound, the removal of one flawed data
point from the original study rendered the application of the concept in these
circumstances unwarranted.[76]

Several alternative explanations for the evidence have been proposed.

## Survival of life through frozen periods[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Blacksmoker_in_Atlantic_Ocean.jpg/220px-

Blacksmoker_in_Atlantic_Ocean.jpg)

A black smoker, a type of hydrothermal vent

A tremendous glaciation would curtail photosynthetic life on Earth, thus
depleting atmospheric oxygen, and thereby allowing non-oxidized iron-rich
rocks to form.

Detractors argue that this kind of glaciation would have made life extinct
entirely. However, microfossils such as stromatolites and oncolites prove
that, in shallow marine environments at least, life did not suffer any
perturbation. Instead life developed a trophic complexity and survived the
cold period unscathed.[77] Proponents counter that it may have been possible
for life to survive in these ways:

                
                                      * In reservoirs of anaerobic and low-oxygen life powered by chemicals in deep oceanic hydrothermal vents surviving in Earth's deep oceans and crust; but photosynthesis would not have been possible there.
                      * Under the ice layer, in chemolithotrophic (mineral-metabolizing) ecosystems theoretically resembling those in existence in modern glacier beds, high-alpine and Arctic talus permafrost, and basal glacial ice. This is especially plausible in areas of volcanism or geothermal activity.[78]
                      * In pockets of liquid water within and under the ice caps, similar to Lake Vostok in Antarctica. In theory, this system may resemble microbial communities living in the perennially frozen lakes of the Antarctic dry valleys. Photosynthesis can occur under ice up to 100 m thick, and at the temperatures predicted by models equatorial sublimation would prevent equatorial ice thickness from exceeding 10 m.[79]
                      * As eggs and dormant cells and spores deep-frozen into ice during the most severe phases of the frozen period.
                      * In small regions of open water in deep ocean regions preserving small quantities of life with access to light and CO
                

2 for photosynthesizers (not multicellular plants, which did not yet exist) to
generate traces of oxygen that were enough to sustain some oxygen-dependent
organisms. This would happen even if the sea froze over completely, if small
parts of the ice were thin enough to admit light. These small open water
regions may have occurred in deep ocean regions far from the supercontinent
Rodinia or its remnants as it broke apart and drifted on the tectonic plates.

                
                                      * In layers of "dirty ice" on top of the ice sheet covering shallow seas below. Animals and mud from the sea would be frozen into the base of the ice and gradually concentrate on the top as the ice above evaporates. Small ponds of water would teem with life thanks to the flow of nutrients through the ice.[80] Such environments may have covered approximately 12 per cent of the global surface area.[81]
                      * In small oases of liquid water, as would be found near geothermal hotspots resembling Iceland today.[82]
                      * In nunatak areas in the tropics, where daytime tropical sun or volcanic heat heated bare rock sheltered from cold wind and made small temporary melt pools, which would freeze at sunset.
                

However, organisms and ecosystems, as far as it can be determined by the
fossil record, do not appear to have undergone the significant change that
would be expected by a mass extinction. With the advent of more precise
dating, a phytoplankton extinction event which had been associated with
snowball Earth was shown to precede glaciations by 16 million years.[83] Even
if life were to cling on in all the ecological refuges listed above, a whole-
Earth glaciation would result in a biota with a noticeably different diversity
and composition. This change in diversity and composition has not yet been
observed[84]—in fact, the organisms which should be most susceptible to
climatic variation emerge unscathed from the snowball Earth.[43]

## Implications[edit]

A snowball Earth has profound implications in the history of life on Earth.
While many refugia have been postulated, global ice cover would certainly have
ravaged ecosystems dependent on sunlight. Geochemical evidence from rocks
associated with low-latitude glacial deposits have been interpreted to show a
crash in oceanic life during the glacials.

Because about half of the oceans' water was frozen solid as ice, the remaining
water would be twice as salty as it is today, lowering its freezing point.
When the ice sheet melted, it would cover the oceans with a layer of hot
freshwater up to 2 kilometres thick. Only after the hot surface water mixed
with the colder and deeper saltwater did the sea return to a warmer and less
salty state.[85]

The melting of the ice may have presented many new opportunities for
diversification, and may indeed have driven the rapid evolution which took
place at the end of the Cryogenian period.

### Effect on early evolution[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fb/DickinsoniaCostata.jpg/222px-

DickinsoniaCostata.jpg)

_Dickinsonia costata_ , an Ediacaran organism of unknown affinity, with a
quilted appearance

The Neoproterozoic was a time of remarkable diversification of multicellular
organisms, including animals. Organism size and complexity increased
considerably after the end of the snowball glaciations. This development of
multicellular organisms may have been the result of increased evolutionary
pressures resulting from multiple icehouse-hothouse cycles; in this sense,
snowball Earth episodes may have "pumped" evolution. Alternatively,
fluctuating nutrient levels and rising oxygen may have played a part. Another
major glacial episode may have ended just a few million years before the
Cambrian explosion.

Mechanistically, the effect of snowball Earth (in particular the later
glaciations) on complex life is likely to have occurred through the process of
kin selection. Organ-scale differentiation, in particular the terminal
(irreversible) differentiation present in animals, requires the individual
cell (and the genes contained within it) to "sacrifice" their ability to
reproduce, so that the colony is not disrupted. From the short-term
perspective of the gene, more offspring will be gained by causing the cell in
which it is contained to ignore any signals received from the colony, and to
reproduce at the maximum rate, regardless of the implications for the wider
group. Today, this incentive explains the formation of tumours in animals and
plants.

It has been argued[86] that because snowball Earth would undoubtedly have
decimated the population size of any given species, the extremely small
populations that resulted would all have been descended from a small number of
individuals (see founder effect), and consequently the average relatedness
between any two individuals (in this case individual cells) would have been
exceptionally high as a result of glaciations. Altruism is known to increase
from rarity when relatedness (R) exceeds the ratio of the cost (C) to the
altruist (in this case, the cell giving up its own reproduction by
differentiating), to the benefit (B) to the recipient of altruism (the germ
line of the colony, that reproduces as a result of the differentiation), i.e.
R > C/B (see Hamilton's rule). The evolutionary pressure of the high
relatedness in the context of a post-glaciation population boom may have been
sufficient to overcome the reproductive cost of forming a complex animal, for
the first time in Earth's history.

There is also a rival hypothesis which has been gaining currency in recent
years: that early snowball Earths did not so much _affect_ the evolution of
life on Earth as result from it. In fact the two hypotheses are not mutually
exclusive. The idea is that Earth's life forms affect the global carbon cycle
and so major evolutionary events alter the carbon cycle, redistributing carbon
within various reservoirs within the biosphere system and in the process
temporarily lowering the atmospheric (greenhouse) carbon reservoir until the
revised biosphere system settled into a new state. The Snowball I episode (of
the Huronian glaciation 2.4 to 2.1 billion years) and Snowball II (of the
Precambrian's Cryogenian between 580–850 million years and which itself had a
number of distinct episodes) are respectively thought to be caused by the
evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis and then the rise of more advanced
multicellular animal life and life's colonization of the land.[87][88]

### Effects on ocean circulation[edit]

Global ice cover, if it existed, may—in concert with geothermal heating—have
led to a lively, well mixed ocean with great vertical convective
circulation.[89]

## Occurrence and timing[edit]

### Neoproterozoic[edit]

There were three or four significant ice ages during the late Neoproterozoic.
Of these, the Marinoan was the most significant, and the Sturtian glaciations
were also truly widespread.[90] Even the leading snowball proponent Hoffman
agrees that the 350 thousand-year-long[1] Gaskiers glaciation did not lead to
global glaciation,[47] although it was probably as intense as the late
Ordovician glaciation. The status of the Kaigas "glaciation" or "cooling
event" is currently unclear; some scientists do not recognise it as a glacial,
others suspect that it may reflect poorly dated strata of Sturtian
association, and others believe it may indeed be a third ice age.[91] It was
certainly less significant than the Sturtian or Marinoan glaciations, and
probably not global in extent. Emerging evidence suggests that the Earth
underwent a number of glaciations during the Neoproterozoic, which would stand
strongly at odds with the snowball hypothesis.[4]

### Palaeoproterozoic[edit]

Main article: Huronian glaciation

The snowball Earth hypothesis has been invoked to explain glacial deposits in
the Huronian Supergroup of Canada, though the palaeomagnetic evidence that
suggests ice sheets at low latitudes is contested.[92][93] The glacial
sediments of the Makganyene formation of South Africa are slightly younger
than the Huronian glacial deposits (~2.25 billion years old) and were
deposited at tropical latitudes.[94] It has been proposed that rise of free
oxygen that occurred during the Great Oxygenation Event removed methane in the
atmosphere through oxidation. As the Sun was notably weaker at the time,
Earth's climate may have relied on methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, to
maintain surface temperatures above freezing.

In the absence of this methane greenhouse, temperatures plunged and a snowball
event could have occurred.[93]

### Karoo Ice Age[edit]

Before the theory of continental drift, glacial deposits in Carboniferous
strata in tropical continental areas such as India and South America led to
speculation that the Karoo Ice Age glaciation reached into the tropics.
However, a continental reconstruction shows that ice was in fact constrained
to the polar parts of the supercontinent Gondwana.

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Europa
                      * Global catastrophic risks
                      * Great Unconformity
                      * Greenhouse and icehouse Earth
                      * Ice age
                      * Interglacial and stadial periods
                      * Lake Nyos
                      * Milankovitch cycles
                

## References[edit]

                
                                      1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Pu, J.P. (2016). "Dodging snowballs: Geochronology of the Gaskiers glaciation and the first appearance of the Ediacaran biota". _Geology_. **44** (11): 955–958. Bibcode:2016Geo....44..955P. doi:10.1130/G38284.1.
                      2. **^** Smith, A. G. (2009). "Neoproterozoic timescales and stratigraphy". _Geological Society, London, Special Publications_. **326** (1): 27–54. Bibcode:2009GSLSP.326...27S. doi:10.1144/SP326.2.
                      3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kirschvink, J. L. (1992). "Late Proterozoic low-latitude global glaciation: The snowball Earth" (PDF). In Schopf, J. W.; Klein, C. (eds.). _The Proterozoic Biosphere: A Multidisciplinary Study_. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–2.
                      4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Allen, Philip A.; Etienne, James L. (2008). "Sedimentary challenge to Snowball Earth". _Nature Geoscience_. **1** (12): 817–825. Bibcode:2008NatGe...1..817A. doi:10.1038/ngeo355.
                      5. **^** Hoffman, Paul F. (2011). "A history of Neoproterozoic glacial geology, 1871–1997". In Arnaud, E.; Halverson, G.P.; Shields-Zhou, G. (eds.). _The Geological Record of Neoproterozoic Glaciations_. Geological Society, London, Memoirs. Geological Society of London. pp. 17–37.
                      6. **^** Alderman, A. R.; Tilley, C. E. (1960). "Douglas Mawson 1882-1958". _Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society_. **5** : 119–127. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1960.0011.
                      7. **^** W. B. Harland (1964). "Critical evidence for a great infra-Cambrian glaciation". _International Journal of Earth Sciences_. **54** (1): 45–61. Bibcode:1964GeoRu..54...45H. doi:10.1007/BF01821169.
                      8. **^** M.I. Budyko (1969). "The effect of solar radiation variations on the climate of the Earth". _Tellus A_. **21** (5): 611–619. doi:10.3402/tellusa.v21i5.10109.
                      9. **^** A. Faegre (1972). "An Intransitive Model of the Earth-Atmosphere-Ocean System". _Journal of Applied Meteorology_. **11** (1): 4–6. Bibcode:1972JApMe..11....4F. doi:10.1175/1520-0450(1972)011<0004:AIMOTE>2.0.CO;2.
                      10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Kirschvink, Joseph (1992). "Late Proterozoic low-latitude global glaciation: the Snowball Earth". In J. W. Schopf; C. Klein (eds.). _The Proterozoic Biosphere: A Multidisciplinary Study_. Cambridge University Press.
                      11. **^** Princeton University - Franklyn Van Houten, expert on sedimentary rocks, dies at 96
                      12. **^** Hoffman, P. F.; Kaufman, A. J.; Halverson, G. P.; Schrag, D. P. (1998). "A Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth". _Science_. **281** (5381): 1342–1346. Bibcode:1998Sci...281.1342H. doi:10.1126/science.281.5381.1342. PMID 9721097.
                      13. **^** Macdonald, F. A.; Schmitz, M. D.; Crowley, J. L.; Roots, C. F.; Jones, D. S.; Maloof, A. C.; Strauss, J. V.; Cohen, P. A.; Johnston, D. T.; Schrag, D. P. (4 March 2010). "Calibrating the Cryogenian". _Science_. **327** (5970): 1241–1243. Bibcode:2010Sci...327.1241M. doi:10.1126/science.1183325. PMID 20203045. Lay summary - _ScienceDaily_ (5 March 2010).
                      14. **^** Harland, W.B. (1964). "Critical evidence for a great infra-Cambrian glaciation". _International Journal of Earth Sciences_. **54** (1): 45–61. Bibcode:1964GeoRu..54...45H. doi:10.1007/BF01821169.
                      15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Meert, J.G.; Van Der Voo, R.; Payne, T.W. (1994). "Paleomagnetism of the Catoctin volcanic province: A new Vendian-Cambrian apparent polar wander path for North America". _Journal of Geophysical Research_. **99** (B3): 4625–41. Bibcode:1994JGR....99.4625M. doi:10.1029/93JB01723.
                      16. **^** Budyko, M.I. (1969). "The effect of solar radiation variations on the climate of the earth". _Tellus_. **21** (5): 611–9. Bibcode:1969TellA..21..611B. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.696.824. doi:10.1111/j.2153-3490.1969.tb00466.x.
                      17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ Eyles, N.; Januszczak, N. (2004). "'Zipper-rift': A tectonic model for Neoproterozoic glaciations during the breakup of Rodinia after 750 Ma". _Earth-Science Reviews_. **65** (1–2): 1–73. Bibcode:2004ESRv...65....1E. doi:10.1016/S0012-8252(03)00080-1.
                      18. **^** Briden, J.C.; Smith, A.G.; Sallomy, J.T. (1971). "The geomagnetic field in Permo-Triassic time". _Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc_. **23** : 101–117. doi:10.1111/j.1365-246X.1971.tb01805.x.
                      19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ D.A.D. Evans (2000). "Stratigraphic, geochronological, and palaeomagnetic constraints upon the Neoproterozoic climatic paradox". _American Journal of Science_. **300** (5): 347–433. Bibcode:2000AmJS..300..347E. doi:10.2475/ajs.300.5.347.
                      20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Young, G.M. (1 February 1995). "Are Neoproterozoic glacial deposits preserved on the margins of Laurentia related to the fragmentation of two supercontinents?". _Geology_. **23** (2): 153–6. Bibcode:1995Geo....23..153Y. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1995)023<0153:ANGDPO>2.3.CO;2.
                      21. **^** Meert, J. G.; Van Der Voo, R. (1994). "The Neoproterozoic (1000–540 Ma) glacial intervals: No more snowball earth?". _Earth and Planetary Science Letters_. **123** (1–3): 1–13. Bibcode:1994E&PSL.123....1M. doi:10.1016/0012-821X(94)90253-4.
                      22. **^** Abrajevitch, A.; Van Der Voo, R. (2010). "Incompatible Ediacaran paleomagnetic directions suggest an equatorial geomagnetic dipole hypothesis". _Earth and Planetary Science Letters_. **293** (1–2): 164–170. Bibcode:2010E&PSL.293..164A. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2010.02.038.
                      23. **^** Font, E; C.F. Ponte Neto; M. Ernesto (2011). "Paleomagnetism and rock magnetism of the Neoproterozoic Itajaí Basin of the Rio de la Plata craton (Brazil): Cambrian to Cretaceous widespread remagnetizations of South America". _Gondwana Research_. **20** (4): 782–797. Bibcode:2011GondR..20..782F. doi:10.1016/j.gr.2011.04.005.
                      24. **^** Rowan, C. J.; Tait, J. (2010). "Oman's low latitude "Snowball Earth" pole revisited: Late Cretaceous remagnetisation of Late Neoproterozoic carbonates in Northern Oman". _American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting_. **2010** : GP33C–0959. Bibcode:2010AGUFMGP33C0959R.
                      25. **^** Sohl, L.E.; Christie-blick, N.; Kent, D.V. (1999). "Paleomagnetic polarity reversals in Marinoan (ca. 600 Ma) glacial deposits of Australia; implications for the duration of low-latitude glaciation in Neoproterozoic time". _Bulletin of the Geological Society of America_. **111** (8): 1120–39. Bibcode:1999GSAB..111.1120S. doi:10.1130/0016-7606(1999)111<1120:PPRIMC>2.3.CO;2.
                      26. **^** Arnaud, E.; Eyles, C. H. (2002). "Glacial influence on Neoproterozoic sedimentation: the Smalfjord Formation, northern Norway". _Sedimentology_. **49** (4): 765–88. Bibcode:2002Sedim..49..765A. doi:10.1046/j.1365-3091.2002.00466.x.
                      27. **^** Macdonald, F. A.; Schmitz, M. D.; Crowley, J. L.; Roots, C. F.; Jones, D. S.; Maloof, A. C.; Strauss, J. V.; Cohen, P. A.; Johnston, D. T.; Schrag, D. P. (4 March 2010). "Calibrating the Cryogenian". _Science_. **327** (5970): 1241–1243. Bibcode:2010Sci...327.1241M. doi:10.1126/science.1183325.
                      28. **^** Kerr, R. A. (4 March 2010). "Snowball Earth Has Melted Back To a Profound Wintry Mix". _Science_. **327** (5970): 1186. Bibcode:2010Sci...327.1186K. doi:10.1126/science.327.5970.1186. PMID 20203019.
                      29. **^** Donovan, S. K.; Pickerill, R. K. (1997). "Dropstones: their origin and significance: a comment". _Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology_. **131** (1): 175–8. Bibcode:1997PPP...131..175D. doi:10.1016/S0031-0182(96)00150-2.
                      30. **^** Thunell, R. C.; Tappa, E.; Anderson, D. M. (1 December 1995). "Sediment fluxes and varve formation in Santa Barbara Basin, offshore California". _Geology_. **23** (12): 1083–6. Bibcode:1995Geo....23.1083T. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1995)023<1083:SFAVFI>2.3.CO;2.
                      31. **^** Jensen, P. A.; Wulff-pedersen, E. (1 March 1996). "Glacial or non-glacial origin for the Bigganjargga tillite, Finnmark, Northern Norway". _Geological Magazine_. **133** (2): 137–45. Bibcode:1996GeoM..133..137J. doi:10.1017/S0016756800008657.
                      32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Condon, D.J.; Prave, A.R.; Benn, D.I. (1 January 2002). "Neoproterozoic glacial-rainout intervals: Observations and implications". _Geology_. **30** (1): 35–38. Bibcode:2002Geo....30...35C. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(2002)030<0035:NGRIOA>2.0.CO;2.
                      33. **^** Halverson, G.P.; Maloof, A.C.; Hoffman, P.F. (2004). "The Marinoan glaciation (Neoproterozoic) in northeast Svalbard". _Basin Research_. **16** (3): 297–324. Bibcode:2004BasR...16..297H. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.2815. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2117.2004.00234.x.
                      34. **^** Peltier, W.R. (2004). "Climate dynamics in deep time: modeling the "snowball bifurcation" and assessing the plausibility of its occurrence". In Jenkins, G.S.; McMenamin, M.A.S.; McKey, C.P.; Sohl, L. (eds.). _The Extreme Proterozoic: Geology, Geochemistry, and Climate_. American Geophysical union. pp. 107–124.
                      35. **^** D.H. Rothman; J.M. Hayes; R.E. Summons (2003). "Dynamics of the Neoproterozoic carbon cycle". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **100** (14): 124–9. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100.8124R. doi:10.1073/pnas.0832439100. PMC 166193. PMID 12824461.
                      36. **^** Kaufman, Alan J.; Knoll, Andrew H.; Narbonne, Guy M. (24 June 1997). "Isotopes, ice ages, and terminal Proterozoic earth history". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **94** (13): 6600–5. Bibcode:1997PNAS...94.6600K. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.13.6600. PMC 21204. PMID 11038552.
                      37. **^** M.J. Kennedy (1996). "Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and isotopic geochemistry of Australian Neoproterozoic postglacial cap dolomite: deglaciation, d13C excursions and carbonate precipitation". _Journal of Sedimentary Research_. **66** (6): 1050–64. Bibcode:1996JSedR..66.1050K. doi:10.2110/jsr.66.1050.
                      38. **^** Spencer, A.M. (1971). "Late Pre-Cambrian glaciation in Scotland". _Mem. Geol. Soc. Lond_. **6**.
                      39. **^** P. F. Hoffman; D. P. Schrag (2002). "The snowball Earth hypothesis: testing the limits of global change". _Terra Nova_. **14** (3): 129–55. Bibcode:2002TeNov..14..129H. doi:10.1046/j.1365-3121.2002.00408.x.
                      40. **^** Wang, Jiasheng; Jiang, Ganqing; Xiao, Shuhai; Li, Qing; Wei, Qing (2008). "Carbon isotope evidence for widespread methane seeps in the ca. 635 Ma Doushantuo cap carbonate in south China". _Geology_. **36** (5): 347–350. Bibcode:2008Geo....36..347W. doi:10.1130/G24513A.1.
                      41. **^** δ11B, in Kasemann, S.A.; Hawkesworth, C.J.; Prave, A.R.; Fallick, A.E.; Pearson, P.N. (2005). "Boron and calcium isotope composition in Neoproterozoic carbonate rocks from Namibia: evidence for extreme environmental change". _Earth and Planetary Science Letters_. **231** (1–2): 73–86. Bibcode:2005E&PSL.231...73K. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2004.12.006.
                      42. **^** Bodiselitsch, Bernd.; Koeberl, C.; Master, S.; Reimold, W.U. (8 April 2005). "Estimating Duration and Intensity of Neoproterozoic Snowball Glaciations from Ir Anomalies". _Science_. **308** (5719): 239–42. Bibcode:2005Sci...308..239B. doi:10.1126/science.1104657. PMID 15821088.
                      43. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Grey, K.; Walter, M.R.; Calver, C.R. (1 May 2003). "Neoproterozoic biotic diversification: Snowball Earth or aftermath of the Acraman impact?". _Geology_. **31** (5): 459–62. Bibcode:2003Geo....31..459G. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(2003)031<0459:NBDSEO>2.0.CO;2.
                      44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ R. Rieu; P.A. Allen; M. Plötze; T. Pettke (2007). "Climatic cycles during a Neoproterozoic "snowball" glacial epoch". _Geology_. **35** (4): 299–302. Bibcode:2007Geo....35..299R. doi:10.1130/G23400A.1.
                      45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Young, G.M. (1999). "Some aspects of the geochemistry, provenance and palaeoclimatology of the Torridonian of NW Scotland". _Journal of the Geological Society_. **156** (6): 1097–1111. Bibcode:1999JGSoc.156.1097Y. doi:10.1144/gsjgs.156.6.1097.
                      46. **^** Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Nature 405:425-429, copyright 2000. See Hyde _et al._ (2000).
                      47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hoffman, P.F. (2005). "On Cryogenian (Neoproterozoic) ice-sheet dynamics and the limitations of the glacial sedimentary record". _South African Journal of Geology_. **108** (4): 557–77. doi:10.2113/108.4.557.
                      48. **^** Jacobsen, S.B. (2001). "Earth science. Gas hydrates and deglaciations". _Nature_. **412** (6848): 691–3. doi:10.1038/35089168. PMID 11507621.
                      49. **^** Meert, J.G.; Torsvik, T.H. (2004). GS Jenkins; MAS McMenamin; CP McKey; CP Sohl; L Sohl (eds.). _Paleomagnetic Constraints on Neoproterozoic 'Snowball Earth' Continental Reconstructions_. _Washington DC American Geophysical Union Geophysical Monograph Series_. Geophysical Monograph Series. **146**. American Geophysical Union. pp. 5–11. Bibcode:2004GMS...146....5M. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.2259. doi:10.1029/146GM02. ISBN 978-0-87590-411-5.
                      50. **^** Smith, A.G.; Pickering, K.T. (2003). "Oceanic gateways as a critical factor to initiate icehouse Earth". _Journal of the Geological Society_. **160** (3): 337–40. Bibcode:2003JGSoc.160..337S. doi:10.1144/0016-764902-115.
                      51. **^** Kerr, R.A. (1999). "Early life thrived despite earthly travails". _Science_. **284** (5423): 2111–3. doi:10.1126/science.284.5423.2111. PMID 10409069.
                      52. **^** Kirschvink, J.L. (2002). "When All of the Oceans Were Frozen". _Recherche_. **355** : 26–30.
                      53. **^** Schrag, Daniel P.; Berner, Robert A.; Hoffman, Paul F.; Halverson, Galen P. (June 2002). "On the initiation of a snowball Earth". _Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems_. **3** (6): 1–21. doi:10.1029/2001GC000219.
                      54. **^** Hoffman, P.F.; Kaufman, A.J.; Halverson, G.P.; Schrag, D.P. (28 August 1998). "A Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth". _Science_. **281** (5381): 1342–6. Bibcode:1998Sci...281.1342H. doi:10.1126/science.281.5381.1342. PMID 9721097.
                      55. **^** Gernon, T. M.; Hincks, T. K.; Tyrrell, T.; Rohling, E. J.; Palmer, M. R. (18 January 2016). "Snowball Earth ocean chemistry driven by extensive ridge volcanism during Rodinia breakup". _Nature Geoscience_. **9** (3): 242–8. Bibcode:2016NatGe...9..242G. doi:10.1038/ngeo2632. Lay summary - _The Conversation_ (18 January 2016).
                      56. **^** Hyde, William T.; Crowley, Thomas J.; Baum, Steven K.; Peltier, W. Richard (May 2000). "Neoproterozoic 'snowball Earth' simulations with a coupled climate/ice-sheet model". _Nature_. **405** (6785): 425–429. Bibcode:2000Natur.405..425H. doi:10.1038/35013005. PMID 10839531.
                      57. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Crowley, T.J.; Hyde, W.T.; Peltier, W.R. (2001). "CO 2 levels required for deglaciation of a 'near-snowball' Earth". _Geophys. Res. Lett_. **28** (2): 283–6. Bibcode:2001GeoRL..28..283C. doi:10.1029/2000GL011836.
                      58. **^** Glacier ecosystems
                      59. **^** Pierrehumbert, R.T. (2004). "High levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide necessary for the termination of global glaciation". _Nature_. **429** (6992): 646–9. Bibcode:2004Natur.429..646P. doi:10.1038/nature02640. PMID 15190348.
                      60. **^** Kennedy, Martin; Mrofka, David; von der Borch, Chris (29 May 2008). "Snowball Earth termination by destabilization of equatorial permafrost methane clathrate". _Nature_. **453** (7195): 642–645. Bibcode:2008Natur.453..642K. doi:10.1038/nature06961. PMID 18509441.
                      61. **^** Hoffman, P.F. (1999). "The break-up of Rodinia, birth of Gondwana, true polar wander and the snowball Earth". _Journal of African Earth Sciences_. **28** (1): 17–33. Bibcode:1999JAfES..28...17H. doi:10.1016/S0899-5362(99)00018-4.
                      62. **^** Peltier, W. Richard, Yonggang Liu & John W. Crowley, (2007), "Snowball Earth prevention by dissolved organic carbon remineralization" (Nature 450, 813-818 (6 December 2007) | doi:10.1038/nature06354)
                      63. **^** Hoffman PF (2016). "Cryoconite pans on Snowball Earth: supraglacial oases for Cryogenian eukaryotes?". _Geobiology_. **14** (6): 531–542. doi:10.1111/gbi.12191. PMID 27422766.
                      64. **^** Did snowball Earth’s melting let oxygen fuel life?
                      65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Harland, W. B. (2007). "Origin and assessment of Snowball Earth hypotheses". _Geological Magazine_. **144** (4): 633–42. Bibcode:2007GeoM..144..633H. doi:10.1017/S0016756807003391.
                      66. **^** Fairchild, I. J.; Kennedy, M. J. (2007). "Neoproterozoic glaciations in the Earth System". _Journal of the Geological Society_. **164** (5): 895–921. Bibcode:2007JGSoc.164..895F. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.211.2233. doi:10.1144/0016-76492006-191.
                      67. **^** Chumakov, N. M. (2008). "A problem of Total Glaciations on the Earth in the Late Precambrian". _Stratigraphy and Geological Correlation_. **16** (2): 107–119. Bibcode:2008SGC....16..107C. doi:10.1134/S0869593808020019.
                      68. **^** Kilner, B.; Niocaill, C.M.; Brasier, M. (2005). "Low-latitude glaciation in the Neoproterozoic of Oman". _Geology_. **33** (5): 413–6. Bibcode:2005Geo....33..413K. doi:10.1130/G21227.1.
                      69. **^** Poulsen, C.J.; Pierrehumbert, R.T.; Jacob, R.L. (2001). "Impact of ocean dynamics on the simulation of the Neoproterozoic _snowball Earth_ ". _Geophysical Research Letters_. **28** (8): 1575–8. Bibcode:2001GeoRL..28.1575P. doi:10.1029/2000GL012058.
                      70. **^** Bao, Huiming; Lyons, J. R.; Zhou, Chuanming (22 May 2008). "Triple oxygen isotope evidence for elevated CO2 levels after a Neoproterozoic glaciation". _Nature_. **453** (7194): 504–506. doi:10.1038/nature06959.
                      71. **^** Kennedy, Martin J.; Christie-Blick, Nicholas; Sohl, Linda E. (2001). "Are Proterozoic cap carbonates and isotopic excursions a record of gas hydrate destabilization following Earth's coldest intervals?". _Geology_. **29** (5): 443. Bibcode:2001Geo....29..443K. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(2001)029<0443:APCCAI>2.0.CO;2.
                      72. **^** "LiveScience.com: The Day The Earth Fell Over".
                      73. **^** Kirschvink, J.L.; Ripperdan, R.L.; Evans, D.A. (25 July 1997). "Evidence for a Large-Scale Reorganization of Early Cambrian Continental Masses by Inertial Interchange True Polar Wander". _Science_. **277** (5325): 541–545. doi:10.1126/science.277.5325.541.
                      74. **^** Meert, J.G. (1999). "A palaeomagnetic analysis of Cambrian true polar wander". _Earth Planet. Sci. Lett_. **168** (1–2): 131–144. Bibcode:1999E&PSL.168..131M. doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(99)00042-4.
                      75. **^** "Rock magnetic evidence for rapid motion of the solid Earth with respect to its spin axis" (PDF). 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010.
                      76. **^** Torsvik, T.H. (2 January 1998). "Polar Wander and the Cambrian". _Science_. **279** (5347): 9. Bibcode:1998Sci...279....9T. doi:10.1126/science.279.5347.9a.
                      77. **^** Corsetti, F. A.; Awramik, S. M.; Pierce, D. (7 April 2003). "A complex microbiota from snowball Earth times: Microfossils from the Neoproterozoic Kingston Peak Formation, Death Valley, USA". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **100** (8): 4399–4404. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100.4399C. doi:10.1073/pnas.0730560100. PMC 153566. PMID 12682298.
                      78. **^** Vincent, W.F. (2000). "Life on Snowball Earth". _Science_. **287** (5462): 2421–2. doi:10.1126/science.287.5462.2421b. PMID 10766616.
                      79. **^** McKay, C.P. (2000). "Thickness of tropical ice and photosynthesis on a snowball Earth". _Geophys. Res. Lett_. **27** (14): 2153–6. Bibcode:2000GeoRL..27.2153M. doi:10.1029/2000GL008525. PMID 11543492.
                      80. **^** Barras, Colin (March 2018). "Scott's dirty ice may solve mystery". _New Scientist_. **237** (3171): 16. doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(18)30558-X.
                      81. **^** Hawes, I.; Jungblut, A. D.; Matys, E. D.; Summons, R. E. (July 2018). "The 'Dirty Ice' of the McMurdo Ice Shelf: Analogues for biological oases during the Cryogenian". _Geobiology_. **16** (4): 369–77. doi:10.1111/gbi.12280. PMID 29527802.
                      82. **^** Hoffman, Paul F.; Schrag, Daniel P. (January 2000). "Snowball Earth". _Scientific American_. **282** (1): 68–75. Bibcode:2000SciAm.282a..68H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0100-68.
                      83. **^** Corsetti, F. A. (2009). "Palaeontology: Extinction before the snowball". _Nature Geoscience_. **2** (6): 386–387. Bibcode:2009NatGe...2..386C. doi:10.1038/ngeo533.
                      84. **^** Corsetti, F.A.; Olcott, A.N.; Bakermans, C. (2006). "The biotic response to Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth". _Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology_. **232** (2–4): 114–130. Bibcode:2006PPP...232..114C. doi:10.1016/j.palaeo.2005.10.030.
                      85. **^** Snowball Earth melting led to freshwater ocean 2 kilometres deep
                      86. **^** Boyle, R. A.; Lenton, T. M.; Williams, H. T. P. (December 2007). "Neoproterozoic 'snowball Earth' glaciations and the evolution of altruism". _Geobiology_. **5** (4): 337–349. doi:10.1111/j.1472-4669.2007.00115.x.
                      87. **^** Cowie, J., (2007) _Climate Change: Biological and Human Aspects_. Cambridge University Press. (Pages 73 - 77.) ISBN 978-0-521-69619-7.
                      88. **^** Lenton, T., & Watson, A., (2011) _Revolutions That Made The Earth_. Oxford University Press. (Pages 30 -36, 274 - 282.) ISBN 978-0-19-958704-9.
                      89. **^** Ashkenazy, Y.; Gildor, H.; Losch, M.; MacDonald, F. A.; Schrag, D. P.; Tziperman, E. (2013). "Dynamics of a Snowball Earth ocean". _Nature_. **495** (7439): 90–93. Bibcode:2013Natur.495...90A. doi:10.1038/nature11894. PMID 23467167.
                      90. **^** Stern, R.J.; Avigad, D.; Miller, N.R.; Beyth, M. (2006). "Geological Society of Africa Presidential Review: Evidence for the Snowball Earth Hypothesis in the Arabian-Nubian Shield and the East African Orogen". _Journal of African Earth Sciences_. **44** (1): 1–20. Bibcode:2006JAfES..44....1S. doi:10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2005.10.003.
                      91. **^** Smith, A. G. (2009). "Neoproterozoic timescales and stratigraphy". _Geological Society, London, Special Publications_. **326** : 27–54. Bibcode:2009GSLSP.326...27S. doi:10.1144/SP326.2.
                      92. **^** Williams G.E.; Schmidt P.W. (1997). "Paleomagnetism of the Paleoproterozoic Gowganda and Lorrain formations, Ontario: low palaeolatitude for Huronian glaciation". _Earth and Planetary Science Letters_. **153** (3): 157–169. Bibcode:1997E&PSL.153..157W. doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(97)00181-7.
                      93. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Robert E. Kopp; Joseph L. Kirschvink; Isaac A. Hilburn & Cody Z. Nash (2005). "The Paleoproterozoic snowball Earth: A climate disaster triggered by the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **102** (32): 11131–6. Bibcode:2005PNAS..10211131K. doi:10.1073/pnas.0504878102. PMC 1183582. PMID 16061801.
                      94. **^** Evans, D. A.; Beukes, N. J.; Kirschvink, J. L. (March 1997). "Low-latitude glaciation in the Palaeoproterozoic era". _Nature_. **386** (6622): 262–266. Bibcode:1997Natur.386..262E. doi:10.1038/386262a0.
                

## Further reading[edit]

                
                                      * Tziperman, E.; Halevy, I.; Johnston, D. T.; Knoll, A. H.; Schrag, D. P. (2011). "Biologically induced initiation of Neoproterozoic snowball-Earth events". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **108** (37): 15091–15096. Bibcode:2011PNAS..10815091T. doi:10.1073/pnas.1016361108. PMC 3174660. PMID 21825156.
                      * Etienne, J.L.; Allen, P.A.; Rieu, R. & Le Guerroué, E. (2007). "Neoproterozoic glaciated basins: A critical review of the Snowball Earth hypothesis by comparison with Phanerozoic glaciations". In Michael Hambrey, Poul Christoffersen, Neil Glasser and Bryn Hubbard (eds.). _Glacial Sedimentary Processes and Products_. IAS Special Publication. **39**. Malden, MA: IAS/Blackwell. pp. 343–399. doi:10.1002/9781444304435.ch19. ISBN 978-1-4051-8300-0.CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
                      * Gabrielle Walker (2003). _Snowball Earth_. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7475-6433-1.
                      * Micheels, A.; Montenari, M. (2008). "A snowball Earth versus a slushball Earth: Results from Neoproterozoic climate modeling sensitivity experiments". _Geosphere_. **4** (2): 401–10. Bibcode:2008Geosp...4..401M. doi:10.1130/GES00098.1. (Geol. Soc. America).
                      * Roberts, J.D. (1971). "Late Precambrian glaciation: an anti-greenhouse effect?". _Nature_. **234** (5326): 216–7. Bibcode:1971Natur.234..216R. doi:10.1038/234216a0.
                      * Roberts, J.D. (1976). "Late Precambrian dolomites, Vendian glaciation, and the synchroneity of Vendian glaciation". _Journal of Geology_. **84** (1): 47–63. Bibcode:1976JG.....84...47R. doi:10.1086/628173.
                      * Sankaran, A. V. (2003). "Neoproterozoic 'snowball earth' and the 'cap' carbonate controversy". _Current Science_. **84** (7): 871–873. JSTOR 24108043.
                      * Torsvik, T.H.; Rehnström, E.F. (2001). "Cambrian palaeomagnetic data from Baltica: Implications for true polar wander and Cambrian palaeogeography". _J. Geol. Soc. Lond_. **158** (2): 321–9. Bibcode:2001JGSoc.158..321T. doi:10.1144/jgs.158.2.321.
                

## External links[edit]

                
                                      * The Snowball Earth 1999 overview by Paul F. Hoffman and Daniel P. Schrag, 8 August 1999
                      * Snowball Earth web site Exhaustive on-line resource for snowball Earth by pro-snowball scientists Hoffman and Schrag.
                      * New Evidence Puts 'Snowball Earth' Theory Out In The Cold sciencedaily.com. 2007. Analyses in Oman produce evidence of hot-cold cycles in the Cryogenian period, roughly 850-544 million years ago. The UK-Swiss team claims that this evidence undermines hypotheses of an ice age so severe that Earth's oceans completely froze over.
                      * Channel 4 (UK) documentary, Catastrophe: Snowball Earth episode 2 of 5, first screened Dec 2008, documentary narrated by Tony Robinson, advocates snowball Earth and contains interviews with proponents.
                      * First breath: Earth's billion-year struggle for oxygen New Scientist, #2746, 5 February 2010 by Nick Lane. Posits an earlier much longer snowball period, c2.4 - c2.0 Gya, triggered by the Great Oxygenation Event.
                      * 'Snowball Earth' theory melted BBC News online (2002-03-06) report on findings by geoscientists at the University of St Andrews, Scotland that casts doubt on the snowball Earth hypothesis due to evidence of sedimentary material, which could only have been derived from floating ice on open oceanic waters.
                      * Life may have survived 'snowball Earth' in ocean pockets BBC News online (2010-12-14) report on research presented in the journal Geology by Dr Dan Le Heron ( _et al._ ) of Royal Holloway, University of London who studied rock formations in Flinders Ranges in South Australia, formed from sediments dating to the Sturtian glaciation, which bear the unmistakable mark of turbulent oceans.
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Greenhouse and Icehouse Earth

* * *

| Greenhouse Earth

Tropical temperatures may reach poles

| Icehouse Earth

Global climate during an ice age

| Snowball Earth

Earth's surface entirely or nearly frozen over

---|---|---  
Warm period | Interglacials | Stadials and Interstadials | Glacials | Cold
period

                
                                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Ice ages

* * *

Quaternary /  
Late Cenozoic|

| Quaternary|

                
                                      * Antarctica
                      * Greenland
                      * Last glacial period
                      * 1st: Würm, Wisconsin, Weichselian, Devensian/Midlandian, Pinedale/Fraser, Merida, Llanquihue
                      * 2nd: Riss, Illinoian, Saale, Wolstonian, Santa María
                      * 3rd–6th: Mindel, Pre-Illinoian, Elster, Anglian, Rio Llico
                      * 7th–8th: Günz, Pre-Illinoian, Elbe or Menapian, Beestonian, Caracol (2.5 to 0 Mya)
                

---|---  
Pliocene  
Miocene  
Oligocene|

                
                                      * Antarctic (34 to 2.5 Mya)
                

![Maximum Quaternary northern-hemisphere

glaciation](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/26/Iceage_north-

glacial_hg.png/60px-Iceage_north-glacial_hg.png)

Carboniferous–Permian|

                
                                      * late Paleozoic icehouse (360 Mya to 260 Mya)
                

Ordovician–Silurian|

                
                                      * Andean-Saharan (460 Mya to 430 Mya)
                

Ediacaran|

                
                                      * Gaskiers (579.88 to 579.63 Mya)
                      * Baykonurian (547 to 541.5 Mya)
                

Cryogenian|

                
                                      * Sturtian (717 to 660 Mya); Marinoan (650 to 635 Mya)
                

Paleoproterozoic|

                
                                      * Huronian (2.4 to 2.1 Gya)
                

Mesoarchean|

                
                                      * Pongola (2.9 to 2.78 Gya)
                

Related topics|

                
                                      * Greenhouse and icehouse Earth
                      * Great Oxygenation Event
                      * Snowball Earth
                      * Interglacial
                      * Milankovitch cycles
                      * Stadial
                

**Timeline of glaciation**

                
                                      * ![WikiProject Geology.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e7/WikiProject_Geology.svg/21px-WikiProject_Geology.svg.png)Geology portal
                      * ![Allosaurus Jardin des Plantes.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Allosaurus_Jardin_des_Plantes.png/21px-Allosaurus_Jardin_des_Plantes.png)Paleontology portal
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snowball_Earth&oldid=900469182"

Categories:

                
                                      * Ice ages
                      * Cryogenian
                      * Extinction events
                      * Proterozoic events
                      * Climate change science
                      * Hypotheses
                      * Meteorological hypotheses
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Articles with short description
                      * Use dmy dates from January 2012
                      * Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2015
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019
                      * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Afrikaans
                      * العربية
                      * Bosanski
                      * Català
                      * Čeština
                      * Dansk
                      * Deutsch
                      * Español
                      * Euskara
                      * فارسی
                      * Français
                      * Galego
                      * 한국어
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Italiano
                      * עברית
                      * Latina
                      * Lietuvių
                      * Bahasa Melayu
                      * Nederlands
                      * 日本語
                      * Norsk nynorsk
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Română
                      * Русский
                      * Simple English
                      * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                      * Suomi
                      * Svenska
                      * Türkçe
                      * Українська
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 22:03 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

