

# Watts Up With That?

## The world's most viewed site on global warming and climate change

# Menu

Skip to content

                
                                      * Home
                      * About
                        * About
                        * Awards
                        * Contact
                        * Compose story
                        * FAQs
                        * My Blog Spawn
                        * Policy
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Publications and Projects
                      * Climate FAIL Files
                        * Al Gore and Bill Nye FAIL at doing a simple CO2 experiment
                        * List of excuses for 'The Pause' in global warming
                        * The Gore-a-thon on WUWT
                      * Climategate
                      * Reference Pages
                        * Atmosphere Page
                          * CO2 Page
                          * Atmospheric Oscillation Page
                        * Climatic Phenomena
                          * ENSO Page
                          * ENSO Forecast Page
                          * Polar Vortex Page
                          * Northern Polar Vortex Page
                          * Southern Polar Vortex Page
                        * "Extreme Weather" Page
                          * Tornado Page
                          * Tropical Cyclone Page
                        * Geomagnetism Page
                        * Global Temperature – Climate
                          * Global Climate Page
                          * Global Temperature Page
                        * Glossary
                        * Ocean Page
                          * Oceanic Oscillation Page
                        * Paleoclimate Page
                        * Sea Ice Page
                          * Beaufort Sea Ice Page
                          * Great Lakes Ice Page
                          * Northern Regional Sea Ice Page
                        * Research
                          * Potential Climatic Variables Page
                          * The Spencer-Braswell & Dessler papers
                        * Solar Page
                        * US Weather – Climate
                          * US Climate Page
                          * US Weather Page
                      * Submit story
                      * Tips and Notes
                      * Test
                

# IPCC silently slashes its global warming predictions in the AR5 final draft

Guest Blogger / January 1, 2014

_**Guest essay by Christopher Monckton of Brenchley**_

Unnoticed, the IPCC has slashed its global-warming predictions, implicitly
rejecting the models on which it once so heavily and imprudently relied. In
the second draft of the _Fifth Assessment Report_ it had broadly agreed with
the models that the world will warm by 0.4 to 1.0 Cº from 2016-2035 against
1986-2005. But in the final draft it quietly cut the 30-year projection to
0.3-0.7 Cº, saying the warming is more likely to be at the lower end of the
range [equivalent to about 0.4 Cº over 30 years]. If that rate continued till
2100, global warming this century could be as little as 1.3 Cº.

Official projections of global warming have plummeted since Dr. James Hansen
of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies told the U.S. Congress in June 1988
the world would warm by 1 Cº every 20 years till 2050 (Fig. 1), implying 6 Cº
to 2100.

![clip_image002](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image002_thumb1.jpg)![clip_image002](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image002_thumb1.jpg)

Figure 1. Projected global warming from 1988-2019 on three scenarios (above),
and from 1988-2060 on scenario A only (below), based on Hansen (1988), who
testified before the U.S. Congress that June that scenario A was his business-
as-usual case. The trend from 1988-2050 on that scenario (arrowed) is
approximately 0.5 Cº/decade.

![clip_image004](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image004_thumb.jpg)![clip_image004](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image004_thumb.jpg)

IPCC (1990: p. xi) projected warming of 0.2-0.5 Cº/decade to 2100. IPCC (1995:
p. 6) projected 0.1-0.35 Cº/decade. IPCC (2001: p. 8) projected 0.13-0.43
Cº/decade to 2050. IPCC (2007: p. 13, table SPM.3) projected 0.11-0.64
Cº/decade to 2100.

![clip_image006](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image006_thumb.jpg)![clip_image006](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image006_thumb.jpg)

Figure 2. Near-term warming projections (2005-2050) relative to 1986-2005,
based on 42 models (colors) against observations (black). The second-order
draft of IPCC (2013) projected global warming at 0.4-1.0 Cº over 30 years (red
arrows), equivalent to 0.13-0.33 Cº/decade. The final draft projected warming
at 0.4-0.7 Cº over 30 years (green arrows), equivalent to just 0.10-0.23
Cº/decade. Diagram based on IPCC (2013, Fig. 11.25a).

The second-order draft of IPCC (2013: fig. 11.33) had projected 0.13-0.33
Cº/decade to 2050. However, the final draft slashed this projection to
0.10-0.23 Cº/decade (Fig. 2), the IPCC’s best guess being closer to the lower
than to the upper bound of the revised range.

The projected range in the second-order draft had been consistent with the
models, but the revised range in the final draft was at the low end of models’
projections (Fig. 3). Implicitly, the IPCC no longer accepts that models
accurately project warming.

The IPCC says:

“Overall, in the absence of major volcanic eruptions – which would cause
significant but temporary cooling – and, assuming no significant future long
term changes in solar irradiance, it is _likely_ ( >66% probability) that the
GMST [global mean surface temperature] anomaly for the period 2016–2035,
relative to the reference period of 1986–2005, will be in the range
0.3°C–0.7°C (expert assessment, to one significant figure; _medium confidence_
).” (IPCC, 2013, p. 11-52).

![clip_image008](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image008_thumb.jpg)![clip_image008](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image008_thumb.jpg)

Figure 3. Above: Models’ global warming projections, 2016-2035 vs. 1986-2005,
against the IPCC’s projected interval of 0.4-1.0 K over 30 years, equivalent
to 0.13-0.33 K decade–1 (between the gray dotted lines, based on IPCC 2013,
2nd draft, fig. 11.33c). Below: Final draft’s revised interval of 0.3-0.7 K
over 30 years or 0.10-2.33 K decade–1, visibly at the low end of models’
projections (based on IPCC, 2013, fig. 11.25c). This implicit rejection of the
models’ forecasting skill has passed unnoticed until now. Reviewers of the
second draft were not consulted about the change in the IPCC’s key near-term
projections, though many had argued for it.

![clip_image010](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image010_thumb.jpg)![clip_image010](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image010_thumb.jpg)

The IPCC’s explicit reliance on its own “expert assessment” rather than upon
the models’ projections is a significant climbdown. However, even its reduced
best estimate of 0.13 Cº/decade may still be on the high side. Observed
outturn since 1950 has been below 0.11 Cº/decade (HadCRUT4, 2013: Fig. 4).

![clip_image012](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image012_thumb.jpg)![clip_image012](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image012_thumb.jpg)

Figure 4. Global mean surface temperature anomalies and 0.11 Cº/decade least-
squares trend, January 1950 to November 2013 (from HadCRUT4 data).

That is not all. Despite record increases in CO2 concentration, there has been
no global warming for almost 13 years (mean of GISS, HadCRUT4, NCDC, RSS, &
UAH temperature data: Fig. 5), or, by satellite measurements, for more than 17
years (RSS, 2013: Fig. 6), and no warming distinguishable from the combined
measurement, coverage, and bias uncertainties for 18 years (HadCRUT4, 2013:
Fig. 7).

![clip_image014](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image014_thumb.jpg)![clip_image014](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image014_thumb.jpg)

Figure 5. Monthly global mean surface or lower-troposphere anomalies (dark
blue) and least-squares linear-regression trend (bright blue: mean of GISS,
HadCRUT4, NCDC, RSS, and UAH data), January 2001 to November 2013, showing no
global warming for almost 13 years notwithstanding continuing rapid increases
in atmospheric CO2 concentration (gray).

![clip_image016](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image016_thumb.jpg)![clip_image016](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image016_thumb.jpg)

Figure 6. Despite a near-linear increase of 2 μatm/year in CO2 concentration
(NOAA, 2013, gray), the least-squares linear-regression trend (bright blue) on
the RSS satellite monthly global mean lower-troposphere anomalies (dark blue)
has been zero for 17 years 3 months (207 months).

![clip_image018](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image018_thumb.jpg)![clip_image018](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image018_thumb.jpg)

Figure 7. HadCRUT4 monthly global mean surface temperature anomalies and
trend, February 1996 to November 2013, showing a linear trend entirely within
and hence indistinguishable from the combined measurement, coverage, and bias
uncertainties.

In the light of the growing divergence between projection and observation, a
direct comparison between the IPCC’s now-reduced near-term global warming
projections and observed temperature change since 2005 is of value as a
performance indicator for the models’ global-warming projections.

Fig. 8 shows such a comparison, based on the downgraded projections in IPCC
(2013, fig. 11.25a: see Fig. 2 above). In the nine years since 2005, a
divergence of 0.15 Cº has occurred.

![clip_image020](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image020_thumb.jpg)![clip_image020](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image020_thumb.jpg)

Figure 8. Orange region: Models’ projections of global warming, January 2005
to November 2013, on the interval 1.33 [1.0, 2.33] Cº/century (from IPCC,
2013, fig. 11.25a). The second draft’s mid-range estimate is the final draft’s
high-end estimate; the former low-end estimate is now the central estimate.
Thick red trend-line: central projection of 0.12 K warming over the 107-month
period, equivalent to 1.33 Cº/century. Gray curve and trend-line: monthly CO2
concentration anomalies (NOAA, 2013) and 18 μatm (198 μatm/century) trend,
which caused 0.24 W m–2 forcing (or 0.35 W m–2 including other anthropogenic
forcings). Of the 0.21 Cº warming projected to arise from this forcing, almost
half was previously committed. Thick bright blue trend-line: Global cooling of
0.03 Cº (0.30 Cº/century: mean of five datasets). Over the period, the models
over-predicted global warming by 0.15 Cº (1.6 Cº/century).

Multiple lines of evidence now confirm that the models and consequently the
IPCC have overestimated global warming. Yet neither that misconceived
organization nor any of its host of unthinking devotees has displayed any
remorse. Instead, they persist in maintaining that the warming is temporarily
paused, though they cannot really explain why; or they blame particulate
aerosols, their get-out-of-jail-free fudge-factor; or they pretend warming is
really continuing unabated, saying it has gone into hiding deep in the oceans
where, conveniently, we cannot measure it, or that the Earth-atmosphere system
has a fever driven by four atom-bombs’-worth of heat content increase every
second.

What they are not prepared to countenance, notwithstanding the real-world,
measured evidence, is the growing probability that they and their precious
models have so badly misunderstood the climate, or so well understood it and
so badly misrepresented it, that global warming is simply not going to occur
at anything like any of the exaggerated rates that they had until now so
confidently over-predicted.

Do not underestimate the importance of the IPCC’s climbdown, albeit that it is
furtive and that there is not a hint of it in the _Summary for Policymakers_ –
the only part of the latest assessment that lazy politicians and incurious
journalists may ever get around to reading.

![clip_image022](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image022_thumb.jpg)![clip_image022](http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image022_thumb.jpg)

Figure 9. Five projections of global warming, 1990-2050, compared with the
linear trends on two observed datasets. IPCC projections are mid-range
estimates. The trend (green) on the HadCRUt4 monthly global mean surface
temperature anomalies reflects the warming at 0.11 K decade–1 observed since
1950. The trend (dark green) on the RSS satellite data reflects the zero trend
that has now persisted for more than 17 years. Both observed trends are
extrapolated to 2050.

If anyone ever again tries to tell you The Science Is Settled, as the now-axed
Klimate Kommissariat in Australia is still trying to do in its latest
taxpayer-funded propaganda sheet, point to Fig. 9 and ask two questions.

First, point to the red zone marked _Projections_ and ask which of the very
wide range of official projections The Science has Settled upon.

Secondly, point to the green zone marked _Observations_ and ask why the real
climate has so persistently failed to pay any attention to the Settled
Science.

Then sit back and listen to the increasingly demoralized and disjointed
flannel. As the nonsense runs down, the game is up.

===============================================================

**References**

GISS, 2013, Monthly global mean surface temperature anomalies, 1880-2013, from
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/tabledata_v3/GLB.Ts+dSST.txt.

HadCRUT4, 2013, Monthly global mean surface temperature anomalies, from
www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadcrut4/data/current/time_series/HadCRUT.4.2.0.0.monthly_ns_avg.txt.

Hansen, J., I., Fung, A. Lacis, D. Rind, S. Lebedeff, R. Ruedy, and G.
Russell, 1988, Global climate changes as forecast by Goddard Institute for
Space Studies Three-Dimensional Model. _J. Geophys. Res._ 93 (D8): 9341-9364.

IPCC, 1990, _Climate Change – The IPCC Assessment (1990):_ **_Report prepared
for Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change by Working Group I,_** J.T.
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, Great Britain, New York, NY, USA and Melbourne, Australia, 410 pp.

IPCC, 1995, _Climate Change 1995 – The Science of Climate Change: Contribution
of WG1 to the Second Assessment Report,_ J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, B.A.
Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, Great Britain, New York, NY, USA and Melbourne,
Australia.

IPCC, 2001, _Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change_ [Houghton, J.T., Y. Ding, D.J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P.J. van
der Linden, X. Dai, K. Maskell and C.A. Johnson (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA, 881 pp.

IPCC, 2007, _Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, 2007_ [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M.
Marquis, K.B. Avery, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)], Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA.

IPCC, 2013, _Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change_ [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)],
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA.

NCDC, 2013, Monthly global mean surface temperature anomalies, 1880-2013, from
ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov

/pub/data/anomalies/monthly.land_ocean.90S.90N.df_1901-2000mean.dat.

NOAA, 2013, Monthly mean atmospheric CO2 concentration anomalies, 1958-2013,
from ftp://ftp.cmdl.noaa.gov/ccg/co2/trends/co2_mm_mlo.txt.

RSS, Inc., 2013, Global mean lower-troposphere temperature anomalies,
1979-2013,
remss.com/data/msu/monthly_time_series/RSS_Monthly_MSU_AMSU_Channel_TLT_Anomalies_Land_and_Ocean_v03_3.txt.

UAH, 2013 **,** Satellite MSU monthly global mean lower-troposphere
temperature anomalies: vortex.nsstc.uah.edu/data/msu/t2lt/uahncdc.lt.

Advertisements

### Share this:

                
                                      * Print
                      * Email
                      * Twitter
                      * Facebook
                      * Pinterest
                      * LinkedIn
                      * Reddit
                      * ### Like this:
                

Like Loading...

January 1, 2014 in IPCC, IPCC AR5 Report. Tags: Christopher Monckton 3rd
Viscount Monckton of Brenchley, climate change, Global warming, Goddard
Institute for Space Studies, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC
2013, James Hansen

### Related posts

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/08/co2-sky.jpg)

### A Story of CO2 Data Manipulation

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2014/03/certaintychannel_ipcc_reality.png)

### Climate Modellers Waiting for Observations to Catch Up with Their

Predictions

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/smoke-map-181117-50x50.png)

### The Picasso Problem

# Post navigation

<- AMSA: Helicopter rescue of Akademik Shokalskiy completed

Ocean Heat Content Variations—Satellites vs Oceanographers ->

## 172 thoughts on "IPCC silently slashes its global warming predictions in

the AR5 final draft"

                
                                      1. GlynnMhor says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:01 pm

I generally tend to trust those recognized to be experts in their field, when
they're talking about their field, at least.  
But once these 'experts' have been caught out in lie after lie after lie,
their credibility in my mind declines markedly.

                
                                      2. Bob Tisdale says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:04 pm

Thanks, Christopher. Happy New Year to you.  
Regards

                
                                      3. PaulH says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:06 pm

"Unnoticed," indeed! The IPCC doesn't seem seem to be aware of modern
communications technology. ;->

                
                                      4. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:06 pm

The point being tha  
T they are still expecting an increasing temperature.

                
                                      5. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:07 pm

Does Christopher think that everything in a draft document should appear in
the final report?

                
                                      6. Jean Parisot says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:12 pm

Did they widen the error bars, or even discuss error and confidence?

                
                                      7. Resourceguy says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:15 pm

First they air brushed Michael Mann off the A list of experts and predictions
and now Hansen, but the money still pulls them like an unseen force.

                
                                      8. John says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:16 pm

It's like a married couple - as time moves along, they see and hear only what
they want to. How obvious must the lie be before they will concede…

                
                                      9. dbstealey says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:16 pm

Billmelater,  
Why does it bother you to see temperature trends vs CO2: actual, vs modeled?

                
                                      10. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:18 pm

It doesn't bother me, why do you think I am?

                
                                      11. dbstealey says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:22 pm

Billmelater,  
Maybe I was mistaken. You seemed to be bothered.  
You also write, "they are still expecting an increasing temperature."  
How about you? Ready to place a small wager? ☺

                
                                      12. troe says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:24 pm

Let us hope that 2014 brings disinvestment to the worst offenders. We will be
working toward that goal.

                
                                      13. Andres Valencia says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:25 pm

Thanks, Christopher, Lord Monckton.  
It looks to me like the IPCC is taking a step back every time they have half a
chance.  
Their GCMs were supposed to be so good that it was worth it to buy ever more
powerful computers to run them. Now, not so much.  
Happy New Year and thanks for the good work in 2013.

                
                                      14. troe says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:31 pm

Billmelater. They have been "expecting" rising temps all along. It's the lack
of same that has wrong footed them. That and things like ice in Antartica.
Think then write.

                
                                      15. Mark McGuire says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:44 pm

Here is an inconvenient truth:  
"In climate research and modelling we should recognise that we are dealing
with a coupled non-linear chaotic system and therefore that long term
prediction of future climate states is not possible."  
UN-IPCC Third Assessment Report 2001. Section 14.2.2.2 page 774

                
                                      16. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:55 pm

Hear, hear, Christopher Monckton. Well done! Thank you for the truth-in-
science _tour de force._  
Damned out of their own mouths:  
"The IPCC says:

> “Overall, … and, assuming … to one significant figure; medium confidence).”
(IPCC, 2013, p. 11-52).

"  
Joe and Maria Voter Hear: "blah, blah, blah… **medium confidence**. "  
Maria (disgustedly): What that supposed to mean? Fifty-fifty. Oh, I'm really
going to go out there now and do what they say based on that -- NOT.  
Joe (turns the channel): They must think we're a bunch of morons.  
Bottom line:  
**CO2 UP. WARMING STOPPED.**  
AGW is over.  
Finis.  
Half the AGW orchestra have left the hall and those wild-eyed few still
sitting in the pit are playing a laughably muddled cacophony of JUNK; all they
have left to trumpet are disharmonious speculation and bold-faced lies) …… The
audience, after laughing at them, has gotten up and left. There are two
remaining: that guy who has been sound asleep from the opening movement, and
the guy who gave them the loan for the hall rental, and he is looking at his
watch… .)

* * *

(btw: why would anyone bill that intellectual wastrel, "billme…," (above) at
**all**? -- he or she has completely refused to take advantage of any of the
tutoring services offered so far.)  
@ Billme -- that's okay, kid. It's on the house.

                
                                      17. Mary Wilbur says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:56 pm

Thank you, Christopher Monckton, for your excellent work.

                
                                      18. Mike from Carson Valley a particularly cold place that could benefit from some warming says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:58 pm

Apparently even the IPCC doesn't take the IPCC seriously either.

                
                                      19. oMan says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:58 pm

Thanks very much. All good, and Figure 9 is a beautiful distillation of the
argument. The Red Arrows of Fear, successively toppling toward the near-
horizontal Green Lines of Fact, say it all.

                
                                      20. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 6:59 pm

poor Maria -- I made her SOUND like a moron (head shake) -- she actually said:
"What **' s** that …"

                
                                      21. Lew Skannen says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 7:00 pm

Happy New Year to you Lord Monckton and thanks for your efforts so far.  
Regarding the graphs I think that the easiest solution is for the IPCC to
publish a graph in which 'reality' is just treated as an outlier and removed
from an otherwise luverly graph.

                
                                      22. Box of Rocks says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 7:10 pm

Cheer up chap, the game is not over.  
They still want your money and for you to live in energy poverty.  
They just can't be honest about it.

                
                                      23. berniel says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 7:45 pm

Where is the 'final' draft of the chapters? Which is this draft? Is this the
one made available at the Stockholm WGI meeting in September? Can someone
please clarify for those not paying attention.  
There was a final draft that still required modification to align it with the
SPM that was agreed in Stockholm as discussed here:  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2013/10/12/tail-wagging-the-dog-ipcc-to-rework-
ar5-to-be-consistent-with-the-spm/  
Also released at the time was the list of amendments to align with the agreed
SPM (I can't get to the 'final' draft nor this table of amendments right now).  
So where was this new range introduced:  
"anomaly for the period 2016–2035, relative to the reference period of
1986–2005, will be in the range _0.3°C–0.7°C_ "?  
If introduced into the 'final' draft circulated at Stockholm then I am
surprised that it has only now been picked up.  
If introduced after Stockholm, then the question is: was it mentioned in the
tabulation of amendments also released there?

                
                                      24. Rob says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 7:49 pm

Sneaky…sneaky!!

                
                                      25. berniel says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 7:59 pm

….answering my own question. It was in the 'final' report as circulated at
Stockholm (ch 11 p52).  
So this appears to be a significant change in the assessment projection that
has been missed (?) by everyone until new. Wow.  
See p52 here:  
http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/uploads/WGIAR5_WGI-12Doc2b_FinalDraft_Chapter11.pdf

                
                                      26. totuudenhenki says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:00 pm

Now we need to create press releases to MSM and send it as actively as
Greenpeace. This is just a good starting point. References must be exact and
pointing to original sources. Copyrights must be absolutely clear.  
Bashing Hansen might give some pleasure but let's leave that sandbox play and
stick on the facts only. It will be easier to get published if we don't
emphasize that this means game over to the global warming agenda.

                
                                      27. davidmhoffer says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:03 pm

Oh. So the data _does_ matter after all?  
_“The data doesn’t matter. We’re not basing our recommendations on the data.
We’re basing them on the climate models.”  
Prof. Chris Folland, Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research_  
We 've come full circle?

                
                                      28. Eric Simpson says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:06 pm

GlynnMhor says at 6:01 pm: I generally tend to trust those recognized to be
experts in their field, when they’re talking about their field, at least. But
once these ‘experts’ have been caught out in lie after lie after lie, their
credibility in my mind declines markedly.

* * *

I thought that my earlier Real Science comment is kind of relevant to what you
said:  
The thing is that it’s not possible to disentangle the politics from the
supposed science.  
Even way before the global warming scare had gained any noteworthy recognition
among scientists and politicos, as in the early ’70s, leftist politicians and
leftist scientists were already spewing as desirable the anti-energy and de-
industrialization proposals that now masquerade “coincidentally” as the
solution to global warming. For example, John Holdren, Obama’s current Science
Czar, said way back in 1973 that we must “de-develop the United States… and
create a low consumption economy.” It wasn’t global warming that drove Holdren
to say that then, but _now_ it’s global warming that supposedly moves Holdren
to say exactly the same thing. Truth is that Holdren obviously thought that
de-development was the right thing to do for it’s own sake, despite the untold
misery and huge reductions in quality of life that such an extreme path would
cause. And we have leftist politicians like the senator Tim Wirth in 1993
joining in, saying: “We’ve got to ride the global warming issue. Even if the
theory of global warming is wrong, we will be doing the right thing.”  
And today, many leftist warmist pundits continue to insist that even if they
are wrong on their theory, that what they propose what would “make the world
better anyway.” No. WRONG. Take the absurdly high _83%_ CO2 cuts mandated in
the 2009 cap  & trade bill that _passed_ the U.S. House. That bill would have
taken an nearly apocalyptic wrecking ball to the economy and civil society. It
wouldn’t have made “a better world.” Far from it.  
The scientists have been told to lie, starting with lead ipcc author Stephen
Schneider in 1989 (“We have to offer up scary scenarios… each of us has to
decide the right balance between being effective [lying] and being honest
[ineffective]”). Over and over again the warmist scientists have idiotically
expressed the view _publicly_ that it’s _good_ to deceive the public in order
to advance “the cause.” There is just no way you can say that the “science”
advanced by the suspect climate scientists, who have been told point blank
that they should not be honest, **there is no way that that science can be
given ANY credibility. It is corrupted, tainted, worthless.** Climate science
is a crock. As a matter of fact any poll of the alleged consensus among
scientists on climate change needs to _exclude_ (post 1990 vintage) climate
scientists because they cannot be considered politically unbiased or
impartial.

                
                                      29. R. de Haan says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:17 pm

Helicopter rescue delayed as second ship is trapped in the ice:
http://www.smh.com.au/travel/travel-incidents/helicopter-rescue-delayed-as-
second-ship-trapped-in-ice-20140102-306yj.html#

                
                                      30. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:21 pm

Re: "come full circle" (davidmhoffer) -- "going in __(s)" is more likely, heh.
Great quote!

* * *

In a line: "Climate science is a crock." (Eric Simpson!) Great post. Thanks
for sharing. Once someone is known (here, as you point out, self-declared!) to
be a l1ar, one cannot take ANY-thing they say seriously.

                
                                      31. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:22 pm

troe:. They have been “expecting” rising temps all along. It’s the lack of
same that has wrong footed them. That and things like ice in Antartica. Think
then write.  
Troe, that is what they are expecting. What did you think they wee saying.  
I don't understand your comment about Antarctic ice. Are you extrapolating
what is happening in Antarctica to to the rest of them earth? If that is the
case, can you also extrapolate what is happening in South Australia (top temp
of 50 degrees centigrade) to the rest of the world as well?

                
                                      32. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:24 pm

Thanks, R. de Haan, for making sure those of us in this room got that
important status bulletin, too. (smile)

                
                                      33. Werner Brozek says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 8:46 pm

Typo:  
_The final draft projected warming at 0.4-0.7 Cº over 30 years (green arrows),
equivalent to just 0.10-0.23 Cº/decade._  
For the 0.10 to be correct, it has to be 0.3 and not 0.4 as stated higher up.  
What does this do to the C in CAGW? Without the C, is there any need for
future conferences to cut down CO2 emissions?

                
                                      34. Scott Scarborough says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:13 pm

Maybe that is why they are now 95% confident over the 90% confidence in the
last report. They are more confident of a lower number. I would be to!

                
                                      35. garymount says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:15 pm

Billmelater says:  
January 1, 2014 at 8:22 pm …can you also extrapolate what is happening in
South Australia (top temp of 50 degrees centigrade) to the rest of the world
as well?

* * *

You dirty rotten liar:  
http://joannenova.com.au/2013/02/how-well-did-that-50-degree-forecast-work-
out-for-the-bom/

                
                                      36. Streetcred says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:24 pm

Doesn't the IPCC remind one of the Wherethefukrwee bird of the Central African
savannas ? You know, the 'long-necked' one that flies in ever diminishing
circles until eventually its head disappears into a dark orifice … at which
time the plainted cry of 'thewherethefukrwee' is heard echoing across the
plains.  
Apologies in advance but its 2014. 😉

                
                                      37. Eric Simpson says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:30 pm

Janice says:  
In a line: “Climate science is a crock.” (Eric Simpson!) Great post. Thanks
for sharing. Once someone is known (here, as you point out, self-declared!) to
be a l1ar, one cannot take ANY-thing they say seriously.

* * *

I got a bunch of quotes from these guys saying that they should make things
up, such as Schneider saying they should "offer up scary scenarios" and find
the balance between effectiveness and honesty. Of course, it implicitly clear
that honesty is not effective. I get a sense that the words of Scneider and
others has pervaded the body politic among climatologists. Understand that
circa 1990 a boatload of cash flowed in to lavishly establish the newly
reconfigured field of climatology. And the field of climatology was tasked not
with finding out whether CO2 was causing dangerous warming, but with
convincing the public of that. That was the mission. Convince the public, not
of the truth, but of the "scary scenarios." Modern climatology was given a
public relations / marketing task from it's ~ 1990 inception, and told to lie.
There is no science there. None. It's wall to wall bs meant to support their
public relations mission.  
Janice, I think you're going to be #1 next year when the annual report comes
out! Of course, it's not about quantity, but quality. But your quality never
ceases to ~~amuse~~ amaze me. Actually, amaze _and_ amuse!  
……………………………………………. …………………… ……………..  
“It doesn’t matter what is true, it only matters what people believe is true.”
-Paul Watson, Greenpeace  
“We have to offer up scary scenarios… each of us has to decide the right
balance between being effective and being honest.” -Stephen Schneider, lead
ipcc author, 1989  
“Unless we announce disasters no one will listen.” -Sir John Houghton, ex ipcc
chair  
“I believe it is appropriate to have an over-representation of .. how
dangerous it is.” -Al Gore  
“Only sensational exaggeration makes the kind of story that will get
politicians’ — and readers’ — attention.” -Monika Kopacz, Atmospheric
Scientist  
“The only way to get our society to truly change is to frighten people with
the possibility of a catastrophe.” -Daniel Botkin, ex Chair of Enironmental
Studies, UCSB  
“We’ve got to ride the global warming issue. Even if the theory of global
warming is wrong, we will be doing the right thing.” -leftist Senator Tim
Wirth, 1993

                
                                      38. john robertson says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:40 pm

So when does the IPCC disband?  
They have met their mandate, the answer was no.  
Now they can slink off before the lynch mobs get angry enough to form.  
Another "blinder well played".

                
                                      39. Christoph Dollis says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:49 pm

Fantastic post, Christopher, particularly those pointed two questions.
Sharing.

                
                                      40. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:51 pm

@ Gary Mount (re: 9:15pm, today): WAY -- TO -- GO! That little punk had that
coming.

* * *

@ Eric Simpson (smile) -- thanks. Oh, brother. I am ACTUALLY (lol) going to
try (ha, ha, ha) to post LESS this year. Meh, what-EVER, huh? I'll just post
as per usual (with a new power brake booster -- hope it works, my mouth engine
is a mighty one (an amazing one, heh, heh), Bwah, ha, ha, ha, haaa!).  
Those are SUPER great quotes! (I kind of remember you supplying them awhile
back) And, here they are again, to help us all remember (we hope) where they
are if we need them (we could yell, "HEY! ERIC SIMPSON!!!!" at the top of our
lungs, but, well, hm):  
{Quotes Supplied by Eric Simpson at 9:30pm, today}  
**“It doesn’t matter what is true, it only matters what people believe is
true.”**  
Paul Watson, Greenpeace  
**“We have to offer up scary scenarios… each of us has to decide the right
balance between being effective and being honest.”**  
Stephen Schneider, lead IPCC author, 1989  
**“Unless we announce disasters no one will listen.”**  
Sir John Houghton, ex IPCC chair  
**“I believe it is appropriate to have an over-representation of .. how
dangerous it is.”**  
Al Gore  
**“Only sensational exaggeration makes the kind of story that will get
politicians’ — and readers’ — attention.”**  
Monika Kopacz, Atmospheric Scientist  
**“The only way to get our society to truly change is to frighten people with
the possibility of a catastrophe.”**  
Daniel Botkin, ex Chair of Environmental Studies, UCSB  
**“We’ve got to ride the global warming issue. Even if the theory of global
warming is wrong, we will be doing the right thing.”**  
leftist Senator Tim Wirth, 1993  
(Thanks again, for all those super-great quotes, Eric Simpson)

                
                                      41. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:57 pm

Say, Eric Simpson, just thought of an idea. If you could supply cites for each
of those quotes, we WUWTers could copy that list and publish it in whatever
venue our pocketbooks will allow (I'd buy an ad in the New York Times and
billboards and metro bus ads, if I had the cash!), even if it's just a
newsletter we have access to. Yes, yes, we can research those cites ourselves,
too. If you haven't the time -- no problem.

                
                                      42. Cora Lynn says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 9:58 pm

garymount  
January 1, 2014 at 9:15 pm  
Please take your 'dirty rotten lier' comment back:  
http://www.smh.com.au/environment/weather/australia-weather-temperatures-set-
to-peak-just-shy-of-50-degrees-20140101-306cz.html  
Your reference was referring to last year (it has gotten hotter since then).

                
                                      43. Eugene WR Gallun says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:00 pm

Warmists seem to have split into two unequal groups -- the smaller group is
trying to walk back previous predictions and the larger group has decided just
to tell bigger lies.  
Eugene WR Gallun

                
                                      44. SAMURAI says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:04 pm

How long will good people of conscience allow these leftist loony looters to
perpetuate this disconfirmed CAGW hypothesis.  
Even As climate sensitity projections continue being "revised" downward (now
1/10th~1/20th of original projections) these scoundrels have the audacity to
keep repeating they're tired and now despicable mantra of "it's worse than we
thought." TM.  
How can revisions of 1/20th of original projections be "worse than we thought"
TM? It defies logic, common sense and morality.  
Forget moral integrity (that bridge was burned years ago), when will the
general scientific community realize that it's in their own best interests to
start speaking out against this hideous CAGW scam as their funding will
eventually suffer greatly once the blowback from the CAGW scandal unfolds…

                
                                      45. Janice Moore says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:09 pm

@ Cora Lynn: "just shy of" makes Billme still a **" dirty rotten liar."**

                
                                      46. Cora Lynn says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:14 pm

Janice Moore says:  
Don't think so. Garymount is less honest to refer to a year old article. Where
as Billme was rounding up.

                
                                      47. cartoonmick says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:23 pm

The climate argument between believers and nonbelievers will still be
happening when Mankind is wiped out by a very predictable cause.  
And the cause will be,,,,,,,,,,, , , ,  
Well, maybe this cartoon will give you a clue - - -  
http://cartoonmick.wordpress.com/editorial-political/#jp-carousel-205  
Cheers  
Mick

                
                                      48. garymount says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:24 pm

Clearly the year old article I reference shows hot temperatures have always
occurred throughout Australian history. The Antarctic ice is a 30 year trend.
I regret my earlier statement, I forgot to add stinkin and scoundrel.

                
                                      49. Patrick says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:30 pm

"Billmelater says:  
January 1, 2014 at 8:22 pm"  
There is absolutely nothing unusual happening with regards to temperatures in
northern SA, other than the hype the media are applying. And remember, at
least one of those highs was recorded at an airport!

                
                                      50. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:33 pm

Garymount. What is it with you that you have to start abusing people. Scared
your arguments aren't sound enough?

                
                                      51. Patrick says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:35 pm

"Cora Lynn says:  
January 1, 2014 at 9:58 pm"  
What you are forgetting is that the BoM changed the way they measure
temperatures using satellites covering areas that were never covered before.
Also the BoM introduced 2 new "hot" colours last year which were removed
because they were simply wrong. Still, I don't see how the BoM can calculate a
national average based on 112 ground based thermometers. That's 1 device for
every ~68,500 squre kilometers. There is nothing unusual about the current
summer temperatures.

                
                                      52. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:41 pm

Just so you that you are informed, I just found this:  
'at the Pink Roadhouse in Oodnadatta, owner Adriana Jacob said her personal
weather gauge showed temperatures had soared to as high as 54C '  
So before calling people liars, you should do a little checking yourself.  
But the point stands, but raising the issue of ice in Antarctica (who would
have thought that?) is a meaningless gesture as it means nothing. Then has the
temerity to say think before you write. Pot Kettle Black?

                
                                      53. mib8 says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:42 pm

OK, folks, here's something I don't get in these graphs or some of the earlier
ones. If there is a non-negative "anomaly" I've always understood it to mean
that global warming is happening. Whether it is 0.001 degree or 0.1 degree or
0.9 degree or 2 degrees, it's still "warming".  
Of course, 3 degrees over 100 years has significantly different effects from
0.4 degree over 100 years; the former being only a little more than mildly
annoying while the latter hardly noticeable. From what I recall my profs
touting, it would take 4 to 6 degrees to even approach the mildest of the wild
horrors of the warmist hysterics.  
So, why do all of the graphs seem to show some global warming over the last
17-18 years, when several postings have said that the data show no global
warming over that period? I'm not trying to be annoying; I just don't
understand.

                
                                      54. Billmelater says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 10:53 pm

Mib8 not sure myself. Someone told me there was a difference between heat and
temperature. Some substance can gain heat and not increase temperature.
Something called latent heat. Sounds weird but I suppose it can happen.

                
                                      55. Greg Goodman says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:14 pm

"The IPCC’s explicit reliance on its own “expert assessment” rather than upon
the models’ projections is a significant climbdown."  
IPCC has always worked on this obscure 'show of hands' / gut feeling method of
assessment. That is subjective and open to criticism. Models have always been
one of the elements influencing the expert opinion. It would seem that they
are being given a lot less weight than before. That is as it _should be_ , it
is not something with which to try to beat them over the head.  
His Lordship seems to be too accustomed to the yabooing of the british
parliament where you lambaste your opponents for being wrong then lambaste
them again, should they be foolish enough to change their minds and agree with
you.  
**The IPCC will have to do something close to a U-turn on the position they
have been pedalling. In the interests of the rest of the planet that process
should be made as easy and quick as possible. Trying to berate them every time
they make the slightest concession to good sense and the facts is not going to
help speed up that process.**

                
                                      56. andrewmharding says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:22 pm

So this is what the IPCC are going to do to save face? They are going to
downgrade their increase in global temperature projections to figures that are
statistically insignificant, but they are still going to scare the wits out of
anyone gullible enough to listen to them?  
Christopher, thank you for sharing this with us, have a very happy 2014!

                
                                      57. garymount says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:30 pm

It has become quite obvious to me as of late that something much better than
the current methods of information dissemination is required.  
So I am announcing today the project code-named Wattson : sub-core project
Colossus.  
Scenario year, 2020.  
Scenario begins:  
It's the year 2020 and Mr. Forbin has just unboxed his new computer using
Intel's latest 5nm process node technology that went into full production just
in the past year. Forbin recalls just 6 years earlier working on the Colossus
project with his first generation i7 processor computer. The new computer fits
in 169 times the number of transistors in the same space as that first
generation version. But there's more to that equation, as greater use of the 3
dimensional space is now used in present day processors.  
Then there's the hybrid nature of this latest computer with 4 hybrid cores
fitting in the space of one CPU class core. The sum results of all these
advancements is a computer that executes code several thousand times faster
than the computer Colossus Alpha first ran on. A supercomputer in a box, on my
desk, thought Forbin, about time.  
Then there's the additional computing power outside of the super-computer core
processor, there's the graphics/physics plug in cards. Now the desktop box is
a super-computer on steroids.  
Never-the-less one only needs the mainstream computer to run the Wattson :
Colossus app:  
Having read some article, about temperatures, or some article about some
condition of the environment somewhere on Earth, Mr. Forbin interacts with
Wattson to display rich visuals of the Earth and the data carefully curated by
both skeptic and warmist alike (disclaimer, future scenarios are just
projections 🙂 )  
It is the hope that students and politicians, policy makers and…trolls will be
using Wattson with their 4k monitors, in many cases 3 or more of them, to
explore the latest science, with terabytes of data already deployed on the
machines to investigate the claims of Pine beetle epidemics and albedo
changes.  
Scenario Ends:  
This project is being announced 1 year ahead of schedule, so take that into
consideration. I plan on a 10 part series to be published on WUWT sometime
next year, with a final article where I turn things up to 11 and announce the
code-named Wattson project : sub-core project Bastardi In A Box, in January
2016.  
Note, I wrote this up in a hurry to meet the midnight deadline so I could have
this published Jan 1, 2014.

                
                                      58. Eric Simpson says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:34 pm

Janice, for the sake of all of us here, don't post less! And a huge thanks for
replaying my quotes in a more prominent and attractive way. Excellent! And
your idea of running the quotes like on the sides of buses and the NYT is
outstanding. This could probably be done on the cheap. Also, possibly Google
Adsense could be used to funnel interested people into a site of selected
quotes. References would be good, and of course for the most part I haven't
bothered maintaining those links. Sure, anyone could google a bit of a quote
to get to some links that will hopefully lead you to a more original source. A
possible problem is that most sites limit the number of links you can include
in a comment, or at least without going to moderation. Regardless, if we want
to get serious about the quotes, links would be essential, so at some point
I'll try to find the time to find links for key quotes, and at times give the
links. I'm thinking I wouldn't provide the links most of the time though
anyway just to keep things quick and simple.  
Also, when you talk about the great idea of running some of these quotes in
ads and stuff, I think also of this 3 1/2 minute video that exposes Al Gore's
deceptions on CO2, that it would be great to get everyone in the country to
see this key key video, somehow:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WK_WyvfcJyg&info=GGWSwindle_CO2Lag

                
                                      59. garymount says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:37 pm

In my hurry I misnamed the first project, it's supposed to be "Colossus-in-a-
Box".

                
                                      60. RossP says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:37 pm

Where does this leave the predictions from Prof Sherwood announced in recent
days ?  
( maybe with a truck load of egg on his face )

                
                                      61. Allan MacRae says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:38 pm

http://www.thegatesnotes.com/Books/Personal/The-Bet?WT.mc_id=12_13_2013_TheBet  
The Gates Notes - 12 THE BIGGER BET  
Note to Bill Gates:  
First, Happy New Year to you and yours Bill ! I see you have not agreed to
take me up on my BIGGER BET.  
To reiterate, here it is. If you prefer, we can make it a bet for $1. Your
call Bill - it’s not about the money.  
Best regards, Allan

* * *

Hello Bill,  
Your article is about THE BET made in 1981 between Paul Ehrlich and Julian
Simon.  
May I suggest that it is time for another BIGGER BET.  
I wrote in an article in the Calgary Herald published on September 1, 2002:  
“If (as I believe) solar activity is the main driver of surface temperature
rather than CO2, we should begin the next cooling period by 2020 to 2030.”  
Bill, I bet you $10,000 that the Global Average Lower Troposphere Temperature
for December 2019 will be colder than Global Average Lower Troposphere
Temperature for the current month of December 2013.  
The key to a good bet is that it is independently measurable. The Surface
Temperature records are generally unreliable for many reasons. The Satellite
Measurements of the Lower Troposphere are much more accurate.  
The Satellite Measurements of the Lower Troposphere are independently analyzed
by  
UAH in Huntsville Alabama http://nsstc.uah.edu/climate/  
and  
Remote Sensing Systems in Northern California http://www.remss.com/  
I have used UAH in my work so I propose that this be used in our BIGGER BET,
but I am open to negotiation.  
http://nsstc.uah.edu/climate/2013/november/tlt_update_bar112013.jpg  
Since you apparently believe the IPCC and its thousands of professional
researchers, I suggest you should provide me with significant ODDS on our BET,
but I am prepared to go even-odds if you wish.  
So what do you say Bill? Are you in and what are your proposed terms?  
Best regards, Allan  
P.S.  
I don’t want to be unfair Bill, so I will tell you now that I am confident I
will win this bet, and I will win it with ease.  
Why? Because my predictive record is much better than that of the IPCC, as
noted in my earlier posts.  
And in science, I suggest that one’s predictive track is perhaps the only
objective measure of one’s competence.

                
                                      62. Christoph Dollis says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:39 pm

Martine Atherton of Brisbane promises a thorough debunking. I'll be sure to
pass it along here when she gets around to it.

> are you kidding me? I am on a phone right now but expect to get a thorough
debunking when I get the chance. and temper your hyperbole. it will get you
into all sorts of trouble.

                
                                      63. tobias smit says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:42 pm

The latest:  
http://www.3news.co.nz/Worst-case-climate-scenario-looking-more-
likely/tabid/1160/articleID/327000/Default.aspx,  
So sorry if that did not come through it was on NZ3 news Channel just a few
minutes ago ( as reported in the …. you guessed it…. the GUa …. loud laughter
prevents me from going further.

                
                                      64. Sharon Knapik says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:45 pm

Well done, Christopher, Lord Monckton!!! So pleased you continue to sound the
alarm with solid facts about these snake oil salesmen and their 'scientific'
lackeys. How anyone can allow themselves to spout such utter nonsense, for
such shallow objectives, is beyond my ken.

                
                                      65. William McClenney says:
                

January 1, 2014 at 11:51 pm

The problem here, of course, is that no one, not even one climate cognoscenti,
provides even a single nod that, as of today, the Holocene interglacial is now
11,717 years old…..  
That's two centuries or so beyond half the present precession cycle (or
23,000/2=11,500). Only one interglacial (that would be MIS-11) since the Mid-
Pleistocene Transition (MPT) has lasted longer than about half a precession
cycle. If the Holocene is supposed to last longer than about half a precession
cycle (which it has by a few centuries now) doesn't this at least deserve an
honorable mention?  
Not in any UN-IPCC Assessment Report.  
If the Holocene (MIS-1) is going to last longer than about half a precession
cycle, like MIS-11 did without anthropogenic GHG emissions, then we need
something better than  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921818102001868 (paywalled)  
as considered by Lisiecki and Raymo 2005
http://large.stanford.edu/publications/coal/references/docs/Lisiecki_Raymo_2005_Pal.pdf  
Recent research has focused on MIS 11 as a possible analog for the present
interglacial [e.g., Loutre and Berger, 2003; EPICA community members, 2004]
because both occur during times of low eccentricity. The LR04 age model
establishes that MIS 11 spans two precession cycles, with 18O values below
3.6h for 20 kyr, from 398{418 ka. In comparison, stages 9 and 5 remained below
3.6h for 13 and 12 kyr, respectively, and the Holocene interglacial has lasted
11 kyr so far. In the LR04 age model, the average LSR of 29 sites is the same
from 398{418 ka as from 250{650 ka; consequently, stage 11 is unlikely to be
arti cially stretched. However, the June 21 insolation minimum at 65N during
MIS 11 is only 489 W/m2, much less pronounced than the present minimum of 474
W/m2. In addition, current insolation values are not predicted to return to
the high values of late MIS 11 for another 65 kyr. We propose that this e
ectively precludes a \double precession-cycle" interglacial [e.g., Raymo,
1997] in the Holocene without human in infuence."  
and illuminated by:  
Boettger et al 2009 (Quaternary International 207 [2009] 137–144)
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040618209001475 (paywalled)  
“In terrestrial records from Central and Eastern Europe the end of the Last
Interglacial seems to be characterized by evident climatic and environmental
instabilities recorded by geochemical and vegetation indicators. The
transition (MIS 5e/5d) from the Last Interglacial (Eemian, Mikulino) to the
Early Last Glacial (Early Weichselian, Early Valdai) is marked by at least two
warming events as observed in geochemical data on the lake sediment profiles
of Central (Gro¨bern, Neumark–Nord, Klinge) and of Eastern Europe (Ples).
Results of palynological studies of all these sequences indicate
simultaneously a strong increase of environmental oscillations during the very
end of the Last Interglacial and the beginning of the Last Glaciation. This
paper discusses possible correlations of these events between regions in
Central and Eastern Europe. The pronounced climate and environment instability
during the interglacial/glacial transition could be consistent with the
assumption that it is about a natural phenomenon, characteristic for
transitional stages. Taking into consideration that currently observed
‘‘human-induced’’ global warming coincides with the natural trend to cooling,
the study of such transitional stages is important for understanding the
underlying processes of the climate changes.”  
The Holocene (MIS-1) will "go-long", like MIS-11 did, or it won't. If it
doesn't, how do you propose to recognize whatever UN-IPCC, Gorical etc. from
the "The pronounced climate and environment instability during the
interglacial/glacial transition could be consistent with the assumption that
it is about a natural phenomenon, characteristic for transitional stages."?  
MIS-5e, the Eemian, went down into the Wisconsin glacial after at least 2
strong thermal pulses right at its very end! It doesn't really matter when the
Holocene ends, now, or however many half or full precession cycles that may
be. The Eemian went thermally ballistic, not once, but twice,during its last
thousand years or so.  
I either need to see a basic average sea level rise between +6 to +45M amsl
during the end Holocene ( http://business.uow.edu.au/sydney-
bschool/content/groups/public/@web/@sci/@eesc/documents/doc/uow045009.pdf or
greater than +52m amsl http://lin.irk.ru/pdf/6696.pdf before ANY
prognostication can be considered anomalous.  
Capiche?  
P.S. Anthropogenic warmIstas: you need to UP your game. To even be considered
anomalous you need to be, at the very least, twice background……. Got it?  
P.P.S. Background. The single largest question that simply MUST be answered is
just what is climate background at a greater than half a precession-old
extreme interglacial?  
P.P.P.S. It really is just that simple. It might be at this portal that we
enter the politics of climate change…….as pre-next glacial as that might seem
to some…………

                
                                      66. Roy UK says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:10 am

Billyoulots has successfully hijacked the thread. Bill seems to want to talk
about something in Australia that has happened before that has no significance
globally (if at all).  
The IPCC changed its report after the Big Headline news releases, its not as
bad as they thought after all. Now this has significance because of the lies
and deceit of the IPCC.  
(BTW Bill I will only respond to you if you if you want to tell us your
thoughts on the IPCC prediction changes…..)

                
                                      67. Christoph Dollis says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:45 am

I feel like passing on this comment by Gary Praxis:

> How is publishing a moderate change to predictions in an international
report either 'silent' or 'slashing' ?  
>  Science evolves as additional data becomes available. Nothing controversial
about that I'm afraid.

And my reply:

> Gary, I can't help but notice that these adjustments are ever in the
direction I predicted over a decade ago when I realised how weak the so-called
"Settled Science" is and how natural climate-change factors dominate in the
system.

Then:

> @Chris: The rate of change is still a hotly debated topic with many climate
scientists leaning on the conservative side. This is not controversial. This
is also a different discussion to the tabloids on skeptic blogs such as WUWT,
which pretty much aim to discredit the field entirely.

And:

> > "to the tabloids on skeptic blogs such as WUWT, which pretty much aim to
discredit the field entirely"

>

> Gary, you are wrong (nor was your sly reference of "to the tabloids on …"
missed).  
>  WUWT and most skeptics acknowledge, as I do in my original post which
Stefan shared:  
>  "While a preliminary leaked draft showed even more major climb-downs that
the politicians and bureaucrats went on to squelch and obfuscate, the fact of
the matter is that the final draft of the International Panel on Climate
Change's Annual Assessment Report 5 shows a major climb-down on what matters:
global warming.  
>  "In short, as it has been doing for a decade, the state of the art in
climate science is moving in the direction I have been saying all along. The
AGW theory was mostly wrong, because while CO2 is, in fact, a greenhouse gas,
they overestimated the amplification feedbacks.  
>  "They are probably, in fact, dampening -- i.e., negative. Another way of
putting that is you will get some global warming (as well as beneficial
increased plant growth) when you add CO2 to the atmosphere, but much much less
than the overwrought predictions coming out of the climate science community
and governments for the last 20 years."  
>  … that CO2 is a greenhouse gas, albeit one with potential benefits,
including a slightly warmer average temperature and greater crop and other
green-plant production as CO2 is integrally bound up in photosynthesis.  
>  We are not determined to "discredit the field entirely", we want to get the
science right. I.e., in accord with nature. As it turns out, we are far more
right than wrong about the feedbacks, which the IPCC and most climate
scientists grossly overestimated. They use scare tactics to rile the public up
to political action that just so happens to be give them more money and power.  
>  However, natural factors easily swamp man's puny contributions. If it was
otherwise, that would be fine, and I and WUWT and others would gladly
acknowledge it. Anthony Watts in particular is an environmentalist and
conversationalist. He, myself, JoAnne Nova, and most other skeptics that I
know bought into the alarmist hypothesis once upon a time. Anthony Watts was
particularly invested in it.  
>  Your allegation that we are interested in a foregone conclusion rather than
following the facts where they lead is false -- certainly it is in my case.  
>

… for your consideration, information, or bemusement.

                
                                      68. M Courtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:49 am

It is worth noting that the rise in temperatures has never been considered
catastrophic or even problematic.  
It is the rate of rise in temperatures that was potentially disastrous.  
So when does the expected change become so slow that we can adapt easily?  
Probably when the effects of warming are slower than the natural wear-and-tear
on infrastructure; we will adapt at no extra cost then.  
Have we hit that point?

                
                                      69. lee says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:49 am

Billmelater says  
'at the Pink Roadhouse in Oodnadatta, owner Adriana Jacob said her personal
weather gauge showed temperatures had soared to as high as 54C ‘'  
When did Adriana say that? What date was she referring to?  
Cora Lynn says:  
January 1, 2014 at 9:58 pm  
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  
So far they are only projections.  
If we have no data from thermometers, in areas where there are none, or none
in regular use, with which to compare- how can we say these temperatures are
unprecedented?

                
                                      70. john robertson says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:00 am

Did Dear leader of the ship of fools get his weather forecast from BOM?  
Was he also promised record heat?  
Heap hot,hot ,hot…Big warm, plenty good weather…  
Might explain the Polar Star's request for a weather forecast from the private
sector.

                
                                      71. Eric says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:14 am

FYI, for those long anchor links breaking its container div use - word-wrap:
break-word

                
                                      72. Ronald says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:18 am

Again models? Using models in state of real time adjusted data?  
I wonder how much the data must be adjusted to get the IPCC lower predictions.  
When I see the figures like nr 9 I get a strange feeling of somehow someone is
still missing something. We have models, HadCRUT4 and then comes RSS.  
I didn't at first know what I was missing but then I remember an picture of
the route the RSS satellites travel. Back in time when I look t at the picture
for me it was nice but no more then that. Now I cant find it any more but it
look t like the planet whit an satellite covering it showing yellow. And two
parts not covert being gray. And guess what? Yes the not covert areas where
the poles. So even RSS is not showing all of the planet and letting out
important cool data. So the temperature in real time is still lower.  
Then there was the news (no lost that one to) that there would be a new
satellite going to masseur data. And that this satellite has an build in
correction up to mead global warming stander ts. So if true even RSS is off
whit the data to the warm site.  
To make figure 9 complete you should put in 1 more set.  
Namely the RAW data  
Only than you cane see what is happening.

                
                                      73. steveta_uk says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:18 am

> the only part of the latest assessment that lazy politicians and incurious
journalists may ever get around to reading

This is the part thart most concerns me. We plebs have little to no access to
the elite folk who actually run our society, and so have little chance of
changing anything.  
But I wonder if Christopher Monckton of Brenchley still has personal
connnections with those in power, particularly in the old-school wing of the
Conservative party in the UK.  
Christopher, I hope you do apply whatever private pressure you can to correct
much of the misinformation being fed to our government from the IPCC and it's
clones.

                
                                      74. Christoph Dollis says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:37 am

I promised I'd post Martine Atherton's thorough debunking. To recap, two hours
ago she promised this:

> are you kidding me? I am on a phone right now but expect to get a thorough
debunking when I get the chance. and temper your hyperbole. it will get you
into all sorts of trouble.

And a few moments ago, she delivered this:

> actually, just go digest this website. It foes a far better job of
addressing you  
>  [link to SS]

I made a _point_ of saying that I 'd post her follow-up here **because I
imagined it would be lame.** She did not disappoint!

                
                                      75. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:40 am

Janice Moore says: @ January 1, 2014 at 9:57 pm  
Say, Eric Simpson, just thought of an idea. If you could supply cites for each
of those quotes…  
Janice, I have these:

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > This is my favorite:  
>  "It's simply not possible, Nine out of 10 units of power that we consume
are produced by hydrocarbons -- coal, oil and natural gas. Any transition away
from those sources is going to be a decades-long, maybe even a century-long
process. … The world consumes 200 million barrels of oil equivalent in
hydrocarbons per day. We would have to find the energy equivalent of 23 Saudi
Arabias."  
>  Bryce used to be a left-liberal, but then: **" I educated myself about math
and physics. I'm a liberal who was mugged by the laws of thermodynamics. The
problem is very simple, It's not political will. It's simple physics. Gasoline
has 80 times the energy density of the best lithium ion batteries. There's no
conspiracy here of big oil or big auto. It's a conspiracy of physics."** ~
Robert Bryce, author of "Power Hungry: The Myths of 'Green' Energy. link  
>  _**“We need to get some broad based support, to capture the public’s
imagination…  
>  So we have to offer up scary scenarios, make simplified, dramatic
statements and make little mention of any doubts… Each of us has to decide
what the right balance is between being effective and being honest.”**_ ~
Prof. Stephen Schneider, Stanford Professor of Climatology, lead author of
many IPCC reports  
>  SEE: http://judithcurry.com/2011/07/21/stephen-schneider-and-the-“double-
ethical-bind”-of-climate-change-communication/ and that goes to
http://www.americanphysicalsociety.com/publications/apsnews/199608/upload/aug96.pdf  
>  A collection is here: http://theunsolicitedopinion.com/2013/12/30/quote-
isnt- hope-planet-industrialized-civilizations-collapse-maurice-strong/  
>  Another collection is here: http://green-agenda.com/neweconomy.html  
>  And a third collection here: http://www.agenda21course.com/what-they-think-
of- humans-in-their-own-words/?print=1  
>  The problem is many of these are from the 1970 's, from speeches and such
and do not have direct links such as:  
>  _**" Current lifestyles and consumption patterns of the affluent middle
class - involving high meat intake, the use of fossil fuels, electrical
appliances, home and work-place air-conditioning, and suburban housing - are
not sustainable.”**_ ~ - Maurice Strong, opening speech at the 1992 Rio Earth
Summit

                
                                      76. Andrew says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:43 am

@Mib8, no for "warming" to be occurring, the anomaly would have to be getting
bigger. Unfortunately for the warmies, the anomaly has been falling this
century, indicating 21st century cooling.

                
                                      77. Stephen Richards says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:46 am

Billmelater says:  
January 1, 2014 at 6:07 pm  
Does Christopher think that everything in a draft document should appear in
the final report?  
Like the minute of your business meetings, council meetings, etc The IPCC
summary for Pols MUST reflect precisely the document, meeting, as written. It
should not be almost the exact opposite. This is a legal requirement in all
speres of public business.

                
                                      78. Stephen Richards says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:50 am

Billmelater says  
‘at the Pink Roadhouse in Oodnadatta, owner Adriana Jacob said her personal
weather gauge showed temperatures had soared to as high as 54C ‘’  
Oh we have a new member of he august society of misplaced thermometers.

                
                                      79. BarryBrill says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:53 am

Great work, Christopher – a promising start to 2014.  
The following is an extract from my written evidence to the UK Select
Committee Inquiry into AR5  
http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/WrittenEvidence.svc/EvidenceHtml/4013  
"SPM.2 (Note (c)) reveals that the “assessed range for near-term (2016-2035)
temperature change” (ie final projections) “is lower than the 5-95% model
range”. This obscure comment is the sole SPM disclosure that all of the CMIP5
near-term projections were downscaled by an arbitrary 20% at the Stockholm
meeting. This was necessary to belatedly recognise that many of the models are
“running hot”[8] and are wholly incompatible with temperature realities.  
This band-aid was neither scientific nor rational. When certain models are
wildly astray, the only acceptable procedure is to isolate all ensembles
affected by their outputs and to require the culprits to be adjusted. If they
remain unable to hindcast ‘the real world’, they must obviously be set aside.  
A last-minute curve-correcting discount of all model outputs for a limited and
arbitrary period inevitably smacks of panic. The unapologetic ad hockery of
this intervention undermines the plausibilty of all AR5 projections.  
The sudden necessity of a 20% discount seriously impeaches the SPM assertion
that past attribution certainty has increased to a 95% level.  
Such alleged certainty contrasts with confidence in the mid-term (2046-65)
future projections being marked down to “medium” – meaning about a 50:50
chance of being correct, or ‘as likely as not’ to be wrong. This is markedly
lower than any previous IPCC projections.  
The confidence markdown was made because there is “insufficient scientific
understanding” whether “the factors” that caused the 20% discount of near-term
projections, might also apply to the mid-term [9].  
50:50 estimates of discredited models using obsolete postulants and
‘insufficient understanding’, cannot hope to provide an adequate basis for
worldwide epoch-changing policy decisions."

                
                                      80. Geir in Norway says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:55 am

About the silence in Norwegian media:  
First they put our former prime minister Stoltenberg in charge of climate
change at the UN: http://www.tu.no/klima/2013/12/23/stoltenberg-blir-klima-
utsending-for-fn  
Then our newly elected prime minister Solberg avoids mentioning climate change
in her New Year's Speech on nationwide TV, to the dismay of Stoltenberg:
http://www.dagbladet.no/2014/01/01/nyheter/erna_solberg/politikk/innenriks/jens_stoltenberg/31075636/  
"ROSES and REACTS: Former prime minister Jens Stoltenberg reacts when prime
minister Erna Solberg chose not to mention environmental and climate politics
in her first new year's speech.  
- It almost begins to form a pattern  
Jens reacted to Erna dropping the climate question - once again."  
Stoltenberg got the UN top job which we have foreseen for years, as he has
given away Norwegian money to all kinds of UN projects and initiatives. It
must be mentioned that he is still in a full job as an elected representative
in the Norwegian government, but that does obviously not hinder him in doing
another full-time job for the UN. Luckily for us, it means that he will
probably perform two jobs badly instead of one of them well.

                
                                      81. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:57 am

Patrick says: @ January 1, 2014 at 10:30 pm  
There is absolutely nothing unusual happening with regards to temperatures in
northern SA….

> > > > > > > > > > > > > Yes, I am sure records are the same: Australian
temperature records shoddy, inaccurate, unreliable.  
>  (Sorry, I couldn't resist)

                
                                      82. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:07 am

mib8 says:  
January 1, 2014 at 10:42 pm  
….So, why do all of the graphs seem to show some global warming over the last
17-18 years, when several postings have said that the data show no global
warming over that period? I’m not trying to be annoying; I just don’t
understand.

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > I will try to answer.  
>  First there are several different data sets.  
>  Second it is all about the statements made by Warmists.  
>  1. Prof. Phil Jones saying in the Climategate emails - _" Bottom line: the
“no upward trend” has to continue for a total of 15 years before we get
worried."_ Also see: interview with Judith Curry and Phil Jones  
>  2. Ben Santer in a 2011 paper _“Our results show that temperature records
of at least 17 years in length are required for identifying human effects on
global-mean tropospheric temperature.”_ link  
>  3. The NOAA falsification criterion is on page S23 of its 2008 report
titled The State Of The Climate

>

> ENSO-adjusted warming in the three surface temperature datasets over the
last 2–25 yr continually lies within the 90% range of all similar-length ENSO-
adjusted temperature changes in these simulations (Fig. 2.8b). Near-zero and
even negative trends are common for intervals of a decade or less in the
simulations, due to the model’s internal climate variability. **The
simulations rule out (at the 95% level) zero trends for intervals of 15 yr or
more** , [Maybe THAT is the 95% the IPCC is now talking about.] suggesting
that an observed absence of warming of this duration is needed to create a
discrepancy with the expected present-day warming rate.

          1. we are looking at no changes in temperature over a period longer than the 10 years that James Hansen once said would show the models wrong;  
So the falsification criteria is 15 years to 17 years. That is why we start at
the present and count backwards. Once we hit 17 years The Goose is Cooked.
Unfortunately the Goose seems to be a zombie and keeps rising from the dead.  
Do not forget this is "Statistically Significant" warming. The discernment has
to be a trend different from zero at 95% confidence because that is the
confidence level used by ‘climate science’.  
All the available time series of global temperature show no discernible global
warming or show global cooling at 95% confidence for at least 17 years. RSS
shows no discernible global warming or global cooling at 95% confidence for 22
years.  
Any other statement (except to query the validity of global temperature data
compilations) is spin

                    
                                          83. Oldseadog says:
                    

January 2, 2014 at 2:13 am

If this is just the "final draft" it will be interesting to see what the
actual report says when it is finally published.  
Don't hold your breath for the MSM to report anything, though.

                
                                      84. Billmelater says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:15 am

A number of posters have been having a go at me about the high temperature in
South Australia. I did so in response to another poster. Surely that is ok
isn't it?  
Roy of uk, I mentioned South Australia being very hot (not unprecedented as
some one claimed). You make a charge that I am hijacking the thread. Yet when
tuer mentioned ice in Antarctica to which I was responding, you don't say
anything. Why is that? Anything cool is ok, anything hot not?  
Remember this is a science blog, and discussion of ideas is paramount. Abuse
and attempts to censure posters should not be tolerated. Then again if it is a
blog of vindictIve know nothings that cannot stand other people expressing a
view, then keep up the good work.

                
                                      85. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:17 am

Christoph Dollis says: @ January 1, 2014 at 11:39 pm  
Martine Atherton of Brisbane promises a thorough debunking. I’ll be sure to
pass it along here when she gets around to it.

> are you kidding me? I am on a phone right now but expect to get a thorough
debunking when I get the chance. and temper your hyperbole. it will get you
into all sorts of trouble.

>

>> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > You forgot the rest of it.

>

> **Martine Atherton** actually, just go digest this website. It foes a far
better job of addressing you  
>  http://www.skepticalscience.com/  
>  53 minutes ago  
>  ………………….  
>  **John Leon** Skepticalscience? the treehouse kids? Ha Ha Ha Ha! Way to go
for 2014 …….  
>  45 minutes ago  
>  link

I agree with John Leon… A Library Technician (for politicians) recommends a
KNOWN propaganda site? ROTFLMAO

                
                                      86. Billmelater says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:25 am

Gail, that report you referred to was for measurement taken before 1972. I was
referring to a reading of 54 degrees taken recently. But although it is hot, I
won't verify the accuracy as it was a private thermometer. The point I was
making that referring to ice in Antarctica is nonsensical to indicate the
Earth is cooling.

                
                                      87. Kelvin Vaughan says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:25 am

Got an infra red thermometer for Christmas. Global Warming solved.- It's all
down to cloud height.  
The temperature reflected back from clouds depends on their height.

                
                                      88. Billmelater says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:29 am

Like the minute of your business meetings, council meetings, etc The IPCC
summary for Pols MUST reflect precisely the document, meeting, as written. It
should not be almost the exact opposite. This is a legal requirement in all
speres of public business.  
Minutes of meetings etc are different from draft reports. If the final report
had to reflect the draft exactly, then the draft is the final report. You know
it makes sense!

                
                                      89. Grunblatt says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:32 am

“Quotes Supplied by Eric Simpson at 9:30pm, today”: most of all quotes are
misrepresentations and do not Apply to climat change see
http://uk.answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=201005290337

                
                                      90. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:47 am

William McClenney says: @ January 1, 2014 at 11:51 pm  
The problem here, of course, is that no one, not even one climate cognoscenti,
provides even a single nod that, as of today, the Holocene interglacial is now
11,717 years old…..  
That’s two centuries or so beyond half the present precession cycle…

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Yes, it is the pronounced climate and
environment instability during the interglacial/glacial transition that has me
worried.  
>  If Dr. Brown (Duke Univ.) is correct and the climate is chaotic with two
strange attractors, Warm and Cold, then the Holocene is sitting on the edge of
the transition between them and it may not even matter if we do not go into
glaciation. The wild ride as the climate becomes unstable will be bad enough.  
>  That is the big question of course. What is the threshold conditions needed
to push us into the next glaciation or climate instability? Catastrophic
Global Warming is completely off the table for the next 4,000 years even in
the best case scenario, "..Insolation will remain at this level slightly above
the inception for the next 4,000 years before it then increases again.” except
as spikes caused by the chaotic climate's instability.

                
                                      91. Roy UK says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:53 am

Billmelots says:  
January 2, 2014 at 2:15 am  
Hot, Cold, Ice, Floods, famine, pestilence, plague and even Zits have been
blamed on Global warming. So I don't care about you being off track again. Try
answer the question or at least post something to do with the Main article.  
So I will try again Bill. What do you think about the IPCC issuing a draft
report and untold press releases telling us what a huge and devastating
problem global warming is. And then changing the draft a few months later,
with no press releases, so its not actually "worse than we thought.".  
Come on now I am sure I have put it quite simply for you so an answer would be
appreciated.  
Lies, damned lies and the IPCC

                
                                      92. Billmelater says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:07 am

Roy UK, fair question. My position that if anyone deliberately misleads the
public with false or distorted data or interpretation of same should be
treated with the full force of the law and given the maximum sentences
possible. This is a crime against humanity.  
Misleading the public has real financial consequences. For instance, my
insurance premiums have gone up by 25% two years ago and another 20% last
year. When I inquired as to why, the insurance company responded that it was
due to high number of claims made due to climate related damage to property.  
If the IPCC have conclude that the climate is changing they should be using
every means that their disposal to get the message out so that action can
commence to lessen the impact. If their analysis shows there is no change in
climate expected then they are acting appropriately and the insurance
companies are ripping people off.

                
                                      93. Ken Hall says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:09 am

Figure 9 completely falsifies the CAGW hypthesis by itself.  
Models are NOT experiment, nor do they create real experimental data. They are
only a model of a variant of the hypothesis and NOT models of the real actual
climate. ALL they can do is create projected data of what the hypothesis
predicts. This then must be compared to the real, observed, empirically
measured data. Figure 9 clearly shows that the prediction of the hypothesis is
NOT supported by the observation and so….  
Science 101 dictates that the hypothesis be rejected or amended until it can
match observed reality.  
All that can be stated for certain at this stage is that there has been
approximately 1 3rd of the predicted warming occur. NOTHING MORE. We do not
know why there has been less warming than predicted, and many of the alarmists
refuse to even countenance that reality at all, so until they do accept that
and research why, there is no way to know if ANY of the warming is man-made or
not, or if we really should have had more warming or if we should have had
less.  
ALL we know for certain is that the there has been 1 3rd of the predicted
warming and that the models are wrong and we don't know jack about what will
REALLY happen to the climate in the future. Every other assertion is nothing
more than unvalidated hypothesis at this point.

                
                                      94. pat says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:14 am

to compensate for the AAE Antarctic fiasco, which Australian media virtually
ignored, & never explained when they did mentiion it, our media have been on a
binge of HOT stories.  
Oodnadatta is in the State of South Australia:  
(one hour ago) 2 Jan: SBS: Near record temperatures in inland Australia  
Bureau of Meteorology climatologist Blair Trewin: "The highest temperature
we've seen so far in this event is 49.3 at Moomba in the far north east of
South Australia on Thursday - that's just short of their record. They had a
49.6 last year - and the overall picture's been a lot of places have just
missed records by one tenth of a degree - Alice Springs is another one where
that's happened."  
He says South Australia appears to have passed the worst of its hot weather…  
http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2014/01/02/near-record-temperatures-inland-
australia  
but there's no doubting Adriana is hot to trot with the aussie media,
including Murdoch's Adelaide Advertiser:  
2 Jan: ABC Breakfast: Central Australia headed for temperature record  
Guest:  
Adriana Jacob  
Owner, Pink Roadhouse, Oodnadatta  
http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/breakfast/central-australia-
headed-for-temperature-record/5181660  
2 Jan: Adelaide Advertiser: Katrina Stokes: South Australia sizzles and
drizzles into the New Year with rain in Adelaide and searing heat in Outback  
The heat stayed on in the north, though. At the Pink Roadhouse in Oodnadatta,
owner Adriana Jacob said her personal weather gauge showed temperatures had
soared to as high as 54C as a front associated with ex-tropical cyclone
Christine sweeps across Central Australia…  
http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/south-australia-sizzles-
and-drizzles-into-the-new-year-with-rain-in-adelaide-and-searing-heat-in-
outback/story-fni6uo1m-1226792975000  
ABC’s Tony Eastley searching for the hotspot near Oodnadatta where the talk is
of 80 degrees centigrade in the sun:  
2 Jan: ABC AM: Australia braces for scorching 49 degrees (audio 3 minutes)  
http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2013/s3919569.htm

                
                                      95. Ken Hall says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:23 am

@Billmelater: "Misleading the public has real financial consequences. For
instance, my insurance premiums have gone up by 25% two years ago and another
20% last year. When I inquired as to why, the insurance company responded that
it was due to high number of claims made due to climate related damage to
property."  
Are the insurance companies actually having an increase in claims due to
weather related damage? In which case they need to alter their actuaries and
determine the actual level of risk associated with increased weather damage,
whether this is caused by human induced, or entirely natural climate change,
is irrelevant. The fact is the climate changes all the time, weather changes
all the time. there are weather related claims being made all the time and the
insurance companies base financial risk on reality, not on hypotheticals.  
I do not believe that insurance companies are basing risk on the IPCC report,
but are basing it on what actually happens in the real world. There has been a
large increase in flooding through 2012 as the excessively wet conditions,
allied with poor flood defences in some locations, increased building on flood
plains and poorly maintained drainage ditches all combined to increase the
number of floods and losses associated therein. Then in early 2013 there was
record snowfall in some areas. Insurance companies are recouping their losses
based on actual claims made.  
There is no doubt that there has been an increase in weather related claims.
This proves nothing about man-made climate change however, but it does allow
insurance companies to use the fact of increased claims, alongside the PR
(propaganda) of climate alarm, to sell the increase in premiums to a largely
mislead (by the mainstream media and especially the BBC) public.

                
                                      96. pat says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:27 am

my comment re australian media in hot pursuit of hotspots (compensating for
the AAE Antarctic fiasco) is in moderation, but this is the 80 degree excerpt
i meant to include with this link.  
2 Jan: ABC: Australia braces for scorching 49 degrees  
Phil Turner: You can imagine what, if it's 49 degrees in the shade, we're
talking 77, 78, 80 degrees out in the sun, which is, I mean, you're running
rubber on it; tyres just can't cope with that sort of condition…  
http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2013/s3919569.htm

                
                                      97. Richard Betts says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:28 am

How can something be "quietly cut" when it was only a draft in the first
place?  
Monckton makes it sound like the IPCC noisily made some predictions, and then
secretly changed them afterwards, but this is the exact opposite of what
really happened. The Second Order Draft was, as the name suggests, a draft.
The IPCC specifically says that the earlier drafts are just preliminary, not
the final conclusions, and indeed it asked authors and reviewers not to
circulate the drafts specifically because it didn't want people thinking that
the draft conclusions were the final ones.  
The drafts will be officially published later as a matter of public record,
along with the review comments and author responses, so the evolution of the
report will be clear.  
This is a totally manufactured criticism.

                
                                      98. M Courtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:57 am

Richard Betts, I politely disagree.  
For sure, drafts are drafts and it is not surprising that they change before
final publication. And of course the trend in expected impact of CO2 will be
downwards, ever downwards, as the planet continues to ignore the rise in CO2.
I do agree that there is nothing to criticise there. That is what is
happening, the drafts should change with more observations.  
But do you honestly think that the constant revisions away from alarmist
rhetoric and towards observations are given the same publicity as "We're all
doomed!"  
They aren’t.  
The constant crushing of alarmism by the relentless hammer of reality is not
publicised. It ought to be the headline of the SFPM. It ought to have an IPCC
press conference. It ought to be in school curriculums as an example of the
scientific process.  
But no; drafts just eke out, one by one, shaving a bit off here, a bit off
there and is no-one meant to notice?  
If Rodin did this with his sculpting the Thinker would be transgendered by
now.

                
                                      99. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 3:58 am

Billmelater says: @ January 2, 2014 at 2:25 am  
…The point I was making that referring to ice in Antarctica is nonsensical to
indicate the Earth is cooling.

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Alright I will be more serious. The accuracy of
the Australia and New Zealand temp record has been under fire for a while.
There are several threads on the subject at various blogs like The Goat Ate
the Data and Announcing a formal request for the Auditor General to audit the
Australian BOM for example.  
>  Jo Nova has a list of her threads on Australian temperature measurement
HERE  
>  ….  
>  **Why the Cold Antarctic matters:**  
>  As William McClenney and I keep pointing out we are just beyond half the
present precession cycle and that may indicate the end of this interglacial.
The latest paper, that William discussed here on WUWT was Can we predict the
duration of an interglacial?  
>  The take home from that paper are:  
>  1. _" …the first major reactivation of the bipolar seesaw would probably
constitute an indication that the transition to a glacial state had already
taken place.”_  
>  2. _"..Comparison with MIS 19c, a close astronomical analogue characterized
by an equally weak summer insolation minimum (474Wm−2) and a smaller overall
decrease from maximum summer solstice insolation values, suggests that glacial
inception is possible despite the subdued insolation forcing, if CO2
concentrations were 240±5 ppmv … "_  
>  **So what is this critical bipolar seesaw?**

>

> Twentieth century bipolar seesaw of the Arctic and Antarctic surface air
temperatures  
>  Understanding the phase relationship between climate changes in the Arctic
and Antarctic regions is essential for our understanding of the dynamics of
the Earth 's climate system. In this paper we show that the 20th century de-
trended Arctic and Antarctic temperatures vary in anti-phase seesaw pattern –
when the Arctic warms the Antarctica cools and visa versa. **This is the first
time that a bi-polar seesaw pattern has been identified in the 20th century
Arctic and Antarctic temperature records** ….

**WHY is it critical?**  
Luckily one of the engineers here on WUWT just answered that question:  
link  
As an engineer he goes into the mechanics of what is happening (2 pages) So
again the take home:

> …To the specific point of open Arctic waters being a heat loss area from the
earth. Notice that we are assuming far-north openings here, not a theoretical
physics textbook ice mass of theoretical albedo = .95 floating off the ice-
filled (Equatorial) waters of Polynesia where the sun is directly overhead
(Air Mass = 1.0) with perfectly clear skies and no humidity.  
>  But this little bit of remaining 3.5 Mkm^2 Arctic sea ice is actually in
the water up between latitude 78 north to 83 north. At that latitude, in mid
and late September when arctic sea ice is at its minimum extents, **there is
MORE heat lost from open waters due to more evaporation losses, more
conduction losses, more convective losses, and more radiation losses from open
sea water than can be gained from that exposed water getting heated by the
ever-lower sun angles!** At those latitudes, at that time of year, the HIGHEST
the sun can get is 8 – 12 degrees above the horizon, air masses are 18 to 34.
There simply is no solar heat penetrating the atmosphere at those low solar
angles to be gained if the Arctic ice continues to melt. **The more the Arctic
sea ice melts from today’s minimum extents in August and September, the more
the planet loses heat energy to space and cools down ever more.** ….  
>  But it is worse than you think!  
>  At today’s levels of BOTH minimum AND maximum extent in the Antarctic seas,
today’s (and last year’s!) record breaking sea ice extents DO reflect much
more solar energy than the exposed waters! **At the edge of the Antarctic sea
ice at 60 – 70 south latitude, ALL YEAR, every day, the record-breaking
Antarctic sea ice extents IS reflecting MORE solar energy and IS cooling the
planet down even more.**  
>  And thus we slide quickly into the next major ice age.

So whether sea ice prevents heat loss or causes solar energy reflection for a
**NET ENERGY LOSS** is completely dependent on the angle of the sun which is
quite different for the Arctic **Sea** vs the Antarctic **Continent** and
surrounding sea ice.  
This is why what is happening in the Antarctic is so critical. There is also
Drakes Passage. See Effect of Drake Passage on the global thermohaline
circulation and think about what ice blocking or restricting the area would
mean….  
If Antarctic sea ice continues to grow at the present rate we may find out
exactly what it means the hard way.  
OH, and speaking of weather, we broke records for low temperatures in my area
BRRrrr.

                
                                      100. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:16 am

Billmelater says: @ January 2, 2014 at 2:29 am  
…Minutes of meetings etc are different from draft reports. If the final report
had to reflect the draft exactly, then the draft is the final report. You know
it makes sense!

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > You are completely missing the point.  
>  The Draft report was the FINAL report from the SCIENTISTS. The Summary for
Policy Makers(SPM) is the results of a meeting from a bunch of POLITICIANS and
BUREAUCRATS. The report from the scientists is then twisted until it supports
The Summary for Policy Makers and becomes the Final Report.  
>  **An analogy:**  
>  I, as lab manager compile the testing results from various technicians in
my quality lab on a product about to be shipped. This is the 'Draft Report"
Then the plant , sales, production and shipping managers hold a meeting and
since we are shipping under "Just-in-time" the test results showing
contamination above allowable limits are reduced by 20%. This is the Summary
for Policy Makers. The Certificate of Analysis is then adjusted to meet the
Summary for Policy Makers. The fraudulant Certificate of Analysis is your
'Final Report'  
>  (In real life the tweaking was done by the lab tech who attended the
meetings I was not invited to and the result was three planes crashed.)

                
                                      101. Patrick says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:19 am

"Gail Combs says:  
January 2, 2014 at 1:57 am"  
Exactly!

                
                                      102. Patrick says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:32 am

"Billmelater says:  
January 1, 2014 at 10:41 pm  
Just so you that you are informed, I just found this:  
‘at the Pink Roadhouse in Oodnadatta, owner Adriana Jacob said her personal
weather gauge showed temperatures had soared to as high as 54C ‘"  
And that is a calibrated "gauge", right?

                
                                      103. Matt G says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:44 am

No where is Australia by official stations have reordered temperatures
anywhere near 54c.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/web03/ncc/www/awap/temperature/maxextrm/hi/week/colour/latest.gif  
Same for yesterday also,  
http://www.bom.gov.au/web03/ncc/www/awap/temperature/maxave/daily/colour/latest.gif

                
                                      104. pat says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:47 am

i've stil got a comment with the following as part of it in moderation:  
Oodnadatta is in the State of South Australia:  
2 Jan: SBS: Near record temperatures in inland Australia  
Bureau of Meteorology climatologist Blair Trewin: “The highest temperature
we’ve seen so far in this event is 49.3 at Moomba in the far north east of
South Australia on Thursday – that’s just short of their record. They had a
49.6 last year – and the overall picture’s been a lot of places have just
missed records by one tenth of a degree – Alice Springs is another one where
that’s happened.”  
He says South Australia appears to have passed the worst of its hot weather…  
http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2014/01/02/near-record-temperatures-inland-
australia

                
                                      105. Jimbo says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:20 am

The last graphic says it all. What if we get a decade of more cooling (without
volcanic forcing), what then? How will the graphic look like? 🙂 Only then will
they admit that the science is really not settled? Or maybe not.  
http://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/clip_image022.jpg

                
                                      106. Boris Gimbarzevsky says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:21 am

I wouldn't put it past the IPCC to suddenly announce that it had been wrong
all along and that increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations causes global
cooling. All it would take would be just changing the signs of a few variables
in their models and quickly readjusting historical global temperature data to
show it was warmer in the past.  
Given the propensity for the majority of individuals to not remember what
happened decades ago and believe what authority figures tell them, likely such
a preposterous scheme would be noticed only by those who are suspicious by
nature and question authority. With a mere flip of the presumed effects of CO2
on world temperature, suddenly the models would fit far better and would
predict a new ice age in a century. The only question is whether people would
accept the huge reductions in fossil fuel consumption which would be
imperative to prevent the next ice age according to "experts"? While such a
reversal of the IPCC's position might seem far fetched, it is more plausible
than Trenbeth's "missing heat" and it appears that no theory is too
implausible for this group of kleptocrats if it furthers the watermelon agenda
of a deindustrialized world.

                
                                      107. pat says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:25 am

2 Jan: ABC: Helicopter rescues passengers onboard stranded Antarctic ship
Akademik Shokalskiy  
All of the scientists and tourists who have been stranded on a research ship
in Antarctica since Christmas Eve have been rescued…  
A total of 52 people were flown to the Australian icebreaker Aurora Australis
in an operation that took more than four hours…  
Sydney-based expedition spokesman, Alvin Stone, says the group is relieved.  
"Aside from the packing madness, I think there's quite a bit of joy through
the ship at the fact that it's finally coming," he said.  
"I think it was at that point where people were getting frustrated with what
was going on.  
"Now at last feel they can move on and the expedition can continue what it was
supposed to do, or actually just get home to be perfectly honest."…  
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-01-02/rescue-helicopter-arrives-at-stranded-
antarctic-ship/5182632  
wondering if everyone realises the "4 degree"/Cloud story was announced to the
world by the same AAE (Australasian Antarctic Expedition) spokesman:  
PUBLIC RELEASE DATE: 31-Dec-2013  
Contact: Alvin Stone  
University of New South Wales  
Cloud mystery solved: Global temperatures to rise at least 4°C by 2100  
“Our research has shown climate models indicating a low temperature response
to a doubling of carbon dioxide from preindustrial times are not reproducing
the correct processes that lead to cloud formation," said lead author from the
University of New South Wales’ Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science
Prof Steven Sherwood…  
http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2013-12/uons-ncs121913.php

                
                                      108. pat says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:40 am

Nature showed Steven Sherwood's affiliations as including CCRC/UNSW, which has
Chris Turney on the Team, but MSM only mentioned Sherwood's affiliation to the
ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science, in which UNSW is just
part of a consortium.  
Nature: Spread in model climate sensitivity traced to atmospheric convective
mixing  
Received 16 May 2013; Accepted 05 November 2013; Published online 01 January
2014  
Affiliations: Steven C. Sherwood: Climate Change Research Centre and ARC
Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science, University of New South
Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia  
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v505/n7481/full/nature12829.html  
Australian Research Council is the Australian government’s main agency for
allocating research funding to academics and researchers at Australian
universities:  
Australian Govt: Australian Research Council  
Alvin Stone  
Media and Communications Manager  
ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science  
University of New South Wales  
http://www.climatescience.org.au/staff/profile/astone  
it has annoyed me that the MSM made no reference to Sherwood/Turney
connections, given the AAE fiasco:  
UNSW Climate Change Research Centre Team  
Professor Steve Sherwood  
Director, Climate Change Research Centre  
Professor Chris Turney  
Adjunct, Climate Change Research Centre  
http://www.ccrc.unsw.edu.au/staff/academic.html

                
                                      109. Matt G says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:42 am

My estimates for global warming at the maximum rate will be 0.85c by 2100.
That is global warming roughly 0.1c per decade, but for 30 years in the near
future don't see any warming. Therefore at most 0.1c per decade global
temperatures will have risen by 0.55c by 2100.  
Why is this value even too high? The theory behind a doubling of CO2 leads to
1c warming, any more relies on positive feedback's.  
Global water vapor has been declining overall during recent decades
(especially at high levels) so the link between CO2 and positive feedback
regarding water vapor is absent. Naturally if more global low cloud increases
this is a positive feedback in the cooling direction, so the feedback to
doubling CO2 still shows to be in the cooling region. Therefore 1c per
doubling of CO2 is still too high taking into feedback's that represent
cooling.  
This is where the 0.55c by 2100 becomes half that and therefore 0.275c warming
by 2100 not starting until to at least 2044, will hardly be noticeable on a
global level. CAGW has finally come to end regarding scientific evidence, but
politically the desperation will continue.  
What if the suns solar activity significant declines over the next decades and
that the 0.275c warming could easily become a negative one by 2100.

                
                                      110. Steve Keohane says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:47 am

_Billmelater says: January 1, 2014 at 10:53 pm  
Mib8 not sure myself. Someone told me there was a difference between heat and
temperature. Some substance can gain heat and not increase temperature.
Something called latent heat. Sounds weird but I suppose it can happen._  
Several of your comments drew out the snarkiness in myself and a few others,
though I had not posted yet. Many have been following this AR5 for several
months, this is the first actual change, and it is in the opposite direction
that the IPCC has been digging in its heels about for years.  
As regards your statement above, that made me realize you have a mind and
there is an opening to it. Temperature does not measure the actual heat in a
system. Think about a 40°C day. Is it more comfortable at 10 %RH or 90 %RH.
Even though the temperature is the same, the air with the higher %RH has more
actual heat, or enthalpy. In order to tell if the world is warming the
temperature needs to go up with the same or higher humidity, but we don 't
really have the measurements to tell if the fraction of a 1°C warming we have
seen so far actually means it has warmed. Considering that humidity seems to
be decreasing, the whole warming concept becomes tenuous at best, let alone
catastrophic.  
http://i48.tinypic.com/2qlfnzn.jpg

                
                                      111. richardscourtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 6:19 am

Billmelater:  
At January 2, 2014 at 2:29 am you write

> Minutes of meetings etc are different from draft reports. If the final
report had to reflect the draft exactly, then the draft is the final report.
You know it makes sense!

**Oh dear! You have completely missed a very major point of the article by
Lord Monckton.**  
He writes

> Do not underestimate the importance of the IPCC’s climbdown, albeit that it
is furtive and that there is not a hint of it in the Summary for Policymakers
– the only part of the latest assessment that lazy politicians and incurious
journalists may ever get around to reading.

**You have not merely underestimated the importance of the point: you have
ignored it completely. And what the IPCC has done is sneaky in the extreme.**  
It is the custom and practice of the IPCC for all of its Reports to be amended
to agree with the political summaries. The facts are as follows.  
The Summary for Policymakers (SPM) is agreed “line by line” by politicians
and/or representatives of politicians, and it is then published. After that
the so-called ‘scientific’ Reports are amended to agree with the SPM. This
became IPCC custom and practice of the IPCC when prior to its Second Report
the then IPCC Chairman, John Houghton, decreed,

> We can rely on the Authors to ensure the Report agrees with the Summary.

This was done and has been the normal IPCC procedure since then.  
This custom and practice enabled the infamous ‘Chapter 8′ scandal so perhaps
it should – at long last – be changed. However, it has been adopted as
official IPCC procedure for all subsequent IPCC Reports.  
Appendix A of the present Report (the AR5 which is under discussion here)
states this where it says.

> **4.6 Reports Approved and Adopted by the Panel**  
>  Reports approved and adopted by the Panel will be the Synthesis Report of
the Assessment Reports and other Reports as decided by the Panel whereby
Section 4.4 applies _mutatis mutandis_ __.

This is completely in accord with the official purpose of the IPCC.  
**The IPCC does NOT exist to summarise climate science and it does not.** ****  
The IPCC is only permitted to say AGW is a significant problem because they
are tasked to accept that there is a “risk of human-induced climate change”
which requires “options for adaptation and mitigation” that can be selected as
political polices and the IPCC is tasked to provide those “options”.  
This is clearly stated in the “Principles” which govern the work of the IPCC.
These are stated at  
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/ipcc-principles/ipcc-principles.pdf  
Near its beginning that document says

> **ROLE** ****  
>  2. The role of the IPCC is to assess on a comprehensive, objective, open
and transparent basis the scientific, technical and socio-economic information
relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of human-induced
climate change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and
mitigation. IPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy, although
they may need to deal objectively with scientific, technical and socio-
economic factors relevant to the application of particular policies.

This says the IPCC exists to provide  
(a) “information relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of
human-induced climate change”  
and  
(b) “options for adaptation and mitigation” which pertain to “the application
of particular policies”.  
Hence, its “Role” demands that the IPCC accepts as a given that there is a
“risk of human-induced climate change” which requires “options for adaptation
and mitigation” which pertain to “the application of particular policies”. Any
‘science’ which fails to support that political purpose is ‘amended’ in
furtherance of the IPCC’s Role.  
This is achieved by amendment of the IPCC’s so-called ‘scientific’ Reports to
fulfil the IPCC’s political purpose by politicians approving the SPM then the
IPCC lead Authors amending the so-called ‘scientific’ Reports to agree with
the SPM.  
All IPCC Reports including the IPCC AR5 are pure pseudoscience intended to
provide information to justify political actions; i.e.Lysenkoism.  
That is bad enough. But what Lord Monckton reports above compounds the
pseudoscience.  
**People only read the SPMs because the so-called ‘science’ Reports are
amended to agree with the SPMs. This practice is in accord with the practice
and procedures specified in the IPCC’s own documents. But in this case – as
Lord Monckton points out – the so-called ‘science’ Report has been amended to
DISagree with the SPM.** ****  
Richard

                
                                      112. Richard M says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 6:57 am

_mib8 says:  
January 1, 2014 at 10:42 pm  
So, why do all of the graphs seem to show some global warming over the last
17-18 years, when several postings have said that the data show no global
warming over that period? I’m not trying to be annoying; I just don’t
understand.  
_  
Couple of things to keep in mind.  
1)A trend is only meaningful if it is within the bounds of the mechanism
causing the trend. Look at the following graph.  
http://www.woodfortrees.org/plot/rss/from/plot/rss/from/to:2005/trend/plot/rss/from:2005/trend  
As you can see the trend shows warming and then cooling if you break at the
approximate position the PDO changed from its warm mode to its cool mode
(2005). Now, you can create trends across this boundary that show warming or
cooling. And, that is what many people do. For example, if you start in 2001
you will still see a cooling trend to the end, but if you start in 1990 you
will see a warming trend.  
2) There are different data sets based on different data capture technologies.
The only good ones are satellites but they only go back 35 years. I would
avoid any of the other data sets when measuring anything within the last 35
years.  
As for the IPCC I think they might have the numerical value pretty close, they
just have the sign wrong.

                
                                      113. Chip Javert says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 7:11 am

Billmelater says:  
January 1, 2014 at 6:07 pm  
Does Christopher think that everything in a draft document should appear in
the final report?  
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++  
Christopher can speak for himself, but the reasonably knowledgeable & curious
observer would want to know the scientific justification for a material change
to “settled science”. You should, too.

                
                                      114. richardscourtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 7:29 am

Richard M:  
I write to respectfully dispute an argument in your post at January 2, 2014 at
6:57 am.  
You say

> As you can see the trend shows warming and then cooling if you break at the
approximate position the PDO changed from its warm mode to its cool mode
(2005). Now, you can create trends across this boundary that show warming or
cooling. And, that is what many people do. For example, if you start in 2001
you will still see a cooling trend to the end, but if you start in 1990 you
will see a warming trend.

True, but so what?  
Your point is not relevant to the important question as to how long there has
been no discernible global warming.  
The answer to that question has to be obtained by back in time from now.  
So-called 'climate science' uses linear trends and applies 95% confidence.
There are good reasons to dispute the adoption of linear trends (and your
point about PDO modes does dispute the applicability of linear trends) and to
dispute the use of 95% as appropriate confidence. But so-called 'climate
science' does use linear trends and does apply 95% confidence so those are the
conventions which are appropriate to use in this case.  
Starting from now and working back in time one discovers that each of the data
sets of global temperature shows a linear trend which cannot be discerned as
being different from zero at 95% confidence for at least 17 years (RSS says 22
years).  
In other words, when the criteria set by so-called 'climate science' are used
then the available data sets each indicates there has been no discernible
global warming or global cooling trend for at least 17 years.  
And this is why even the IPCC admits that there is a "pause" in global
warming. However, in reality it cannot be known if global warming will resume
(so has "paused") or if global cooling will occur in future. All that can be
said with certainty is that a discernible trend of global warming has stopped.  
Richard

                
                                      115. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 7:48 am

Boris Gimbarzevsky says:  
January 2, 2014 at 5:21 am  
I wouldn’t put it past the IPCC to suddenly announce that it had been wrong
all along and that increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations causes global
cooling. …  
While such a reversal of the IPCC’s position might seem far fetched, it is
more plausible than Trenbeth’s “missing heat” and it appears that no theory is
too implausible for this group of kleptocrats if it furthers the watermelon
agenda of a deindustrialized world.

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Given what William McClenney says @
January 1, 2014 at 11:51 pm and in his threads here at WUWT, information that
is obviously known to the politicians as shown in this CIA Report - link, one
wonders WHY a movement to "deindustrialized" the first world, was promoted at
the same time by John Holdren, Anne Ehrlich, and Paul Ehrlich in the book
_Human Ecology: Problems and Solutions._ link  
>  The problem is although the 1970 's "Cooling Scare' died the Anti-Growth
Malthusianism typified by that book did not. The perspective is still very
much alive and well in Obama's Science Czar, John Holdren, who now wants to
use "free-markets" (WTO??) to achieve his original goal. Heck he even has a
really weird definition of 'Human' and I doubt many here at WUWT meet it.

>

> “The fetus, given the opportunity to develop properly before birth, and
**given the essential early socializing experiences** and sufficient
nourishing food during the crucial early years after birth, **will ultimately
develop into a human being** ” ~ “Human Ecology: Problems and Solutions. link

So a baby or even a toddler with bad 'Socializing' is not human and therefore
killing it is not murder. (Ain't Spin-Doctors great)  
This can also be seen in this statement by Dr. Ezekiel J. Emanuel, a
bioethicist and architect of President Obama’s health care law.

> …"This civic republican or deliberative democratic conception of the good
provides both procedural and substantive insights for developing a just
allocation of health care resources. Procedurally, it suggests the need for
public forums to deliberate about which health services should be considered
basic and should be socially guaranteed. Substantively, it suggests services
that promote the continuation of the polity - **those that ensure healthy
future generations, ensure development of practical reasoning skills, and
ensure full and active participation by citizens in public deliberation - are
to be socially guaranteed as basic. Conversely, services provided to
individuals who are irreversibly prevented from being or becoming
participating citizens are not basic and should not be guaranteed. An obvious
example is not guaranteeing health services to patients with dementia.** link

So only those people who are 'useful' are 'Human' and the elderly are no
longer 'useful' This attitude towards the general public can also be seen in
the Liverpool Care Pathway scandal in the UK. link and link and link  
Where am I going with this?  
These bits and pieces that indicate that world leaders view us as less than
'human' and may therefore have plans for wiping out large numbers of people if
the feel it necessary.  
A return to very cold weather would make that necessary and despite the public
face I very much doubt they ever forgot Shackelton and the Milankovitch theory
from the 1960s and 70s. The 88 year Geissberg cycle would have told them a
warming trend was due. This is substantiated by Maurice Strong's flogging the
Global Warming Horse back at the 1972 Earth Summit BEFORE warming actually
became obvious. This was especially ironic because in the same year:

> …the improving knowledge of glacial history, and especially the apparent
brevity of warm interglacials, prompted anxiety about a full-blown ice age.
George Kukla, together with Robert Matthews of Brown University, convened a
conference in 1972 entitled “The Present Interglacial: How and When will it
End?”, and reported it in Science magazine.  
>  Kukla and Matthews alerted President Richard Nixon, and as a result the US
Administration set up a Panel on the Present Interglacial involving the State
Department and other agencies. None of us knew then that the mid-century
cooling was about to be punctuated by a warming spell from the late 1970s to
the mid 1990s…  
>  link

Am I distrustful and cynical when it comes to the motives of politicians? You
Betcha!

                
                                      116. Monckton of Brenchley says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 7:59 am

Many thanks to all who have commented on this surely heartening news that the
IPCC is no longer predicting climate doom arising from rapidly rising
temperatures in the short to medium term. In the light of the IPCC's climbdown
over its near-term predictions, the notion that we only have x years to Save
The Planet becomes visibly nonsensical.  
I'm grateful to Werner Brozek for pointing out a typo: the IPCC's prediction
is for 0.3-0.7 K warming over the next 30 years, not 0.4-0.7 K.  
The trolls are on the back foot on this one. Their arguments are more than
usually dopey. For instance, the furtively pseudonymous "Billmelater" presents
the news that the IPCC is "still expecting an increasing temperature" as
though that were some kind of knock-down argument against the fact that the
IPCC has now admitted that the "increasing temperature" range it predicts is
smaller than it has predicted before.  
"Billmelater" also asks whether I think everything in a draft document should
appear in the final report. Nothing in the head posting suggested that I
thought any such thing. However, given that the IPCC has in fact dumped the
models and substituted its own supposedly "expert" judgment, with a consequent
substantial reduction in its near-term warming predictions compared with
previous reports, that fact should have been - but was not - made clear in the
Summary for Policymakers.  
The sneakily pseudonymous "Mib8" asks "Why do all the graphs seem to show some
global warming over the last 17-18 years?" On wishes trolls could read - or,
even if they cannot be expected to be able to read, at least look at the
pictures. The graph from Remote Sensing Systems Inc. shows no global warming -
at all - for 17 years 3 months - a fact that is not only pointed out in words
but also illustrated with a graph plainly showing the zero trend line.  
Richard Betts says my statement that the IPCC has "quietly cut" its near-term
global-warming projections is a "totally manufactured criticism". My only
criticism of the IPCC was that it was furtive and that it is a misconceived
body. The central points of the head posting, as all of the trolls no doubt
realized, are to show that the IPCC is no longer confident in the ability of
the models accurately to predict near-term warming, and that it has greatly
reduced its predictions of near-term warming compared with earlier reports,
and that even its latest predictions are well above observed reality.  
Of course these points are a huge embarrassment to those who have profiteered
by telling us we're all doomed, and of course the trolls will do their best to
undermine these points by deliberately misunderstanding them. But the facts
are the facts, and the trolls - if they are any better at math than they are
at reading and at looking at graphs - will be able to verify the facts from
the detailed list of references provided at the end of the posting.  
A Happy New Year to one and all.

                
                                      117. M Courtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:09 am

Gail Combs, I fear you are right - I would not be classified as human by the
Gurdaian editorial staff.  
I guess that's why my right to free speech is taken away. Wonder what is next.  
As usual, CS Lewis, (That Hideous Strength), got there first.  
A highly recommended read, although I'm sure you have done.

                
                                      118. Richard Betts says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:39 am

Mr Monckton  
On the contrary, the IPCC previously made clear the substantial uncertainty in
projections of near-term warming (as with long-term warming). As this figure
from AR4 shows, the previous projections of warming by 2011-2030 spanned quite
a wide range (see the orange curves).  
The new range of projections in AR5 falls within the wider range of the AR4
projections. The range has been narrowed (with the upper end of previous
projections now being less likely) because of (a) more years of observational
data becoming available as time goes on, and (b) the recent slowdown in
warming.  
But thanks for taking an interest - Happy New Year to you.

                
                                      119. Richard Betts says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:41 am

Previous post should have said 2020-2029, not 2011-2030.

                
                                      120. Robert W Turner says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:43 am

I can't believe they included Eemian temperatures showing that we are barely
into the lower end of the temperatures during that time. Only a climactivist
can admit we are colder than the previous interglacial period -- during which
the biosphere thrived -- and claim that the Earth will soon become a barren
wasteland as we warm to the exact same levels.

                
                                      121. Robert Brown says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:56 am

_If Dr. Brown (Duke Univ.) is correct and the climate is chaotic with two
strange attractors, Warm and Cold, then the Holocene is sitting on the edge of
the transition between them and it may not even matter if we do not go into
glaciation. The wild ride as the climate becomes unstable will be bad enough.  
That is the big question of course. What is the threshold conditions needed to
push us into the next glaciation or climate instability? Catastrophic Global
Warming is completely off the table for the next 4,000 years even in the best
case scenario, “..Insolation will remain at this level slightly above the
inception for the next 4,000 years before it then increases again.” except as
spikes caused by the chaotic climate’s instability._  
At least two attractors -- two are readily apparent in the Pliestocene, with
the warm phase attractor nearly stable at pre-Pliestocene levels and the cold-
phase glacial attractor steadily decreasing in mean temperature. The other
pronounced feature of the data is a steady shift of the length of the glacial
periods from 22 ky to 26 ky to 100 ky over the last 600 ky or thereabouts. As
was already noted above, we are in one of the two longest interglacials
evident in at least the recent record at a point that could reasonably be
expected to be the end of it -- or not. The LIA was, or should have been,
rather terrifying as global temperatures reached the lowest levels they have
been across the entire Holocene post Younger Dryas, level that could easily
have been critically unstable to the cold phase transition.  
Near critical points in open bistable/multistable dynamical systems,
fluctuations often grow. The system has two (or more) states that are both
consistent with the given energy flow, and random factors constantly nucleate
small domains with the structure appropriate to the opposite phase. Far from
criticality, those fluctuations are quickly damped. Near criticality, the
feedbacks start to favor their growth rather than their decay and the behavior
of the system becomes much broader, with larger oscillatory trajectories
around an increasingly unstable attractor. This is what "tipping point"
arguments are all about -- sometimes there are gross feedbacks (such as ice
albedo and latent heat) that one can imagine having a point of no return -- if
_enough_ ice melts, if glaciers and permafrost retreat _enough_ during the
summer, then the lowered albedo ensures that it won 't get cold enough to
refreeze into glaciers/permafrost anew come winter (at least on the
boundaries) and glaciers shrink irreversibly. Or the other way -- we have a
very cold winter with excessive snow and ice, and all of that snow both takes
time to melt and reflects away a lot of spring heat, prolonging the winter and
lowering the net heat uptake for the year. The next winter is even colder,
snowier, and longer, and spring/summer cooling even less effective, and we tip
towards glaciation.  
The problem with such arguments is that they are vastly oversimplified -- they
attempt to predict the behavior of a complex system on the basis of an
heuristic applied to one or two projective dimensions. They fail to explain
_why_ any given year is unusually cold and snowy (or not) in the first place,
and besides, the system is _manifestly approximately stable_ almost all of the
time because we do _not_ tip over into glaciation any time there is a
particularly cold winter, or tip over into melted ice caps and eternal
springtime any time we have years, or even decades, of excessive warmth. The
_shortest_ relevant timescales of secular variation appear to be decades, and
the relevant timescale for true movement of the climate appears to be at least
a century.  
I 've said it before, and I'll say it again. Until we have models that can
quantitatively -- not qualitatively in some reduced dimensionality, but
quantitatively -- explain the full Pliestocene, and (further refined)
quantitatively explain the climate variation over the Holocene, we will not
have a clear idea of the _baseline_ for climate variation -- what the climate
would be in the absence of anthropogenic CO_2. This is a serious question. If
the barbarians had overrun Europe at the end of the 17th century (also the end
of the coldest stretch of the LIA), so that the Enlightenment never occurred,
so that human generated CO_2 never became an issue, what would the global
climate be like right now? Is it conceivable that it would have rebounded
_almost identically_ to what we have observed even without human "forcing"?
Bear in mind that even the models that predict CO_2-based warming indicate
that this warming is essentially negligible up until perhaps the 1950's when
the post-WWII industrial boom caused the current relatively rapid rise. The
warming from 1950 to 2000 is almost identical to the warming observed from
1900 to 1950 (so much so that one has to be pretty knowledgeable in order to
be able to even identify which is which without a legend or caption to help if
they are presented on the same scale side by side).  
In the meantime, _something_ caused the Little Ice Age. It was a real, global
phenomenon. It was not aerosols, not carbon dioxide or its lack. It was in
some ways a continuation of the general _cooling_ that has been slowly
occurring since the Holocene Optimum, but it suggests that that cooling may
have proceeded to the point where cold-phase fluctuations are not so strongly
suppressed -- that one certainly grew, and it has taken centuries for it to
shrink back to near "normal" for this point in the Holocene (which is still
somewhat cooler than it has been for most of the last 11,000 years). These are
not small effects -- what is being moved is the climate of the entire planet,
over a few _decades_ , from mostly warm to substantially colder, all occurring
_entirely naturally_.  
The current cooling-to-neutral phase is being accomplished without the help of
volcanic aerosols and in the teeth of increasing CO_2. What might we expect if
we have a series of 2-3 Pinatubo-scale volcanic events in a decade, or even if
one, large, particularly emissive volcano re-awakens and begins a decade-long
eruption? We don 't really have much evidence for a still warmer-phase tipping
point in the climate record with the current configuration of oceans and
continents -- the last time the climate was substantially warmer than the
Holocene even back before the beginning of the Pliestocene was when the
continents and oceans had an entire different topology and connectivity, in
particular a channel between North and South America. It is hypothesized on
the basis of a perceived stability to a warm phase planet with Antarctica and
Greenland fully melted, so that negative albedo feedback is maximally
achieved.  
But is that truly stable? In the historical past, it hasn't been. Even when
Antarctica was indeed fully melted in the summers and supported a rich array
of life, it wasn't horribly _stable_ and eventually it froze never to thaw
again. We do not, really, have a clear idea of what the stable attractors are
even out there in this extreme regime, and we have no idea what the barriers
are between the current climate state and any domain where those attractors
become dominant. Many egregious statements are made that are based on e.g. the
melting of the Greenland icepack, kilometers thick, in only a few decades, or
the melting of the land based Antarctic glaciers at a time when Antarctic ice
appears to be _growing_.  
I truly do think that climate science is a worthy endeavor for the human race.
We have benefited tremendously from our ability to predict the weather in the
short run and the climate (within reason) on a slightly longer run. However,
predicting the climate on a century scale _without_ the complication of CO_2
is currently beyond us. We cannot even explain the climate of the last few
centuries (without CO_2) and have no particularly good reason to think that we
could accurately predict what the climate would have been without
anthropogenic CO_2. The historical record is rife with century-scale degree-
scale changes in global temperature. If one computes the root-mean slope of
global temperature in most of the proxies -- essentially the average slope
positive OR negative of the temperature -- I suspect that it would be order of
0.5-1.0 C -- decades where the average temperature changes by at least 0.05 C
almost certainly outnumber decades where it does not, and the climate usually
appears to have a longer term trend up or down over still longer time scales.
This is a _lower bound_ for the natural variability of the climate, and is
clearly of the same order as all of the warming correctly or falsely
attributed to human activity.  
There is a serious problem with signal to noise here. It will be decades
before the AGW hypothesis is quantitatively settled, simply because it will
take decades for any "warming signal" to emerge from the natural noise, and it
will even then require a lot of sophisticated analysis to _separate_ the two
in a fully coupled chaotic system with a substantial innate trend that might
well swamp both signal and noise in movements so grand that the entire human
race is helpless before them (such as a return to glacial conditions).  
Human civilization has risen from "nothing" but scattered tribes of hunter-
gatherers over the Holocene interglacial. We may -- I say may -- have learned
enough to survive the next glaciation, although probably with a vastly reduced
global population, decimated by wars and famine and the return of energy
poverty. Hansen's 5 meter SLR and the end of the Pliestocene is equally scary,
actually, although I have to say that I'd rather live in a warm, wet world
than in a glacial interval when times are hardest everywhere and ice a
kilometer thick stretches down to Pennsylvania in North America and covers
most of Europe and northern Asia where currently some billion or two people
live (given a choice of catastrophes). However, we do not have such a choice.
We do not understand the climate well enough to predict it with anything like
real confidence, and it will almost certainly require decades of work on the
part of a scientific community _not_ infected with uncharacteristic hubris to
get to where we can.  
In the meantime, technology will continue its advance. The energy sources of
today will eventually be abandoned simply because they aren 't sustainable on
a millennial scale (some of them not even on a century scale). Carbon based
energy was never more than a bootstrap resource, a readily available resource
sufficient to permit the rapid advance of civilization and human knowledge to
where we can do better, with fuel resources that can last indefinitely. It
would be lovely to get through that transition with lots of unexploited carbon
left in the ground, so that if humans are wiped out by a pandemic or if
civilization collapses in a global nuclear war upon the advent of the next
glacial era, there is something easy to mine and burn to bootstrap a second
attempt. I applaud the desire to develop solar energy, fission based energy,
fusion based energy, satellite based energy into viable sustainable resources
even as I deplore any effort to _force the issue_ and adopt them before the
technologies are mature and cost-efficient.  
It 's funny. For most of the course of human history, religions of all sorts
predict apocalyptic events that will end "the age" of the day, the current
Yuga. Even without science, religions recognize the essential impermanence of
things, the changing nature of Nature. The apocalypses they predict -- nay,
"prophecy" -- are absurd, of course. There is no secret knowledge of divine
inspiration that can lead us to accurately predict the future, and plain old
mundane observationally founded knowledge of things such as physics,
chemistry, geology, and astronomy have a pretty hard time extrapolating the
global ecology a single decade into the future let alone a century. As noted
above, it is easy to find or hypothesize "apocalyptic" catastrophes in nature
with or without human help -- glaciation, desertification, collapse of the
global ecosystem, pollution of the oceans, nuclear war, asteroid collisions,
gamma ray bursts. Some of these we can clearly influence. Some them, if they
occur, are just plain bad luck for the human race. So long, human Charlie.
Better luck next Yuga.  
As was the case with the religious "catastrophes", the unscrupulous are quick
to seize on any possibility of disaster and exploit it to their own profit, or
use it to advance a privately help political position by basically lying to
people, playing on their fears. That's what the quotes up above reveal -- a
substantial amount of the CAGW noise is just the deliberate attempt to
exaggerat the the quality and certainty of the science in order to achieve a
political end through deception. The end, it is presumed, justifies the means.
Thus always does the priesthood justify its actions -- without this _myth_ ,
without believing this _lie_ , people won't do what they "should" do or would
choose to do if, like me (they believe), they were in full possession of the
facts.  
Time to replay the Feynman Cargo Cult lecture. There is absolutely no
substitute for honesty in science, and there is something ethically
reprehensible about any scientist who would deliberately overstate the
scientific case for some belief in order to attain _their own_ desired
political ends.  
rgb

                
                                      122. John Whitman says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 9:31 am

> Richard Betts on January 2, 2014 at 8:39 am said,  
>  @Mr Monckton  
>  ". . .  
>  The new range of projections in AR5 falls within the wider range of the AR4
projections. The range has been narrowed (with the upper end of previous
projections now being less likely) because of (a) more years of observational
data becoming available as time goes on, and (b) the recent slowdown in
warming.  
>  . . ."

* * *

Richard Betts,  
I find your criticism of Monckton's rhetoric both logical and reasonably
established, but only when ignoring a faulty premise at the base of your
reasoning.  
Your problematic premise is that the IPCC has an unbiased epistemological
structure with neutral processes and built in self-correction mechanisms to
yield objective balance.  
It is not. It is a subjectively contrived entity for using a new concept of
science to support a non-scientific 'a priori' conclusion.  
Its new concept of science is based on ideas having primacy over observations
instead of observations having primacy over ideas.  
Thus the AR progression you discuss is the non-rational product of built-in
subjectivity, scientifically speaking.  
A demarcation of IPCC endorsed research from objectively evaluated research is
now known sufficiently for minimizing the IPCC's merit in the evolution of
future climate science dialog.  
Happy New Year to you.  
Also, Happy New Year to the IPCC Bureau.  
John

                
                                      123. Monckton of Brenchley says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 9:55 am

Mr. Whitman flatters me by describing my surely businesslike and scientific
head posting as "rhetoric", and says he cannot fault Mr. Betts' criticism of
my "rhetoric". However, I had made the simple, straightforward point that the
IPCC's current interval of projections is lower than it was in the second
draft of its latest report.  
Neither in the second draft nor in any previous report had the IPCC projected,
as its central case, as little as 0.4 K global warming over 30 years. No
amount of wriggling by Mr. Betts will alter that fact. It is also entirely
plain from the very clear diagrams in the head posting that the IPCC's current
interval of projections is very much at the low end of the models'
projections. It is the first time the IPCC has substituted its "expert
judgment" for the electronic crystal-gazing of the models.  
Professor Brown points out, rightly, that the rate of global warming from
1900-1950 is almost indistinguishable from that of 1950-2000. In the earlier
period, the models would not have predicted much global warming (probably as
little as 0.1 K). Yet that period warmed almost as fast as the later period,
when we could in theory have had some measurable influence on the climate. His
final sentence about the immorality of scientists deriving their results from
political belief rather than the other way about is well put.

                
                                      124. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 9:58 am

Robert Brown says: @ January 2, 2014 at 8:56 am

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Thank you Dr. Brown for clarifying that.  
>  We need to understand the real questions and variables in climate. Not
focus on just one possibility. Let's face, it the Holocene has been incredibly
'even tempered' compared to other interglacials. Also like you I want to see
other energy sources (Thorium?) brought on board. As a chemist, burning the
feed stock for many chemical processes makes me cringe.

                
                                      125. Allan MacRae says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 10:27 am

Remembering Victor Paschkis, 93, Retired Professor And Pacifist  
I met Victor and Marjory Paschkis in ~1970 in Kingston Ontario. They were
impressive people who had a significant influence on my life. Victor and
Marjory invited us to visit them at Fellowship Farm in Pottstown, Pa. Events
intervened and we never made the trip. Marjory died in 1983 and Victor in
1991.  
http://www.nytimes.com/1991/06/20/obituaries/victor-paschkis-93-a-retired-
professor-and-pacifist-is-dead.html  
In 1986, the American Association for the Advancement of Science gave Dr.
Paschkis its Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award for his "pioneering
efforts to establish the principle that scientists and engineers have a
personal responsibility for the social consequences of their professional
activity." In the same year the American Society of Mechanical Engineers gave
him its Founders Award.  
Stephen H. Unger wrote in 2009, “At some point after joining the Society of
Friends (Quakers), Paschkis began promulgating the idea that scientists and
engineers can’t properly ignore their consciences during working hours. They
should, he argued, behave as moral people with respect to their work. To
disseminate this viewpoint more widely, in 1949 he formed the Society for
Social Responsibility in Science. Prominent SSRS supporters included Albert
Einstein and Linus Pauling.”  
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=05466002  
The relevance to this thread is that the warmist camp has, I believe, failed
to adhere to basic ethics in their fanatical promotion of global warming
alarmism. They have squandered over a trillion dollars of scarce global
resources based on nonsensical global warming catastrophism that we knew was
false more than a decade ago. Now the warmist camp is climbing down from their
very-scary global warming predictions one degree C at a time, in the hopes
that nobody will notice they are abandoning ship.

                
                                      126. rgbatduke says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 11:03 am

_We need to understand the real questions and variables in climate. Not focus
on just one possibility. Let’s face, it the Holocene has been incredibly ‘even
tempered’ compared to other interglacials. Also like you I want to see other
energy sources (Thorium?) brought on board. As a chemist, burning the feed
stock for many chemical processes makes me cringe._  
That 's a point that isn't made often enough. There are some human activities
that we will probably look back on and say: Gawd, how stupid were we to do
thus and such. Decimating the genetic diversity of the planet is one big oops,
as it looks like genes are a natural resource of enormous value. Decimating
the feedstock for organic chemistry by burning it is another one that doesn't
receive nearly enough attention. It would be LOVELY to find a cost-effective
alternative to gasoline and fuel oils simply because oil is the cost-effective
basis of everything from drugs to plastics, to the point where burning it to
heat a house seems really stupid. Sadly, the very highly energetic chemical
bonds that make it valuable as a starting point (because it is expensive to
create them the hard way, starting from carbon and hydrogen) also give it an
enormous energy density and make it a nearly uniquely useful fuel for
automotive devices.  
But that doesn't justify creating an artificial global panic to try to keep
people from burning oil to serve the "greater good" of preserving a valuable
resource for other uses. It might well justify an rational public conversation
on the importance of investing in (research into) reasonable alternatives.  
rgb

                
                                      127. John Whitman says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 11:27 am

> Monckton of Brenchley on January 2, 2014 at 9:55 am said,

>

>> John Whitman on January 2, 2014 at 9:31 am  
>  Richard Betts,  
>  I find your criticism of Monckton’s rhetoric both logical and reasonably
established, but only when ignoring a faulty premise at the base of your
reasoning.  
>  . . .

>

> Mr. Whitman flatters me by describing my surely businesslike and scientific
head posting as “rhetoric”, and says he cannot fault Mr. Betts’ criticism of
my “rhetoric”. However, I had made the simple, straightforward point that the
IPCC’s current interval of projections is lower than it was in the second
draft of its latest report.

* * *

Christopher Monckton,  
Apparently the rhetoric of yours that I refered to (in my comment Richard
Betts) was 'furtively' expressed by me.  
The subject rhetoric of yours being discussed is your 'furtive' / 'sneaky'
verbiage wrt the change found in the IPCC's final AR5 document.  
John

                
                                      128. Janice Moore says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 11:36 am

@ Eric Simpson (re: 11:34pm yesterday) -- Sounds good! Yes the video, too -- I
watched that excellent video thanks to YOUR name-link. And, thank you **so
much** for the kind words.

* * *

Hi, Gail (congratulations, heh, heh -- seriously, YOU always write excellent
posts (and they are always **on** -topic, too, lol), thank you for all your
super-great research on behalf of the truth!) -- thanks for the wonderful
collection of quotes above (and for all the **super-great** research you share
in succeeding posts). That is exactly what we WUWTers need to get the facts
out there and to expose the corruption of the climate "scientists." THANKS!

* * *

**The Society of Misplaced Thermometers** (Stephen Richards, 1:50am today)
LOL. And right on about minutes of meetings. Wouldn 't THAT be a great comedy
skit!  
Hope all is well with you in Pahhh-hrrree. How's that lemon tree doing? (I
will always remember you for your very kind words to me last year -- again,
thank you.)

* * *

@ Geir (1:55am, today) -- Thanks for the insightful report from Norway. Hang
in there, buddy!

* * *

**" Lies, damned lies and the IPCC."** (Roy UK, 2:53am, today). Good one!

* * *

@ Ken Hall -- excellent point about what information people rely on when
**their own** money is on the line.

* * *

**" If Rodin did this with his sculpting the Thinker would be transgendered by
now."** (M Courtney 3:57am, today). Applause, applause. (and, yes, C. S.
Lewis's (an author who is ALWAYS a good read), That Hideous Strength is
marvelous (wonder if the Cult of Climastrology has a Head (ugh)?).

* * *

@ Richard Courtney -- glad you are okay (hope your friend, Sue, is, too).  
(muttering to self as I am about to click on "Post Comment," "… sure hope I
got all those end-bolds right…")

                
                                      129. cliff hanger says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:47 pm

My grandfather told me about this fellow that would come around during dry
spells in the late 1800s he was called the rainmaker and tried to collect
money to cause it to rain. He was called the rainmaker the people that paid
him were called fools you cannot control the weather but if you want to pay
feel free. I think this gentle man also sold snake oil its been around for a
long long time.

                
                                      130. Robert A. Taylor says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:49 pm

Excellent as usual, except in the final graph “OBSERVATIONS” should be labeled
“Linear Projections Based Upon Observations from Through ”, or far shorter
“Projections from Observations”. Obviously any date beyond 2013 is a
projection not an observation, and should be so stated to avoid giving
ammunition to quibbling CAGW advocates.

                
                                      131. Robert A. Taylor says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 12:51 pm

Oops! Formatting problem. Should have been "from [date] Through [date]”.
Sorry.

                
                                      132. Khwarizmi says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:14 pm

_Decimating the feedstock for organic chemistry by burning it is another one
that doesn’t receive nearly enough attention. It would be LOVELY to find a
cost-effective alternative to gasoline and fuel oils simply because oil is the
cost-effective basis of everything from drugs to plastics, to the point where
burning it to heat a house seems really stupid._  
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  
Only a religious adherence to the fossil fable allows for depletion anxiety.  
Earth is awash in hydrocarbons. Earth produces hydrocarbons continuously via
**serpentinisation**. Bugs have been eating petroleum for billions of years -
bugs were eating petroleum _before photosynthesis evolved._ Petroleum is a
"renewable".  
I am the only person to ever mention serpentinisation on this website -
ignorance of geochemistry is evidently bliss.  
Hydrocarbons from rock for billions of years - serpentinisation and life:  
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2520656/Did-life-begin-
underground-Microbes-MILES-surface-similar-lived-3-5-billion-years-ago.html  
Petroleum is abundant and abiotic. It's time we stopped deceiving ourselves
about its origin.

                
                                      133. PJ Clarke says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:14 pm

What is the exact source for the claim that Hansen's Scenario A was his 'BAU'
case? In his own words:  
" _The three scenarios were used to bracket likely possibilities. Scenario A
was described as “on the high side of reality,” because it assumed rapid
exponential growth of GHGs and it included no large volcanic eruptions during
the next half century. Scenario C was described as “a more drastic curtailment
of emissions than has generally been imagined,” specifically GHGs were assumed
to stop increasing after 2000. Intermediate scenario B was described as “the
most plausible._ ”  
(Hansen et al 2006)  
Clearly if three values are used to 'bracket' a range, it follows that the the
first and last will be at the extremes rather than the most likely, no?  
What is the source of the assertion that Hansen predicted a 1C rise every two
decades in his 1988 testimony?  
As far as I can tell, the paper cited only gives moodel run projections to
2019, and at a rather lower rate than 0.5C/decade. I have been unable to
locate the actual testimony, however a press report at the time quoted Hansen
saying  
"If the current pace of the buildup of these gases continues, the effect is
likely to be a warming of 3 to 9 degrees Fahrenheit from the year 2025 to
2050, according to these projections. This rise in temperature is not expected
to be uniform around the globe but to be greater in the higher latitudes,
reaching as much as 20 degrees, and lower at the Equator."  
Now 9F is 5C so Hansen appears to have been predicting a _range_ 1988-2050 of
between 0.2 to 0.8C per decade. What is the source for the idea that he
actually predicted a single number?

                
                                      134. PJ Clarke says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:18 pm

Ah, I've located some of Hansen's testimony (he testified on 4 occasions over
a 2 year span, on one occasion he said:-  
"These scenarios are designed specifically to cover a very broad range of
cases. If I were forced to choose one of these as most plausible, I would say
Scenario B. My guess is that the world is now probably following a course that
will take it somewhere between A and B"

                
                                      135. M Courtney says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:27 pm

Khwarizmi says at January 2, 2014 at 1:14 pm, Serpentisation:  
I would love this to be true. I don't know why it isn't.  
But it does seem that it isn't. Geological surveys that have looked for oil
near serpentine or similar marble-like geology have not led to commercial
finds.  
Maybe biological oil is formed in far more accessible places than inorganic
oil? If so, then oil is still running out with current technology.  
Maybe the chemistry is wrong and Serpentisation doesn't happen (I can't see
that but I may be wrong). Seemingly, it isn't seemingly formed near the
surface, though. And why should I doubt empirical evidence?  
It does seem like all usable oil is biogenic.

                
                                      136. dbstealey says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:36 pm

PJ Clarke, you are trying to defend the indefensible. As head of GISS, James
Hansen unethically manipulated the temperature record to show lower past
temperatures, and higher current temperatures. The result was to show a
[false] rapidly increasing rate of global temperatures.  
Hansen's "adjusted" record always went in the same direction: lower past T and
higher present T. See here and here and here.  
Honesty matters. You need to pick your heroes a little more carefully.

                
                                      137. Bob Weber says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 1:51 pm

I was waiting for this - we are seeing the white flag being waved by the UN,
with a hedge. Of course in 30 years it's going to warm up, after the cooler
period that's already started that will last another, guess what, 30 years or
so. This is the closest thing to a complete face-saving surrender by the UN
IPCC. Good job skeptics everywhere around the world for being on the job for
all this time pointing out the obvious, dissecting the difficult, and
repudiating false claims.  
It'll dawn on the rest of the warmists soon enough that it is solar cycle 24
and a rag-tag barely affiliated minority of true climate realists that kicked
their collective arses. Let's just hope the MSM and US government doesn't try
to continue to buffalo and badger any more about climate change or CAGW. If
they do, I am positive my fellow skeptics will keep up the good work.  
Let's just see what they try to pull on us now this year politically as they
prepare to fleece us again for something that isn't and could never be our
fault. I'm ready. Are you?

                
                                      138. David Harrington says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:16 pm

How the hell can anyone still try to portray all this as a crisis?

                
                                      139. Gail Combs says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:17 pm

Khwarizmi says: @ January 2, 2014 at 1:14 pm  
Thanks for the link and new word. I was aware of the abiotic oil hypothesis
which has been discussed here before.  
For others, here is a dissertation on the subject: Origin of organic compounds
in fluids from ultramafic-hosted hydrothermal vents of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge  
(I still rather use it for producing feed stock for chemicals and thorium
nuclear for energy.)

                
                                      140. MrX says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:28 pm

What's really staggering is that if the climate hadn't cooled, the warmists
would use this to claim they were right. Many Leftists don't understand why
they would still be wrong even if the temperature had gone up the last 17
years.

                
                                      141. Gary Hladik says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:33 pm

Robert Brown says (January 2, 2014 at 8:56 am): [snip]  
Lord Monckton and RGB in the same thread, only two days into the new year!
What a great start to 2014!

                
                                      142. Jay says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 2:38 pm

Follow the money.. Simple as that!

                
                                      143. TB says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 4:04 pm

Eric Simpson says:  
January 1, 2014 at 9:30 pm  
“Unless we announce disasters no one will listen.” -Sir John Houghton, ex ipcc
chair”

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > >
> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > I Don’t
know about the others but I recognised this as being a “myth” when I spotted
it.  
>  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_T._Houghton  
>  “Falsely attributed  
>  In a November 2006 article in Australia's The Daily Telegraph, journalist
Piers Akerman quoted Houghton as saying "UNLESS WE ANNOUNCE DISASTERS, NO ONE
WILL LISTEN", attributing the quotation to his 1994 book Global Warming, The
Complete Briefing. This has since been quoted by many sceptics, including
Benny Peiser and Christopher Monckton, and is listed at the top of the front
page of Christopher Booker's The Real Global Warming Disaster. However, the
quotation does not appear in any edition of Houghton's book. Houghton has
never said any such thing and believes the opposite. The publishers of The
Real Global Warming Disaster, The Continuum International Publishing Group,
have apologised for the reference to that quotation, confirmed (in addition to
Booker's confirmation) that it will not be repeated, and have agreed to place
a corrigendum in any further copies of the book. In an article which appeared
in The Sunday Telegraph on 20 February 2010, Christopher Booker purported to
correct the misquotation contained in The Real Global Warming Disaster but
this article contained yet further inaccuracies. As a result, Houghton
referred the matter to the Press Complaints Commission (PCC Reference 101959).
Following the PCC's involvement, The Sunday Telegraph published on 15 August
2010 a letter of correction by Houghton stating his true position. An article
supportive of Houghton also appears in the 21 May 2010 edition of New
Scientist.”  
>  What he actually said was….  
>  “If we want a good environmental policy in the future we’ll have to have a
disaster.”  
>  Says nothing about “announcing” (read forecasting??) - It says “we’ll have
to have”.  
>  That is, one will need to happen and NOT that we’ll have to forecast one.  
>  I suspect that (like me) he is fully aware of human nature and realises
that “people” generally need a sharp reminder of reality (I don’t mean it will
be a reality BTW), in order to bring any problem to forefront of their minds.

                
                                      144. CRS, DrPH says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:28 pm

> David Harrington says:  
>  January 2, 2014 at 2:16 pm  
>  How the hell can anyone still try to portray all this as a crisis?

Well…a repeat of the "Little Ice Age" during the Maunder Minimum would likely
lead to all sorts of global crises! Starvation due to crop collapse, mass
migration, perhaps regional wars…  
A bit of warming on the other hand? Not so much. Thank you, Lord Monckton, for
your hard work and dedication.

                
                                      145. TXMichaelaal says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:36 pm

David Harrington says:  
January 2, 2014 at 2:16 pm  
"How the hell can anyone still try to portray all this as a crisis?"

* * *

First, I absolutely agree … but what they have actually done is to INCREASE
the burden on Skeptics to prove that the models are wrong.  
For the past five years, Skeptics have been pounding away at the lack of
warming (17 years and counting). Even the governments to whom the IPCC reports
have reminded the IPCC crowd that this is a significant variance as compared
to AGW model predictions. By flattening out their projections slightly, the
IPCC is essentially putting the Skeptics in the position that we now won't be
able to "disprove" their models until we have 50 years (to pick a number) or
so of data showing no warming. All the while, they will continue to trumpet
"man's impact on global climate change" while negating the argument that there
is proof to the contrary. After all, they are not debating the issue, so much
as they are driving the propaganda/research funding machine.  
For those who understand this stuff, we get the fact that this is a major
concession by the IPCC. However, it might serve us well to view this revision
as something of a Trojan Horse; it may look good on the surface, but when they
start dismissing the 17 year temp plateau as being well within the parameters
of their models, it may become problematic.

                
                                      146. Doug says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 5:38 pm

Billmelater, please learn the difference between climate and weather. You may
be illuminated

                
                                      147. Mervyn says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 6:12 pm

A good article.  
The real issue, now, should be about holding to account those who knowingly
misled the public by falsely claiming the 2007 IPCC's 4th Assessment Report's
message was gold standard climate science … incontrovertible … settled, and
about the appalling treatment of sceptic scientists guilty of only doing what
real scientists do i.e. diligently searching for the data that contradicts a
theory, in this case the IPCC's mantra … in accordance with the scientific
method.  
If the IPCC had been a listed corporation, the 2007 climate report would most
certainly have been withdrawn by the end of 2010 (following all the many
revelations … errors, mistakes, controversies and scandals relating to that
report) and the directors would have been charged for engaging in misleading
and deceptive conduct.  
Unless a lesson is learnt from what has happened since 2007, with all the
lies, half-truths and scientific malfeasance, all this exaggerated global
warming alarmist propaganda will continue in order to achieve what activists
and politicians have been trying to achieve for decades, international
controls on fossil fuel energy use.

                
                                      148. Janice Moore says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 6:40 pm

"… what they have actually done is to INCREASE the burden on Skeptics to prove
that the models are wrong… " (TX Michaelaal)  
Nonsense. The burden of proof has always been and **remains** on those
asserting that human CO2 drives climate. We have **nothing to prove.** We only
point out, day after day after day …, that they have not yet provided ANY
**evidence** for their purely speculative position to prevent their fooling
people. We do not do this to disprove them. Reality has done that over and
over. We do this to educate the voters to, thereby, prevent the destruction of
our economies by the Enviro-profiteers and their stooges in government.

* * *

Lest we forget ….  
**Why We Truth-tellers Must Engage in a  
Nonsensical-but-Necessary Battle for Truth**

(note the "plant a tree" truism -- Con artists always mix in a little truth to
get you to swallow their l1es)  
Well, ACTUALLY, heh, heh, heh, …. that video turned out to be a **great morale
booster**. You WUWT Science Giants are WINNING! Al "Millions of Degrees" Gore
said that over 7 years ago… .  
The foes of truth will be forever with us, but **they are on defense**.  
Bwah, ha, ha, ha, haaaaaaaaaaa!  
TRUTH PREVAILS OVER L1ES -- EVERY TIME.

* * *

Time for a little laugh at a fool's expense:  
**" Ball of Fire"** -- "Al Gore" (Paul Shanklin)

                
                                      149. Janice Moore says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 7:16 pm

After that, you may feel in dire need of a mental cleansing. So, for a
refreshing taste of the truth,  
**Christopher, Lord Monckton! Warrior for Truth**

Ah, now, wasn 't that a delight? I could listen to CM's mind (and that lovely
voice) all day. Hm. A good part of the day (smile).  
(yes, yes, there are, indeed, likely better video clips; I don't have ALL
DAY!)

# (:))

                
                                      150. Geoff Brown says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:04 pm

Down-under, Australia's Climate Council (including Tim Flannery and Will
Steffen) keep making alarmists rubbish announcements. Lord Monckton has made a
reply to their latest garbage:  
http://theclimatescepticsparty.blogspot.com.au/2014/01/lord-monckton-to-
climate-council-no.html

                
                                      151. Werner Brozek says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 8:15 pm

Update: RSS for December is now out and the time for a zero slope went up a
month to 17 years and 4 months from September 1996 to December 2013.

                
                                      152. RobRoy says:
                

January 2, 2014 at 9:56 pm

"The rats are the first to leave a sinking.ship."  
I'm sure this addage is empirically based. It's an observation.  
Empirical observation causes this latest IPCC backpedal, (The largest yet.)  
Let'm squirm.

                
                                      153. Richard Betts says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 2:40 am

@Monckton of Brenchley  
I'm not disagreeing with you that the central estimate of near-term warming
was reduced between AR4 and AR5. This is indeed the case, as a result of the
slower warming in recent years.  
My objection, as John Whitman correctly notes, is to your rhetoric. You seem
to be attempting to paint a picture of the IPCC somehow surreptitiously
"climbing down", which is simply untrue.  
You say:

> the IPCC is no longer confident in the ability of the models accurately to
predict near-term warming

This is incorrect, as there was not much confidence in the first place. As I
showed with the AR4 figure, the uncertainty range for the previous near-term
temperature projections was quite large, and indeed it spanned zero. Yes, a
small probability of _cooling_ was judged possible. This is not exactly a sign
of high confidence in the ability to predict near-term warming! The IPCC did
not have the former confidence that you are claiming. There is no "climb down"
- just ongoing developments in science.  
Incidentally, you described your post as "businesslike and scientific", but to
me it reads as political. There does seem to be a bit of a theme that whenever
some aspect of climate science moves in a direction favoured by sceptics
(e.g.. observations or models showing/projecting slower warming) then this
gets tagged as being "admitted" (you use that word above), or "conceded", or
done "silently" or "quietly". It's almost as if some people simply don't
understand the scientific process, and think that it works like a legal or
political process with one side pitched against the other. It seems to me that
your use of "admitted", "silently" etc helps you build the narrative of
mainstream scientists being your adversaries who are gradually giving way on
their position - but this is a false narrative. Science evolves based on
evidence, and if the evidence points to slower warming in recent years and in
the near future, then fine, that is what the scientific conclusions will be.

                
                                      154. M Courtney says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 2:59 am

Forgive my strong reply but this is quite infuriating.  
There seems to be a misapprehension that climate science evolves based on
evidence. That is incorrect. Science evolves based on evidence. Climate
science is a closed club that denigrates alternate views. It is a pseudo-
science, despite the failed efforts of Richard Betts to restore some
credibility to the field.  
For example take these quotes about Lord Monckton (when he dared to ask for a
debate)

> Professor Frame said Lord Monckton was trying to bait scientists into a
debate on climate change.  
>  "But I am not under an obligation to debate with Lord Monckton because he
has no credibility and no expertise in this field."  
>  Professor Boston confirmed he had been contacted about hosting Lord
Monckton at the university, but declined.  
>  "I thought I would be doing the public and the university a disservice by
in any way supporting an event involving Lord Monckton."

Copied from here:  
http://www.stuff.co.nz/the-press/national/8545516/Sceptics-ire-amuses-but-
views-retain-sting  
In science evidence is accepted and the conclusions derived based on the
evidence. In pseudo-science like astrology and climatology the conclusion is
pre-detemined and evidence chosen that fits. Other evidence is silenced and
certainly never debated.  
(The IPCC looks for Antropogenic Global Warming and so cannot accept that it
may be negligable)  
It is quite reasonable for a scientist to look down on climatologists for
acting surreptitiously. They do as they have to. Otherwise they would need to
debate the real evidence - about 17 years so far - which is contrary to the
core purpose of the IPCC.  
_Has anyone ever noticed that no other (scientific, not religious) field has
copied the formation of an IPCC structure to determine truth? Why is that?_

                
                                      155. richardscourtney says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 3:43 am

Richard Betts:  
Your post at January 3, 2014 at 2:40 am begins by saying to Monckton of
Brenchley

> I’m not disagreeing with you that the central estimate of near-term warming
was reduced between AR4 and AR5. This is indeed the case, as a result of the
slower warming in recent years.  
>  My objection, as John Whitman correctly notes, is to your rhetoric. You
seem to be attempting to paint a picture of the IPCC somehow surreptitiously
“climbing down”, which is simply untrue.

The only untruths are yours.  
Viscount Monckton’s above article concerns changes between the IPCC AR5 SPM
and the AR5 so-called ‘science’ report. Your attempt to pretend the article is
about changes between the AR4 and AR5 is a ‘red herring’ which can only be
understood to be extreme trolling.  
As Viscount Monckton says in his above article **concerning the AR5**

> But in the final draft it quietly cut the 30-year projection to 0.3-0.7 Cº,
saying the warming is more likely to be at the lower end of the range
[equivalent to about 0.4 Cº over 30 years].

That is simply true, and your sophistry does not – and cannot – alter it.  
**Importantly, the “rhetoric” of Viscount Monckton is correct.  
The IPCC has “climbed down” and has provided the “climb down” in a manner
which is not only “surreptitious” but is also in flagrant contradiction of the
IPCC’s own agreed and formally adopted procedures.**  
I explained this above in my refutation of the similar nonsense to that which
you present when it was provided by Billmelater. This link jumps to my
explanation.  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2014/01/01/ipcc-silently-slashes-its-global-
warming-predictions-in-the-ar5-final-draft/#comment-1521470  
Richard

                
                                      156. Matt Skaggs says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 8:49 am

Thank you Dr. Brown for your very astute comments on both the need to
understand natural variability before we can meaningfully predict future
climate, and also your statements regarding the desirability of not burning
through our fossil fuels so rashly. Reading your comments on a thread like
this is like finding a treasure in a junk store.

                
                                      157. richardscourtney says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 11:26 am

Matt Skaggs:  
re your post at January 3, 2014 at 8:49 am.  
Yes, Robert Brown does make good comments and has made some in this thread.
But that is not why I am writing this post.  
You write of his comments on this thread as being like

> like finding a treasure in a junk store

Say what!? "A junk store"?  
We are only in the first week of January and your post may turn out to be the
best piece of concern trolling during the entire year. Congratulations.  
Richard

                
                                      158. Matt Skaggs says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 12:56 pm

OK Richard, now I am looking at you.  
In a Jan 2, 6:19 am comment RichardSCourtney wrote:  
“Any ‘science’ which fails to support that political purpose [of bolstering
CAGW] is ‘amended’ in furtherance of the IPCC’s Role.”  
In a Jan 3, 3:43 am comment (the same) Richard wrote:  
“’But in the final draft [the IPCC] quietly cut the 30-year projection to
0.3-0.7 Cº, saying the warming is more likely to be at the lower end of the
range (equivalent to about 0.4 Cº over 30 years).’ That is simply true.”  
It is also true that the most difficult place to recognize junk is in your own
closet.

                
                                      159. John Whitman says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 2:23 pm

> Richard Betts on January 3, 2014 at 2:40 am said,  
>  @Monckton of Brenchley  
>  My objection, as John Whitman correctly notes, is to your rhetoric. You
seem to be attempting to paint a picture of the IPCC somehow surreptitiously
“climbing down”, which is simply untrue.

* * *

Richard Betts,  
I agree that the subject 'furtive' rhetoric by Monckton about the AR5 process
has little merit . . . **but on the other hand** the IPCC 's inherently
subjective behavior that serves to support biased assessments is, in my view,
the thrust of what is being implied by Monckton even without his rhetoric. If
I am correct that it is his implication then I support Monckton.  
FYI = > In this thread and in my frequent comments on this venue for the past
several years I have maintained that the IPCC has implemented a new concept of
science which is subservient to the promotion of mere preconceived 'a priori'
ideas.  
On a personal note: I admire your calm measured demeanor in the dialog on this
thread. It adds a good dimension. Thanks.  
John

                
                                      160. richardscourtney says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 2:39 pm

Matt Skaggs:  
I am replying to your "junk" at January 3, 2014 at 12:56 pm.  
This is a link to my entire post which you attempt to vilify.  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2014/01/01/ipcc-silently-slashes-its-global-
warming-predictions-in-the-ar5-final-draft/#comment-1521470  
I am content for people to click the link and to read what I wrote. They will
see I linked to and quoted the IPCC's own documents. If that is "junk" then
complain to the IPCC, not me.  
You trolls swarm to any thread which presents indisputable facts you don't
like. It is because the truth hurts warmunists.  
Richard

                
                                      161. DJG says:
                

January 3, 2014 at 4:59 pm

If the IPPC's previous predictions were so wrong, what reason is there not to
expect that their most recent predictions aren't also wrong? Did they predict
that there would be no warming in the last 17 years? No, they missed that one
too.

                
                                      162. Matt Skaggs says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 8:05 am

Richardscourtney wrote:  
"You trolls swarm to any thread which presents indisputable facts you don’t
like. It is because the truth hurts warmunists."  
Gosh, Richard, for a self-appointed comment cop, you seem to not be paying
much attention. I am a CAGW skeptic who has been making primarily scientific
comments here for a number of years. What I don't share is the political views
of folks like you and Monckton, nor will you find many examples of me using
schoolyard taunts like "warmunist" or "troll." In fact I am living proof that
it is possible to be a CAGW skeptic and still believe that sustainability is a
moral imperative, a viewpoint that is eloquently elucidated by Dr. Brown
above.

                
                                      163. John Whitman says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 9:51 am

> Matt Skaggs on January 4, 2014 at 8:05 am said,

>

>> @Richardscourtney wrote:  
>  “You trolls swarm to any thread which presents indisputable facts you don’t
like. It is because the truth hurts warmunists.”

>

> Gosh, Richard, for a self-appointed comment cop, you seem to not be paying
much attention. I am a CAGW skeptic who has been making primarily scientific
comments here for a number of years. What I don’t share is the political views
of folks like you and Monckton, nor will you find many examples of me using
schoolyard taunts like “warmunist” or “troll.” In fact I am living proof that
it is possible to be a CAGW skeptic and still believe that sustainability is a
moral imperative, a viewpoint that is eloquently elucidated by Dr. Brown
above.

* * *

Matt Skaggs,  
Thank you for expressing those views.  
On this wonderful venue, I am often disappointed with the righteous troll
accusations by a few self-appointed vigilantes whose demeanor toward those
with differing views tends to suppress the spirit of open dialog here.  
Re: sustainability => I think the topic of sustainability initially expressed
on this thread by rgbatduke (on January 2, 2014 at 11:03 am) needs a lot more
precision of definition and full expansion wrt free individual volunteerism
versus authoritarianism . . . and it must venture more clearly into the very
fundamental basis necessary for any valid economic calculation and ownership.
In other words it needs very open dialog **without troll namecalling**.  
John

                
                                      164. richardscourtney says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 11:59 am

Matt Skaggs:  
I see you are still trolling at January 4, 2014 at 8:05 am.  
Viscount Monckton and I have very, very different political views. And that
has NOTHING to do with why each of us promotes good science and opposes the
AGW-scare.  
You called everything which does not concur with your views "junk", and when I
called you on it you misrepresented a post I had made.  
Stop trolling.  
Richard

                
                                      165. richardscourtney says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 12:05 pm

John Whitman:  
re your ridiculous post at January 4, 2014 at 9:51 am.  
Each and every post from Matt Skaggs has been a troll comment.  
I am not "disappointed", I am outraged that you would cl;aim support for this
site while supporting trolling.  
If you really support "this wonderful venue" then have the guts to support the
presentation of all views while opposing trolls whose purpose is to prevent
debate.  
Richard

                
                                      166. Elaine Coker says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 1:24 pm

I just love it when GOD makes a fool out of the elitist morons.

                
                                      167. John Whitman says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 7:24 pm

> richardscourtney on January 4, 2014 at 12:05 pm  
>  @John Whitman:  
>  re your ridiculous post at January 4, 2014 at 9:51 am.  
>  Each and every post from Matt Skaggs has been a troll comment.  
>  I am not “disappointed”, I am outraged that you would cl;aim support for
this site while supporting trolling.  
>  If you really support “this wonderful venue” then have the guts to support
the presentation of all views while opposing trolls whose purpose is to
prevent debate.  
>  Richard

* * *

richardscourtney,  
Disagreement on the most fundamental of concepts is the essence of the most
important knowledge dialogs. We can burn away all irrelevancies in that
crucible.  
Troll accusations are detrimental to that.  
Why persist?  
Fear?  
John

                
                                      168. richardscourtney says:
                

January 4, 2014 at 10:05 pm

John Whitman:  
I am replying to your questions concerning my objections your sophistry which
you present in your ridiculous post at January 4, 2014 at 7:24 pm.  
.

> I persist because I am trying to stop trolling (i.e. attacks on rational
discourse)

An example of such trolling is your implication that I am afraid of you and/or
Matt Scaggs' nonsense.  
**Trolls attempt to prevent discussion of a subject by using a variety of
methods to deflect the discussion onto something else.**  
Anth0ny W@tts hosts this blog so he chooses the subjects for discussion, and
this thread is about  
_IPCC silently slashes its global warming predictions in the AR5 final draft_  
That is a wide subject which encompasses the IPCC, IPCC Procedures, IPCC
global warming predictions in the AR5, the "slashing" of those predictions,
reasons for and justification of the "slashing", and the "silent" manner of
the slashing.  
This thread is  
NOT about your self adulation,  
NOT about your like of trolling,  
NOT about Matt Scaggs flaming that discussions of the thread's subject are
"junk",  
NOT about Matt Scaggs misrepresentation of a post I made,  
NOT about Matt Scaggs desire for "sustainablility" (whatever that is),  
and  
NOT about Matt Scaggs erroneous assertions of my and Lord Monckton's politics.  
This thread IS about  
_IPCC silently slashes its global warming predictions in the AR5 final draft_  
**If you want discuss matters other than the subject of this thread then find
a thread which discusses those other matters or establish your own blog for
the discussion. Frankly, I don 't think there would be much traffic on a blog
established for presentation of your narcissism.**  
For myself, I will continue to support rational discourse and, therefore, I
will continue to oppose trolls.  
Richard

                
                                      169. John Whitman says:
                

January 5, 2014 at 10:21 am

> richardscourtney on January 4, 2014 at 10:05 pm  
>  @John Whitman:

* * *

richardscourtney,  
The subject troll accusation(s) is (are) name-calling.  
It is invalid logically and is not appropriate in basic intellectual
discourse.  
Personally, I am surprised it is occurring on this venue.  
John

                
                                      170. richardscourtney says:
                

January 5, 2014 at 1:12 pm

John Whitman:  
I am writing as a courtesy to let you know that that I read your daft post at
January 5, 2014 at 10:21 am.  
If you were to answer my post at January 4, 2014 at 10:05 pm then I would
address your answer. But I shall ignore any further posts from you similar to
that which I am replying: I have better things to do than waste time
responding to idiocy.  
Richard

                
                                      171. Danny says:
                

January 7, 2014 at 4:25 pm

Too many lies for even this to be believed.

                
                                      172. John Whitman says:
                

January 8, 2014 at 2:31 pm

> richardscourtney,  
>  The subject troll accusation(s) is (are) name-calling.  
>  It is invalid logically and is not appropriate in basic intellectual
discourse.  
>  Personally, I am surprised it is occurring on this venue.  
>  John

* * *

richardscourtney,  
In reply to your latest comment to me, my above quoted previous comment to you
remains relevant.  
You persist, even in your most recent comment to me, to defend chronic name-
calling and in doing so to keep on insulting.  
Who here on this thread has treated you that way? I do not recall anyone doing
so.  
I would like to know who here on this venue has historically ever treated you
that way?  
John

Comments are closed.

# Search WUWT:

Search

# Donate to support WUWT

Support our work: HERE ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/donate-

now.png)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/donate-now.png)

# The Maxim of our resolve

“ _Walk toward the fire. Don’t worry about what they call you._ " - Andrew
Breitbart | read more

# Blog Stats

                
                                      * 389,592,030 hits
                

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/ICCC13-175-225.png)

# Top Posts & Pages

                
                                      * Glacier National Park Quietly Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs 
                      * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast 
                      * The moral case for honest and competent climate science 
                      * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News': Trump's EPA Chief Fires Back At Reporter Who Misquoted Him 
                      * New Policy Brief Shows No Evidence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise 
                      * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out not to be about bulls&$# 
                      * On the Flat Earth Rants of Joe Postma 
                      * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand 
                      * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century Warming - interview with Dr. Roy Spencer. 
                      * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using Bloomberg-Funded Attorneys To Promote A Climate Crusade
                

# Weather Picture of the Day

![](https://cache1.intelliweather.net/wpotd/todayx240.jpg)

Advertisements

**" …the world's most viewed climate website"**  
- Fred Pearce _The Climate Files:  
The Battle for the Truth about Global Warming_

**" …invaluable"** - Steven F. Hayward, _The Weekly Standard_

**" …changed the world and is one of the most influential resources on global
warming.** - Jonathon Moseley, _American Thinker_

**" …flashy (apparently widely distributed)"** - Michael E. Mann

# Follow me on Twitter

My Tweets

# Follow WUWT via Email

You are following WUWT via email

Join 41,530 other subscribers

Email Address

Follow

Advertisements

# ENSO METER

![](http://4castwidgets.intelliweather.net/enso/wuwt/elninometer-current.gif)

# Recent Posts

                
                                      * Demystifying feedback.
                      * EIA data shows wind & solar met 3% of U.S. energy after $50 billion in subsidizes
                      * Glacier National Park Quietly Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs
                      * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century Warming - interview with Dr. Roy Spencer.
                      * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand
                      * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using Bloomberg-Funded Attorneys To Promote A Climate Crusade
                      * How deep-ocean vents fuel massive phytoplankton blooms
                      * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast
                      * Former communications director, and spokesperson for Al Gore, Named Chief of Content, Communications, and Public Affairs for National Geographic Society.
                      * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News': Trump's EPA Chief Fires Back At Reporter Who Misquoted Him
                      * The moral case for honest and competent climate science
                      * New Policy Brief Shows No Evidence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise
                      * The epic search for oldest ice in Antarctica is starting
                      * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out not to be about bulls&$#
                      * Early lives of Alaska sockeye salmon accelerating with climate change
                

January 2014 M | T | W | T | F | S | S  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
« Dec | | Feb »  
| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5  
6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 11| 12  
13| 14| 15| 16| 17| 18| 19  
20| 21| 22| 23| 24| 25| 26  
27| 28| 29| 30| 31 |

# Archives

Archives Select Month June 2019 (36) May 2019 (201) April 2019 (201) March
2019 (227) February 2019 (197) January 2019 (222) December 2018 (232) November
2018 (214) October 2018 (192) September 2018 (180) August 2018 (181) July 2018
(178) June 2018 (194) May 2018 (191) April 2018 (164) March 2018 (185)
February 2018 (170) January 2018 (178) December 2017 (153) November 2017 (176)
October 2017 (173) September 2017 (188) August 2017 (218) July 2017 (185) June
2017 (121) May 2017 (131) April 2017 (131) March 2017 (147) February 2017
(125) January 2017 (149) December 2016 (139) November 2016 (138) October 2016
(171) September 2016 (133) August 2016 (142) July 2016 (138) June 2016 (156)
May 2016 (160) April 2016 (163) March 2016 (172) February 2016 (137) January
2016 (133) December 2015 (158) November 2015 (136) October 2015 (123)
September 2015 (129) August 2015 (130) July 2015 (146) June 2015 (144) May
2015 (157) April 2015 (125) March 2015 (126) February 2015 (115) January 2015
(106) December 2014 (130) November 2014 (136) October 2014 (163) September
2014 (185) August 2014 (190) July 2014 (173) June 2014 (195) May 2014 (216)
April 2014 (182) March 2014 (185) February 2014 (164) January 2014 (202)
December 2013 (144) November 2013 (146) October 2013 (147) September 2013
(148) August 2013 (165) July 2013 (174) June 2013 (164) May 2013 (193) April
2013 (171) March 2013 (164) February 2013 (165) January 2013 (172) December
2012 (126) November 2012 (139) October 2012 (176) September 2012 (151) August
2012 (144) July 2012 (175) June 2012 (179) May 2012 (177) April 2012 (178)
March 2012 (190) February 2012 (161) January 2012 (142) December 2011 (161)
November 2011 (168) October 2011 (180) September 2011 (189) August 2011 (190)
July 2011 (170) June 2011 (187) May 2011 (177) April 2011 (177) March 2011
(172) February 2011 (183) January 2011 (193) December 2010 (183) November 2010
(168) October 2010 (191) September 2010 (179) August 2010 (200) July 2010
(188) June 2010 (140) May 2010 (124) April 2010 (122) March 2010 (136)
February 2010 (142) January 2010 (157) December 2009 (168) November 2009 (163)
October 2009 (132) September 2009 (106) August 2009 (92) July 2009 (96) June
2009 (94) May 2009 (89) April 2009 (99) March 2009 (99) February 2009 (60)
January 2009 (60) December 2008 (58) November 2008 (45) October 2008 (63)
September 2008 (75) August 2008 (77) July 2008 (68) June 2008 (72) May 2008
(54) April 2008 (54) March 2008 (39) February 2008 (40) January 2008 (31)
December 2007 (27) November 2007 (37) October 2007 (29) September 2007 (17)
August 2007 (31) July 2007 (20) June 2007 (25) May 2007 (31) April 2007 (31)
March 2007 (27) February 2007 (24) January 2007 (25) December 2006 (22)
November 2006 (11)

# Categories

Categories Select Category 2017 Solar Eclipse 350.org connect the dots 97%
consensus 99% certainty Adjustments/Corrections Aerosols Agriculture AGU AGU
2013 AGU 2014 AGU 2015 AGU16 Air pollution Al Gore Alarmism Albedo AMO
Announcements Antarctic Anthropocene Anthropogenic Ocean Warming Arctic ARGO
data Astronomy Atmospheric physics Attribution Bad science Bad science
journalism Bengtsson Climate McCarthyism scandal Berkeley Earth Surface
Temperature Biodiversity biofuels Biomass Book Review Cancun Climate
Conference Cap-and-trade Carbon credits Carbon dioxide Carbon footprint Carbon
sequestration Carbon soot carbon tax Celebrities on AGW censorship CFC's Chaos
and Climate Citizen science Climate Attribution Climate cash Climate Change
Debate Climate Communications Climate Craziness of the Week Climate data
Climate Economics Climate FAIL Climate Hypocrisy Climate Lawsuits Climate
Models Climate Myths Climate News Climate News Roundup Climate Politics
Climate reconciliation Climate Reference Network climate refugees Climate
Science Climate sensitivity Climate ugliness Climate_change Climategate
Climategate 3.0 Clouds Coal Cold wave Common sense Consensus COP conferences
Copenhagen Climate Conference Copygate coral reefs Cosmic rays Cowtan & Way
Curious things Current News Desertification Disaster disinvitation Drought
Durban Climate Conference dust storms Earth Earthquakes Economy-health
Education Educational opportunity El Nino Basics Emergence Emergent Climate
Phenomena Emissions Endangered Species Energy ENSO Environment EPA erosion
Experiments Extinction extreme weather Fake News Fakegate feedbacks flooding
fog FOI Forecasting Forests Fracking Freeman Dyson FUG Fun_stuff Fusion power
Gavin Schmidt Geoengineering geothermal energy Gergis et al GHCN GISS Glaciers
Global cooling Global Greening Global Temperature Update Global warming Global
Warming in Perspective Global Warming Optimism GLOC Gore-a-thon 2011 Gore-a-
thon 2012 Gorefest11 Government funding of science Government idiocy Graph of
the Week Gravity Green Blob Green Mafia Green New Deal Green tech Greenland
ice sheet HADCRUT4 hail Hausfather et al 2017 heat wave Hiatus in Global
Warming History Hits and Misses How Climate Works Humor humour hurricanes
hydroclimatology Hydropower Ice Ages IPCC IPCC AR5 leak IPCC AR5 Report Ira
It's Worse Than We Thought! James Hansen John Cook junk science Karl et al.
2015 Katowice Conference Land Surface Air Temperature Data Land use land cover
change Landslides Letters To The Editor Lewgate Lewis and Crok lightning
Little Ice Age Local_issues Lower Troposphere Temperature Lukewarmerism
Marcott et al proxy paper Mass Extinctions measurement media
MedievalWarmPeriod Methane MetOffice Michael E. Mann MJO Modeling modification
monsoons More On Series NASA NASA GISS National Climate Assessment Report
Natural CO2 sources natural gas Natural Warming NCADAC NCDC NCEI News
Newsbytes NGOs NOAA NOAA 2 year FOIA documents NOAA ERSST.v4 Pauses Buster
Noble Cause Corruption nuclear power Obama Climate Plan Obamas War on Energy
Obvious science Ocean acidification Ocean Heat Content Ocean Temperatures
Oceans Oil and Gas Open Thread Opinion Optical phenonmena Ozone
Paleoclimatology Papal Climate Encyclical Paris Climate Accord PDO Peer review
PEOPLE WILL DIE! Personal note petroleum Plankton and other critters Podcasts
Polar Amplification Polar Bears Polar Vortex Polarbeargate Politics Positive
effects of CO2 Post-normal science Presentations Proxies Puzzling things Quote
of The Month Quote of the Week Radiation Radiative Imbalance Rainfall RCP 8.5
Science Fiction records Reference Pages Renewable energy reproducibility
RICO20 Ridiculae Rio+20 Russia Salinity Satire Science Sea Sea ice Sea Ice
News Sea level Sea Surface Temperature Snow snowfall social cost of carbon
Solar solar flare solar power Southern Annular Mode Space Spaceweather
Specific Humidity Spencer-Braswell and Dessler statistics Stephan Lewandowsky
Stern Review Stratospheric water vapor Surfacestations paper Surveys
Sustainability Tabloid Climatology TAO/TRITON Buoys Technology Temperature The
"Clitanic" aka Spirit of Mawson The Rat-hole problem The Skeptic's Case The
Weather Channel The WUWT Hot Sheet The Yamal Deception thorium power Throwback
Thursday Predictions thunderstorms tornadoes Transportation Trenberth's
missing heats Tropical Hot spot Tropics Tsunami UHI UKMO HADCRUT4
Uncategorized Uncertainty United Nations USCRN USGS Volcanoes Vortex Vulcanism
Waste heat Watts et al 2012 Weather Weather_stations Wiki Wars Wildfires
Willis Autobiography wind power WUWT-TV

# Bookmarks

                
                                      * 1000+ skeptical papers
                      * A Walk On The Natural Side - Jim Steele
                      * AccuWeather GW Blog
                      * American Elephants
                      * Andrew Bolt
                      * Appinsys
                      * Australian Climate Madness
                      * Autonomous Mind
                      * Bishop Hill
                      * Bob Carter
                      * C3 Headlines
                      * Carlin Economics
                      * Cartoons By Josh
                      * Christopher Booker
                      * Climate Abyss - John Nielsen-Gammon
                      * Climate Audit
                      * Climate Change 101
                      * Climate Change Dispatch
                      * Climate Conversation - NZ
                      * Climate Debate Daily
                      * Climate Depot
                      * Climate Progress
                      * Climate Realists
                      * Climate Realists of Norway
                      * Climate Resistance
                      * Climate Sanity
                      * Climate Science - Pielke Sr.
                      * Climate Skeptic
                      * Climate Views
                      * CO2 Science
                      * Collide-a-scape - Keith Kloor
                      * Die Kalte Sonne
                      * Digging in the Clay
                      * Dr. Norman Page
                      * Dr. Roger Pielke Jr.
                      * Dr. Roy Spencer
                      * Dr. Tim Ball
                      * Ecotretas
                      * EU Referendum - Richard North
                      * Friends of Science
                      * Green Hell Blog
                      * Haunting the library
                      * ICECAP
                      * International Climate Science Coalition
                      * James Delingpole @ Breitbart
                      * Jennifer Marohasy
                      * Jo Nova
                      * Judith Curry
                      * Lucia's The Blackboard
                      * Marcel Crok – De staat van het klimaat
                      * Master Resource
                      * Moshtemp - Steve Mosher
                      * NCDC Hi/Lo Records lookup
                      * Niche Modeling - David Stockwell
                      * No Frakking Consensus
                      * No Tricks Zone
                      * NYT Dot Earth - Revkin
                      * Our World in Data
                      * Planet Gore
                      * Real Climate
                      * scienceofdoom
                      * Skeptical Science – John Cook
                      * Small Dead Animals
                      * SOHO solar images
                      * Solar Cycle 24 Board
                      * Stoat - Connolley
                      * Surfacestations Gallery
                      * Surfacestations Main
                      * Susan Crockford - polarbearscience
                      * Tallbloke’s Talkshop
                      * Tamino's Open Mind
                      * The Air Vent
                      * The Chiefio - E.M. Smith
                      * The Cosmic Tusk
                      * The Daily Bayonet
                      * The GWPF
                      * The Hockey Schtick
                      * The Lukewarmer's Way - Tom Fuller
                      * The Next Grand Minimum
                      * The Reference Frame
                      * Thomas Fuller – 3000quads
                      * Tom Nelson
                      * Trust Yet Verify
                      * UAH AMSU Daily Temps
                      * Warren Meyer
                      * Warwick Hughes
                      * Weather Picture of the Day
                      * WFT - Interactive Climate Graph Engine
                      * William Briggs
                      * World Climate Report
                

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2010/10/hsi_montford.jpg)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/spencer_tggwb.jpg)

# Click for the:

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/08/watts_et_al_2012_button.png)

# Sea Ice Page

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/09/jaxa_amsre_thumbnail.png)

# Solar Images & Data Page

![](https://sdo.gsfc.nasa.gov/assets/img/latest/latest_256_HMIIC.jpg)

# ENSO/SST Page

![](https://www.ospo.noaa.gov/data/sst/anomaly/anomnight.current.small.gif)

# WUWT Tag Cloud

Al Gore antarctica Arctic Australia Bill McKibben california climate climate
change Climate model Climatic Research Unit email controversy Current sea
level rise Earth El Niño-Southern Oscillation Energy environment Global
warming Goddard Institute for Space Studies greenhouse gas greenland Heartland
Institute Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC James Hansen Judith
Curry La Nina Little Ice Age Met Office Michael Mann NASA National Climatic
Data Center National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Weather
Service NOAA Pacific Ocean Peter Gleick Polar ice packs Science &
Environmental Policy Project Sea ice Steve McIntyre sun temperature
Temperature record United States United States Environmental Protection Agency
Watts Up With That?

# Feed Me

![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Posts

![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Comments

![USB Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use. Many

models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)![USB

Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use. Many models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)

# Meta

                
                                      * Log in
                      * Entries RSS
                      * Comments RSS
                      * WordPress.org
                

# Copyright Notice

Material on this website is copyright © 2006-2019, by Anthony Watts, and may
not be stored or archived separately, rebroadcast, or republished without
written permission. (Miriam O'Brien aka slandering "Sou" from Hotwhopper, that
means you.)

For permission, contact us. See the About>Contact menu under the header.

All rights reserved worldwide.

Some material from contributors may contain additional copyrights of their
respective company or organization.

We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on WUWT. If you
continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. This
notice is required by recently enacted EU GDPR rules, and since WUWT is a
globally read website, we need to keep the bureaucrats off our case! Cookie
Policy

Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Expound by Konstantin Kovshenin

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

