

Skip to main content

Advertisment

Search

Search

![Home](/themes/custom/sciblogs_bs/logo.svg)

Toggle navigation

## Main navigation

                
                                      * Life Sciences
                      * Physical Sciences
                      * Environment
                      * Social Sciences
                      * Education
                      * Policy
                      * Medicine
                      * Brain & Behavior
                      * Technology
                      * Free Thought
                

# The 1970s Ice Age Myth and Time Magazine Covers - by David Kirtley

                
                                      * facebook
                      * twitter
                      * reddit
                      * linkedin
                      * email
                      * print
                

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

By gregladen on June 4, 2013.

_This is a guest post by David Kirtley. David originally posted this as a
Google Doc, and I'm reproducing his work here with his permission. Just the
other day I was speaking to a climate change skeptic who made mention of an
old Time or Newsweek (he was not sure) article that talked about fears of a
coming ice age. There were in fact a number of articles back in the 1970s that
discussed the whole Ice Age problem, and I'm not sure what my friend was
referring to. But here, David Kirtley places a recent meme that seems to be an
attempt to diffuse concern about global warming because we used to be worried
about global cooling. The meme, however, is not what it seems to be. And,
David places the argument that Ice Age Fears were important and somehow
obviate the science in context._

### The 1970s Ice Age Myth and Time Magazine Covers

_- by David Kirtley_

A few days ago a facebook friend of mine posted the following image:  
![Facebook_meme_Global_Cooling_11](/files/gregladen/files/2013/06/Facebook_meme_Global_Cooling_11.gif)

From the 1977 cover we can see that apparently a new ice age was supposed to
arrive. Only 30 years later, according to the 2006 cover, global warming is
supposed to be the problem. But the cover on the left isn’t from 1977. It
actually is this Time cover from April 9, 2007:

![Time_Covoer_April_9_2007_1101070409_400](/files/gregladen/files/2013/06/Time_Covoer_April_9_2007_1101070409_400.jpg)

As you can see, the cover title has nothing to do with an imminent ice age,
it’s about global warming, as we might expect from a 2007 Time magazine.

The faked image illustrates one of the fake-skeptics’ favorite myths: The
1970s Ice Age Scare. It goes something like this:

                
                                      * In the 1970s the scientists were all predicting global cooling and a future ice age.
                      * The media served as the scientists’ lapdog parroting the alarming news.
                      * The ice age never came---the scientists were dead wrong.
                      * Now those same scientists are predicting global warming (or is it “climate change” now?)
                

The entire purpose of this myth is to suggest that scientists can’t be
trusted, that they will say/claim/predict whatever to get their names in the
newspapers, and that the media falls for it all the time. They were wrong
about ice ages in the 1970s, they are wrong now about global warming.

But why fake the 1977 cover? Since, according to the fake-skeptics, there was
so much news coverage of the imminent ice age why not just use a real 1970s
cover?

I searched around on Time’s website and looked through all of the covers from
the 1970s. I was shocked (shocked!) to find not a single cover with the
promise of an in-depth, special report on the Coming Ice Age. What about this
cover from December 1973 with Archie Bunker shivering in his chair entitled
“The Big Freeze”? Nope, that’s about the Energy Crisis. Maybe this cover from
January 1977, again entitled “The Big Freeze”? Nope, that’s about the weather.
How about this one from December 1979, “The Cooling of America”? Again with
the Energy Crisis.

**  
**___** ** ___** _____**

Check out: Ubuntu and Linux Books

* * *

Now, there really were news articles in the 1970s about scientists predicting
a coming ice age. Time had a piece called “Another Ice Age?” in 1974. Time’s
competition, Newsweek, joined in with “The Cooling World” in 1975. People have
collected lists and lists of “Coming Ice Age” stories from newspapers,
magazines, books, tv shows, etc. throughout the 1970s.

But if it was such a big news story why did it never make the cover of
America’s flagship news magazine like the faked image implies? Perhaps there
is more to the story.

In the 1970s there were a few developments in climate science:

                
                                      * Scientists were finding answers to the puzzle of what caused ice ages in the past: variations in earth’s orbit.
                      * Scientists were gathering data from around the world to come up with global average temperatures, and they found that temperatures had been cooling since about the 1940s.
                      * Scientists were realizing that some of this cooling was due to increasing air pollution (soot and aerosols, tiny particles suspended in the air) which was decreasing the amount of solar energy entering the atmosphere.
                      * Scientists were also quantifying the “greenhouse effect” of another part of our increasing pollution: carbon dioxide (CO2), which should cause the climate to warm.
                

The realization that very long cycles in earth’s orbit could cause the waxing
and waning of ice ages, coupled with the fact that our soot and aerosols were
already causing cooling, led some scientists to conclude that we may be headed
for another ice age. Exactly when was still a little unclear. However, the
warming effects of CO2 had been known for over a century, and new research in
the 1970s was showing that CO2 warming would more than compensate for the
cooling caused by aerosols, resulting in net warming.

**  
**___** ** ___** ** ___** ** ___** ____**

Check out: Books on programming, especially for kids

* * *

This, in a very brief nutshell, was the state of climate science in the 1970s.
And so the media of the time published many stories about a coming ice age,
which made for timely reading during some very cold winters. But many news
stories also mentioned that other important detail about CO2: that our climate
might soon change due to global warming. In 1976 Time published “The World’s
Climate: Unpredictable” which is a very good summary of the then current
scientific thinking: some scientists emphasized aerosols and cooling, some
scientists emphasized CO2 and warming. There was no consensus either way. Many
other 1970s articles which mention a Coming Ice Age also mention the
possibility of increased warming due to CO2. For instance, here, here and
here.

Fake-skeptics read these stories and only focus on the Coming Ice Age angle,
and they enlarge the importance of those scientists who focused on that angle.
They totally ignore the rest of the picture of 1970s climate science: that
increasing CO2 would cause global warming.

The purpose of the image of the two Time magazine covers, and of the Coming
Ice Age Myth, is not to show the real history of climate science, but to
obscure that history and to cause confusion. It seems to be working. Because
today, when there really is a consensus about climate science and 97% of
climatologists agree that adding CO2 to the atmosphere is leading to climate
change, only 45% of the public know about that consensus. The other 55% must
think we’re still in the 1970s when scientists were still debating the issue.
Seems newsworthy to me, maybe Time will run another cover story on it.

![Screen Shot 2013-06-04 at 10.50.34

AM](http://scienceblogs.com/gregladen/files/2013/06/Screen-

Shot-2013-06-04-at-10.50.34-AM1-640x476.png)

To learn more see:

                
                                      * The Discovery of Global Warming: Revised and Expanded Edition (New Histories of Science, Technology, and Medicine)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=grlasbl0a-20&l=as2&o=1&a=067403189X), Spencer R. Weart. The author has an online expanded version of this book. 
                      * Ice Ages: Solving the Mystery![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=grlasbl0a-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0674440757), John Imbrie and Katherine Palmer Imbrie.
                      * “The Myth of the 1970s Global Cooling Scientific Consensus,” Peterson, Thomas C., William M. Connolley, John Fleck, 2008: Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 89, 1325–1337.
                

Tags

Climate Change

Global Warming

Uncategorized

Facebook Memes

global warming

ice age

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

### More like this

* * *

Thanks, Greg!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By David Kirtley (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It is just the same with mobile phones and cancer. In this country, one
textbook ("Approved" by the examining board) uses this as an example of
"Controversy in Science". It gives the case for phones causing cancer
completely unjustified prominence.

Now this is a recent phenomenon. Research into the origins of the "scare" is
easy. First look for references to the original paper published in a
reputable, peer-reviewed, journal that started it (even Wakefield had that). A
search of the Internet shows nothing. Maybe there was some anecdotal evidence,
maybe the trends in cancer cases showed something. Again nothing. What you
find is an endless circle of references citing newspaper reports or just
people citing each other.

Researching something that did not happen in the 1970's is much more
difficult. Too recent to be history and too old to be current affairs.
Sufficently long ago not to be able to remember not hearing about it.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Alan(UK) (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I had some insight into scientific consensus back then. That was back when I
thought I was going to be a planetary scientist, and was studying a fair
amount of atmospheric physics and chemistry at Caltech.

As I remember it (it's been a while),there was a lot of uncertainty about what
clouds and particulates would do, because clouds are hard to model, and
particulants are hard to measure globally. We did have nice, smooth CO2 from
Mauna Loa, and had a pretty good idea where that was headed. We were also well
aware that we were in the middle of an interglacial, and that all else being
equal, we were due for another glaciation soon. (Well, "soon" in a geological
sense.) putting all of this together, I would say that most people I knew back
then thought the atmosphere would most likely heat up in the near term. If I
had had to make a guess, it would not have been too far off from what has been
observed since. (Meaning like within a factor of two or something.)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By CherryBombSim (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

What a clueless piece of fake design. Time magazine looked nothing like this
in the 1970s and anyone with a few years behind them should know it.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Daughter Numbe… (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Imbrie and Imbrie have a nice graph at the end of their book expressing I liar
thoughts, CBS

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

Great post! Another way to fact check this is to compare Google Scholar
searches on "global cooling" vs. "global warming" each in quotes to match the
exact phrase, for specified date ranges. Every decade there are lots more hits
for warming than for cooling.  
BTW can you fix the spelling of Spencer Weart? You're missing the 'a'.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Jim Prall (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

And the fool who thought this was a convincing fraud also left in the top left
hand corner an actually headline from a `1977 story on 'Cancer: the changing
science". Seems the idiot will accept that idiot will accept that science
changes as more information comes to hand, but not when it offends his pre-
determined ideology.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Simon Nasht (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Time magazine 1974-

Another Ice Age?  
Monday, June 24, 1974

In Africa, drought continues for the sixth consecutive year, adding terribly
to the toll of famine victims. During 1972 record rains in parts of the U.S.,
Pakistan and Japan caused some of the worst flooding in centuries. In Canada's
wheat belt, a particularly chilly and rainy spring has delayed planting and
may well bring a disappointingly small harvest. Rainy Britain, on the other
hand, has suffered from uncharacteristic dry spells the past few springs. A
series of unusually cold winters has gripped the American Far West, while New
England and northern Europe have recently experienced the mildest winters
within anyone's recollection....

The trend shows no indication of reversing. Climatological Cassandras are
becoming increasingly apprehensive, for the weather aberrations they are
studying may be the harbinger of another ice age...

When Climatologist George J. Kukla of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty
Geological Observatory and his wife Helena analyzed satellite weather data for
the Northern Hemisphere, they found that the area of the ice and snow cover
had suddenly increased by 12% in 1971 and the increase has persisted ever
since. ..

Scientists have found other indications of global cooling. For one thing there
has been a noticeable expansion of the great belt of dry, high-altitude polar
winds —the so-called circumpolar vortex—that sweep from west to east around
the top and bottom of the world...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By James (not verified) on 04 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I made this in response to a Time Magazine Cover Parade some time ago, still
makes me laugh :)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Peter Hartmann (not verified) on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Not that long ago, we were very rightly concerned about polluting our
environment, filling the air and the water and the soil with toxic by-products
of our industrial activities. It was very easy to say when any of these
natural resources was contaminated, and almost as easy to determine exactly
where the source of contamination was occurring. Somehow, in the early 1990s,
those who contaminate our planet for their own greedy means commandeered the
discussion about pollution and changed the focus to climate change. I realize
that one of the outcomes of pollution is climate change, and it is a hugely
destructive and apocalyptic outcome, but it also a longer term outcome, more
difficult to prove on a case by case basis, and fraught with many challenges
to accurately document so that the general public can easily comprehend the
immediate problem. Added to that, the naysayers do have, in their favor,
several millions of years of natural climate change data they use to undermine
public confidence in current scientific predictions.

Climate change is an issue because we pollute the environment . We can easily
prove that industry practices pollutes the environment. Why have we allowed
the argument of contaminating this planet to be hijacked by the monsters who
are ruining our air and water and soil? By focussing on climate change, vast
amounts of scientific energy and goodwill is expended on proving and
'reproving' the value of the date and the models, meanwhile, the pollution of
the planet continues essentially unchanged. There was a time when activists
confronted individual polluters at individual sites and got action. Now, with
the attention on climate change and not on specific rivers, or landfills or
air sheds, the targets are amorphous, the cause and effect not so clear. . It
makes one wonder who exactly is benefitting from all the climate change
summits, the earth or the polluters?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marilou Hall (not verified) on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Peter, what?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

I'd like to add to this the little point that I first heard about the threat
of global warming when the science around it was used in a sci-fi story about
a future earth, a major part of the history of which was the catastrophe that
befell the earth in the 21st century due to warming from pollutants. I don't
think that story was unique either. That would have been about 1975. I told my
mother about it, and that she shouldn't buy aerosols or use her car so much,
and she told me I was being silly. And I do remember some articles and things
speculating about if an ice age might come again soon, but they were always
very speculative, and not a part of the news, or any serious focus of concern,
and existed alongside other such stuff,as we still, quite reasonably, have
today, such as whether we could become capable of intergalactic travel. An
important thing to bear in mind here too, is how younger people of course
don't remember times before they were born, and actually can end up believing
that things were very different to what they were, thus making them open to
this kind of disinformation.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Mark Davess (not verified) on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Thanks for the comments.

I second Greg's comment to Peter: What?

Daughter # 3 and Simon: I noticed how the fake-skeptic cover used the design
of the real cover. They kept the same "cancer" headline but changed the woman
in the photo. (I'm not sure who these two women are. Cancer survivors?) The
middle headline about Baghdad got changed to one about detente with the
Soviets. And the last one about the tv show The Sopranos was changed to
M.A.S.H. Pretty clever, but Daughter # 3 is right, that isn't the design used
in the 1970s.

I was curious about what date is on the fake cover. I think it says April but
the resolution isn't too good and I can't read it. (Anyone know how to clean
it up??) I wonder if the fake-skeptics just kept the date that was on the real
2007 cover (April 9) or if they changed it to an accurate date of a real 1977
cover (which would have been April 4,11,18, or 25).

Jim: sorry about Weart's name. I fixed it in my original google doc. Maybe
Greg can fix it here.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By David Kirtley (not verified) on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Fixed

Oh, I see.. peter has a link in his post, cleverly embedded with HTML so I did
not see it:  
http://img812.imageshack.us/img812/2489/scienceformul600px.jpg

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 05 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,944914,00.html

So now Time is right but was wrong then?

Have cake and eat it?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By kevin (not verified) on 06 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Oops forgot about awaiting moderation/disappearance practiced of this blog.  
Guess I'll have to rely on screencaps.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By kevin (not verified) on 06 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Whoah. The Climate Deniers really don't have any shame at all do they? Did
they rally, honestly , think they'd get away with that?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 07 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I think maybe the genesis of the myth of global cooling is a conflation of
"nuclear winter" and the fever dreams of conservatives who hate science.
Nuclear winter was supposed to happen when great clouds of dust were kicked up
by a few thousands nukes going off. Like that'd be the thing you worry most
about in that situation!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Terry Doyle (not verified) on 08 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It isn't really the case that concern over global cooling was a myth. There
was concern. The part about it being a myth is that this concern has been
reconstructed as equally valid in comparison to understanding of climate
science 40 or so years later, that mention of ice ages 50 years ago means that
climate science has always been confused, and as is documented in this
excellent bit of research (blog post above) 1970s cooling is mythologized
further by fabricating phony evidence making it look like a bigger deal than
it was.

But yes, I think the nuclear winter fed into this idea then, and conservative
hatred and fear of science had fed into it in more recent decades as a valid
point of concern has been turned into a Fox News style lie.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 08 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

There is one thing missing from this story that I would really like to know.
Were you ever able to discover who was responsible for producing this forged
Time cover? So much of the output of the right is out and out lying disguised
as serious commentary (their entire response to the climate issue is a perfect
example) that I think it is important to track down, if we can, who is behind
the lies.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Green Eagle (not verified) on 08 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Green Eagle, Bryan Walsh at TIME mag

http://science.time.com/2013/06/06/sorry-a-time-magazine-cover-did-not-…

traced the cover back to April 2012 at this site:

http://www.uncommondescent.com/intelligent-design/time-cover-fake-1970s…

which is an Intelligent Design site (!) They acknowledge that the cover is a
fake, and in the comments it seems like the cover appeared in a previous post
which was then deleted.  
You'll notice that on the image there is a web-address:
ExtraordinaryIntelligence.com. I looked around on this weird, new-age site run
by someone named Natalina and found this from May 2011:

http://extraordinaryintelligence.com/4633/extraordinary-intelligence-co…

It's about crazy weather. Anyway, at the bottom of the piece is this note:
"****This article previously contained an image of a Time magazine cover
predicting a coming Ice Age. It was brought to our attention that the image
was photoshopped… so we’ve removed it."

In the comments section we learn that in June 2012 a reader (Will S,) showed
Natalina that the image was a fake. Will S. said, "But faked covers like the
one on the left don’t do our side, i.e. the side of skeptics of CAGW
(‘catastrophic anthropogenic global warming’) any favours; we should instead
point to actual words, properly sourced and documented, and show when and
where they actually promoted the opposite hysteria, to that which they promote
today."

I don't know where the faked image goes from there. I guess I could contact
Natalina and the Intelligent Design site but this is about as far down the
rabbit hole I want to go.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By David Kirtley (not verified) on 08 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I took courses in meterology and climatology around 1956-57. Because we know
so little then, compared to what is known now, I am very careful not to
present my self as any sort of expert on the matter. I've seen some comments
on the short doubling times of scientific knowledge. From 1957 to 2013 is some
55 years. If doubling time for climate knowledge has been a leisurely five
years, that is is 11 doublings. 1-2-4-8-16-32-64-126-258-516-1038-2076. No
doubt the increase in climate knowledge over 55 years has been a lot, whatever
the real number is.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Jim Thomerson (not verified) on 09 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It's a shame that the US Academy of Science's 1975 report "Understanding
Climate Change: A Program for Action" is yet to make it into digital format
and made available online. Commissioned in response to the media fuss about
'imminent global cooling, it made clear that understanding of climate was
insufficient to make any such predictions - from it's foreword -

“…we do not have a good quantitative understanding of our climate machine and
what determines its course. Without the fundamental understanding, it does not
seem possible to predict climate…“.

The NAS - and every leading science body - failed to confirm global cooling as
a danger that requires urgent and global action, but what it did do was set in
train some focused scientific efforts to build that foundation of
understanding of how the climate system. When that was built the results have
been considered more than solid enough that the NAS - and every peak science
body - does urge global action.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Ken Fabian (not verified) on 10 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

In last paragraph, make that "foundation of how the climate system WORKS."

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Ken Fabian (not verified) on 10 Jun 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The planet is getting cooler. At least the polar bears are happy now.  
http://www.express.co.uk/news/world/427980/Global-warming-No-the-planet…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By James Okamoto (not verified) on 30 Sep 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"But why fake the 1977 cover? "  
It was faked by someone (a believer in global warming) who wanted to pwn the
skeptics. He succeeded.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Not gullible (not verified) on 03 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Not gullibe at #40...you got any _proof_ of that, or is that just a personal
opinion, borne of delusions?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Harry Wiggs (not verified) on 14 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Check it out:

http://www.drroyspencer.com/2013/10/the-danger-of-hanging-your-hat-on-n…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 14 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

That would be funny, Mr. Gullible, but I don't think so!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 14 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

I like the way one photoshop job trumps two real Time covers here:

http://www.cfact.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/TimeMagCoolingCovers.jpg

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By MikeCornelison.com (not verified) on 18 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

My previous comment doesn't deserve publishing, I see you did address three
Time covers that weren't faked, but apparently have been taken out of context.
When you say:

"Fake-skeptics read these stories and only focus on the Coming Ice Age angle,
and they enlarge the importance of those scientists who focused on that
angle."

Realize that the first of your lists from Popular Technology strikes a very
balanced tone:

"While a silent majority of the scientific community may have been more
skeptical, you ironically find one of the most outspoken supporters of modern
day Al Gore style global warming alarmism was promoting global cooling in the
1970s, the late Dr. Steven Schneider."

A lot of irony there, and if 97% of active publishers on climate change are in
agreement, that makes me more skeptical about the environment in that
community. You really think if you took all the scientific minds who were
actively looking at the data, the minority opinion would only amount to 3%?
The publishing community on climate changed is an old boys network, a closed
society keeping out the minorities much like they used to do in country clubs.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By MikeCornelison.com (not verified) on 18 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Note, MikeC, that Time is not now and never was a journal of science. The fact
that they had one, or two, or a handful, of articles about cooling, does not
mean anything in terms of today's science.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 19 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

MikeCornelison.com:

> You really think if you took all the scientific minds who were actively
looking at the data, the minority opinion would only amount to 3%?

Do you think you can tell who has a "scientific mind" and who doesn't? What
does "actively looking at the data" mean to you? What do you think is
required, to understand climate science well enough to be an expert? Does in-
depth knowledge of the subject make a difference? How do you think that kind
of knowledge is acquired?

> The publishing community on climate changed is an old boys network, a closed
society keeping out the minorities much like they used to do in country clubs.

Why do you think that? Have you ever submitted a scientific article for
publication? Have you ever presented a paper at a scientific conference?

Have you heard of the Dunning-Kruger effect?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Mal Adapted (not verified) on 20 Oct 2013 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It's 60 degrees below zero in certain parts of the United  
States today.

and the top grossing film in the nation involves eternal winter....

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By anonymous (not verified) on 05 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

If global warming was a fact, every scientist would agree. Not every scientist
agrees. Why was it changed from global warming to climate change? Doesn't the
climate always change? Isn't there only temp records dating back to 1880's?
Going off 135 years of data?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By panther75 (not verified) on 07 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Panther, it was not "changed from global warming to climate change." Both
terms mean something, one is inclusive of the other, people tend to go back
and forth. There are conspiracy theories and I've seen people argue over the
history of the terms ... it turns out to be a bit complicated ... but using
the fact that there are two words for one thing is poor evidence for the
science at issue.

If every single scientist, or any other group of people, fully agreed on the
same thing that would be strange. There are scientists, a very small number,
who disagree with almost every other scientist on almost every thing
scientists have come to generally agree on.

Your own side of this fake argument, the denialists, claim that consensus is
not argument (and that is correct depending on what one means by argument) so
it is funny to see you using consensus as data. But the truth is that if the
vast majority of scientists in a given field come to thing the same thing is
likely true, or accurate, or actually happened, etc. etc. within that
scientific field, than that is a good clue that that thing is for real,
especially when it is something that has been given very careful consideration
and that has been addressed, argued about, fought over, etc. in the peer
reviewed literature, at conferences, and in other venues for years.

So, what is the consensus regarding climate change? Here is a close look at
the issue of consensus about climate change and/or global warming

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 07 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

you people can't even accurately predict tomorrows weather. Go to the highest
peaks and the lowest depths and judge (be honest) your significance on this
planet.....you have little to no impact on this place.....a bit grandiose to
think you, little ol you has that much influence on this planet....get
real...& you people cal the "deniers" crazy....mirror time

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Scott (not verified) on 14 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

you warmers create diversions...you probably photoshopped the cover for just
that purpose: see this site & learn:  
http://www.populartechnology.net/2013/02/the-1970s-global-cooling-alarm…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Scott (not verified) on 14 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I think I have finally figured out how to deal with anomalies, and graphs
which show a zero or slightly negative slope of the anomalies do not
necessarily show a stable global temperature. Since the anomalies are
calculated vs. an average of previous years, if the temperature continues to
increase at the average rate the anomaly curve will be zero. Right? Have I
decoded the anomaly correctly?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Sylvester B (not verified) on 14 Jan 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

So many comments filled with ignorance. 1978 was the year climate "scientists"
predicted the glaciers would cover the USA down to kansas city.

Widely reported in all the magazines and especially omni.

More alarmist religion from the truly ignorant.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By DannyE (not verified) on 06 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I just watched on you tube an episode of the old in search of series called
the coming ice age. Leonard Nimoy talks about climate scientists worried about
global cooling.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By joe (not verified) on 10 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Yes, there was talk about global cooling in the 1970s.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 10 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by joe (not verified)

* * *

Here is a small list of articles on global cooling/coming ice age that were
published in the 1970s. Just because you don't like it doesn't change the
facts...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By HarveyMushman (not verified) on 13 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Sorry, Harvey, I don't allow links to blatant science denialist site on this
blog. I have kids that I care about.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 13 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by HarveyMushman (not verified)

* * *

The American Meteorological Society has a very useful paper on the myth of a
consensus in the '70s that global cooling was imminent:

http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/2008BAMS2370.1

It shows that, by far, most scientific papers published during the period
predicted warming.

Of course the story was an artifact of (some) of the public media, not the
general opinion of scientists studying the climate. "Skeptics" clinging to
this old story just show how impoverished their whole argument is.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Adam R. (not verified) on 13 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

As we are hit with freezing weather , all I remember is the Time magazine
cover of the ice age coming from the '70's but the people who predicted that
are now politically involved with the left and their dopey global warming. So
I pulled it up and found this, the Ice Age was made up by Time and their
writers in the '70's. I bet in another 40 years the Global warming articles
will be fiction as well. One nice thing about aging is watching all this and
knowing the truth !

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By valerie (not verified) on 13 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Let's all get together and smear opponents by equating them to holocaust
deniers. Then lets change the term "global warming" to "climate change" when
we learn the "inconvenient truth " that the earth is not warming, at least for
the last 15 years. Finally, let's stifle dissent by having the President state
that "science" says the climate change issue is settled and incontrovertible
and have John Kerry tell people that climate change is a weapon of mass
destruction (wielded by the polluting Chinese and Indians, no doubt).

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Dow Davis (not verified) on 23 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The Earth has been warming for the last 15 years. Climate change is settled
science.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 23 Feb 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Dow Davis (not verified)

* * *

It's Called WEATHER... Climate Change MY ASS. MORONS!!!

And the WEATHER cahnges every day, every year. But when Obama's Muslim
brothers in Iran uneash an EMP attak over us, you will have YOUR Climate
Change when the GRID is GONE!!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Navyman Norm (not verified) on 11 Mar 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Almost bingo: no difference between weather and climate, the President is a
Muslim partnering with a foreign government, and the mythical threat of some
type of attack (the dreaded statement of EMP by someone who most likely
doesn't understand any of it). Come-on #67, you can "conspiracy" better than
that.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 11 Mar 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The EMP attack lacks sufficient causality. I recommend adding contrails.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 11 Mar 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

No different than the faux science GW alarmist are feeding us now. leave out
any data lately, lololol? What goes around, comes around. Ever wonder why they
don't call it GW anymore? Because we haven't been for the last 16 years. CG
here we come. now, where is my grant money, so I don't have to get a real job.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Opie (not verified) on 16 May 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Opie, We still call it global warming, and the globe is still warming.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 16 May 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Opie (not verified)

* * *

I am sorry, but I was there and I DO REMEMBER the covers of magazines
predicting a new ICE AGE in the 1970's.

It was presented as real and serious.

SO NOW you say, "Oh, pay no attention to the Global Cooling scientists of the
1970's."

It eventually faded away since it was obviously false, but there was never any
great backlash from the scientific community.

You can convince willing believers that they weren't serious back in the
1970's, but you still have to explain why today's scientists who were
absolutely certain (the science is settled) had to change the name from GLOBAL
WARMING to CLIMATE CHANGE.

So what was that all about?

You guys said the science was settled.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By TommyD6of11 (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Yes, people were concerned about the ice age in those days. The orbital
geometry idea had been tested by then against the deep sea core records, and
people were thinking about it. Also, there had been one of those occasional
"pauses" in the overall trend of warming.

It didn't fade away because it was false. Concern over a coming ice age faded
away because further research indicated that we were pushing atmospheric CO2
levels well above any threshold that would disallow an ice age to kick in even
when orbital geometry favored it.

This is not about willing believers. This is about the science.

Nobody was certain "in those days" about an ice age coming.

There was never a change from "global warming" to "climate change." Both have
been used all along. They mean somewhat different but related and overlapping
things.

What is your agenda, here, TommyD6of11?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by TommyD6of11 (not verified)

* * *

I always ask those who claim scientists had to change the name from global
warming to climate change:  
a) when that supposed change in terminology was made  
b) what the "CC" in "IPCC" stands for  
c) when the IPCC was formed  
Perhaps unsurprisingly, those questions are never answered.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Ha. Great questions, I'll have to start doing that. Might even be worth a blog
post. Want to write a guest blog post?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

@64. valerie :

"As we are hit with freezing weather, .. "

Whose "we" here? Its summer and getting hotter where I live!

".. all I remember is the Time magazine cover of the ice age coming from the
’70’s but the people who predicted that are now politically involved with the
left and their dopey global warming."

Really? Not so sure bout that. I recall reading articles in Science year book
encyclopedia from the 1970's where both "coming ice age" and "global warming
_" ideas where discussed and if memory serves they said the latter - ie global
warming_ was more likely.

Also the actual scientists tended to be apolitical and non-polemical. Some of
the commentators and pundits outside of the science less so of course, natch.

"So I pulled it up and found this, the Ice Age was made up by Time and their
writers in the ’70’s. I bet in another 40 years the Global warming articles
will be fiction as well."

I'll take that bet. I bet you'll lose.

Also, bzzt. No. It wasn't made up by Time writers although they may have
publicised someof teh climatological debate sat the time.

"One nice thing about aging is watching all this and knowing the truth!"

Or thinking you know the truth anyhow.

See also this excellent debunking of the 'In the 70s, They said there'd be an
Ice Age' canard by Greenman3610 / Peter Sinclair :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XB3S0fnOr0M

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

^ * "Global warming" strikes me as the wrong term too because 'warming" has
too many pleasant connotations and doesn't accurately describe the reality
that our planet is getting too hot.

Personally I prefer the description of HIRGO - Human-Induced Rapid Global
Overheating as the most accurate and descriptive way of terming the issue.

Plus those who use the idea that the world isn't getting hotter after all may
want to read this :

http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/11/14/october_2014_was_the…

Warmest October on record in the same year that we've had the warmest ever
April, May, June, August and September -and it isn't even an El Nino year!
Yikes. Co-incidence? (Obi- wan voice) Oh I don't think so! (/Obi-wan Kenobi
voice)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@67. Navyman Norm :

It’s Called WEATHER… Climate Change MY ASS!

Shouting doesn't make it so - or even make it clear what you are referring to
here Norm.

Weather and climate change both exist and are different things as is HIRGO or
Global Overheating.

"And the WEATHER cahnges every day, every year."

Hell, the weather can change every hour and even in the space of a few minutes
depending on where and when you are. The climate? Not so much.

But when Obama’s Muslim brothers in Iran ..

Hmm .. usually the "Obama is a secret Muslim" mob are coy on exactly which
islamic brothers Obama has and which branch of that global diverse religion he
supposedly follows.

I wouldn't have thought Iran would be high on that list because firstly, they
are Sunni whereas the groups Obama has most notably been tied to are Sunni.
For ex. - the Saudis to whose King he bowed to (Oh shock horror! Showing a
foreign dignity some basic politeness ! Can't have that can we!) are Sunni.
Secondly, Indonesia where Obama apparently maybe went to a mosque as a kid is
Sunni - and, btw, the largest Muslim though not Arab nation. Finally the woman
who told McCain, Obama was an Arab (or Ay-rab rather!) in espousing that
perspective - despite Obama's skin colour and physical non-Arab nature.

Note here that Arabs and Persians aka Iranians are very diffferent groups with
a bitter history of some antagonism between them and Shiite Iran hates the
Sunni Arabs historically to the point of ongoing sectarian warfare now between
them incl. the Syria-Iraq -Is-IL/S conflict currently raging.

So even _IF_ Obama was a "secret Muslim", it strikes me as most unlikely he'd
be working with Iran and more likely that he'd be working against them. Of
course even the first of those is an extraordinary claim requiring
extraordinary evidence as per Sagan's law. (If Obama is actually a secret
anything I suspect he's more likely a secret agnostic / atheist.)

"..uneash an EMP attak over us, you will have YOUR Climate Change when the
GRID is GONE!!"

Nope. That won't change the climate although I guess it would mean people
experience it more directly without the benefits of air-con. Enough nuclear
weaponry detonated could cause a Nuclear winter but Iran lacks nuclear bombs
at all and it is highly unlikely to be quickly manufacturing enough to cause
that effect.

So, sorry, but you are fractally wrong in your comment there - still thanks
for the laughs!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

D'oh! Correction - that's :

I wouldn’t have thought Iran would be high on that list because firstly, Iran
are Shia Muslims whereas the groups Obama has most notably been tied to are
Sunni.

Please feel free to edit and correct for me if you are so inclined Greg Laden.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Nah, no guest post from me, Greg. You can elevate my questions to a guest
post, of course, so you can easier link to that whenever someone comes up with
the "they had to change the name to climate change" canard again.

And if need be, there's the following:  
http://www.skepticalscience.com/climate-change-global-warming.htm

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 21 Nov 2014 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The author should read the June 24, 1974 issue of Time and the April 28,1974
isuue of Newsweek which were both alarmist about the chilling of the planet.
NOAA was one of the main sources quoted in the Newsweek ariticle citing
temperature drops at that time which is now warning us about it being the
hottest year ever. They can't have it both ways.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Robert Wheeler (not verified) on 17 Jan 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Robert, you need to get it straight. It is true that in the 1960s and 70s
climate scientists were looking at both cooling and warming. That is not in
dispute. It is also true that concern 40 years ago about cooling is not even a
tiny bit relevant to the reality of global waarming, or to NOAA or NASA
talking about the warmest year having just happened.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 17 Jan 2015 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Robert Wheeler (not verified)

* * *

For you children who depend on Wiki and Google for your "science", I _lived_
through the global *** of the 1970s. There absolutely _was_ a great hue and
cry about the coming ice age. Scientists (the very same scientists who were
shouting global warming in the 1990s) were decrying the miles of ice that were
to bury us by the year 2000.  
There was even a plan to scatter carbon black on the polar caps to gather more
solar heat in the attempt to prevent that ice age.  
The cause then, as now, was that of maintaining the cash flow of government
grants for the 'study' of climate.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By kilroy (not verified) on 28 Jan 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Kilroy: Yes, as has been stated several times, both warming and cooling were
being considered then. Recent research starting in the 1960s with deep sea
core recovery and going into the 1970s with the test of the orbital geometry
hypothesis had brought ice ages into the forefront, but global warming due to
the release of greenhouse gasses had been on the table for a century and
concern was growing then.

There's the thing. This is not simple. None of this is simple. The climate is
complex and climate science is complex. There seems to be an entire category
of science denier arguments that are based, ultimately, on the idea that if
something is complex it can't be understood, or more exactly, since the
climate is complex, it can't be changing. That is a form of argument from
incredulity, and it is incorrect.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 28 Jan 2015 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by kilroy (not verified)

* * *

Greg, you are being too kind to Kilroy.  
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/2008BAMS2370.1  
Read it, it destroys several of Kilroy's myths.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 28 Jan 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Here is the real 1979 cover. You just did not look hard enough.

http://content.time.com/time/magazine/0,9263,7601791224,00.html

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Robert Gunthry (not verified) on 02 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

That's it? The question is reduced to 'why didn't Time do a cover on it' if it
was such a big deal? Who knows why? Maybe because they didn't have to compete
with a host of internet and cable competitors for readers. Maybe because
everyone from the NYT to the Chicago Tribune to the Eugene Register-Guard had
already published reams on the topic.  
The point is that academic science can't use sensationalism to derive funding
without being called on it if it is found to be false. That's just what
happened in the 1970's, so excuse us if we exercise skepticism today.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chardin (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

So, Chardin, your current disbelief in basic physics is predicated on your
almost certainly incorrect perception that grants were written to scientists
owing to the strength of their marketing efforts in major media.

Wow.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Chardin (not verified)

* * *

From what I can tell, the people with the best background in physical climate
modeling (Manabe, Wetherall, Broecker, Hansen, etc.) knew in the 1970s that
the future would be dominated by greenhouse-gas-induced warming. (See, e.g.,
Broecker's 1976 paper that had both "global warming" and "climate change" in
its title).

At the same time, some other people - mostly those who did not have as strong
a background in physical climate modeling - were influenced by discussion of
Milankovich cycles to speculate that we might be nearing the end of the
current interglacial.

The people in the first group were right, and those in the second group were
wrong.

But for some reason, fake-skeptics like to claim that the existence of the
second group somehow invalidates the correct reasoning of the first group.

Frankly, it's just another example of how so much of climate contrarianism is
based not just on misinformation or bad data, but on bad reasoning.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Ned (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

You know back in the 1970's (indeed intothe 1980';s if memory serves) there
was also debate about whether quasars were extremely distant galaxies or
strange objects that were very much nearer to us but somehow only appeared
further away and thus more powerful.

There was the Big Bang theory versus the Steady State theory.

Yet somehow today we don't argue that because some scientists then thought
quasars were nearby or the universe infinite with no Beginning that somehow
means the modern understandingand scientific consensus is wrong.

Just as the phlogiston theory of fire was once widely held and argued for
doesn't mean that our modern understanding of chemical combustion is somehow
invalid and the scientists wrong to change their mind and drop the old no
longer tenable theory based on the evidence.

Scientists back in the year umpty ump however long or short ago saying 'X'
when they and we now say 'Y ' really isn't an actual argument against 'Y'
being true, just a curious bit of history that shows how much we've learnt.

Climate reality Deniers that say otherwise are really not very bright or
logical.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@ Chardin :

> "The point is that academic science can’t use sensationalism to derive
funding without being called on it if it is found to be false. That’s just
what happened in the 1970’s, .."

It is? Is it really? I don't think so.

I don't think climate scientists were out to sensationalise their findings
back then and I think they stressed the uncertainties and doubts and different
possibilities at the time.

> "so excuse us if we exercise skepticism today."

You are excused. You - and everyone else - are always welcome to exercise
skepticism, I'm not quite sure that's what you are really doing here though
and that's a question -'Are you really being skeptical here?' which I think
you would do well to consider for yourself.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@ 86. kilroy :

> "For you children who depend on Wiki and Google for your “science”, I
_lived_ through the global *** of the 1970s. There absolutely was_ a great hue
and cry about the coming ice age."

Y'know I think I'll still to actual tangible physical evidence such as
articles and scientific papers and so on from that time. Human memory is
sadly, not always relaible as has been found in a lot of experiments on
eyewitness testimony for example. Our memory is not the same as photographs or
recordings or ice cores and not as trustworthy. As the old saying goes the
plural of anecdote isn't anec-data.

> .. the very same scientists who were shouting global warming in the 1990s
were decrying the miles of ice that were to bury us by the year 2000.

Some of those scientists maybe but certainly not all and likely not the
majority. Stephen Schneider for instance was one scientists who famously once
suggested that an ice age could be on its way - although with a lot of caveats
as noted no further away than wikipedia :

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Schneider

> In 1971, Schneider was second author on a Science paper with S. I. Rasool
titled "Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and Aerosols: Effects of Large Increases on
Global Climate" (Science 173, 138–141). This paper used a one-dimensional
radiative transfer model to examine the competing effects of cooling from
aerosols and warming from CO2. The paper concluded:

>

> "However, it is projected that man's potential to pollute will increase 6 to
8-fold in the next 50 years. If this increased rate of injection... should
raise the present background opacity by a factor of 4, our calculations
suggest a decrease in global temperature by as much as 3.5 °C. Such a large
decrease in the average temperature of Earth, sustained over a period of few
years, is believed to be sufficient to trigger an ice age. However, by that
time, nuclear power may have largely replaced fossil fuels as a means of
energy production.[5]"

>

> Carbon dioxide was predicted to have only a minor role. However, the model
was very simple and the calculation of the CO2 effect was lower than other
estimates by a factor of about three, as noted in a footnote to the paper.

>

> The story made headlines in the New York Times. Shortly afterwards,
Schneider became aware that he had overestimated the cooling effect of
aerosols, and underestimated the warming effect of CO2 by a factor of about
three. He had mistakenly assumed that measurements of air particles he had
taken near the source of pollution applied worldwide. He also found that much
of the effect was due to natural aerosols which would not be affected by human
activities, so the cooling effect of changes in industrial pollution would be
much less than he had calculated. Having found that recalculation showed that
global warming was the more likely outcome, he published a retraction of his
earlier findings in 1974.[6]

>

> In a 1976 book The Genesis Strategy he discusses both long-term warming due
to carbon dioxide and short-term cooling due to aerosols,[7] ..

Stephen Schneieider passed away about five years ago and thus is no longer
around. many of the current climate scientists are in fact young folks in
their twenties and thirties and thus were not even born at the time.

> "The cause then, as now, was that of maintaining the cash flow of government
grants for the ‘study’ of climate."

That is an extraordinary claim that requires extraordinary evidence. Do you
actually have any extraordinary evidence to back that offensive conspiracy
theory allegation up?

Do you really think climate scientists are actually getting rich from devoting
their lives to understanding our climate and do you really think that's what
mainly motivates them - and if that were so why go into science as opposed to
business or working for , say, a fossil fuel giant that rakes in far more with
arguably much less brainpower and effort required?

Also note that a scientist who broke ranks and disproved or who "blew the
whistle" on the supposed "conspiracy" here would earn far more and be hailed
by so many many rich and powerful people as well as not having to come up with
tough peer-reviewed science papers that contradict - in your scenario -actual
reality. The absence of such occurrence in essence invalidates your absurd
proposition there and destroys the already obviously silly idea of any such
conspiracy.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Astrostevo (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

kilroy:

> Scientists .. were decrying the miles of ice that were to bury us by the
year 2000.

That would have been Reid Bryson: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reid_Bryson

> the very same scientists who were shouting global warming in the 1990s

Er, no. Reid Bryson remained a human-caused global warming denialist until he
died.

You're just spreading a lie. Shame on you.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Robert Gunthry:

> Here is the real 1979 cover.

1979? The media certainly like beating-up a dead horse don't they? This is
what scientists were saying in 1976 (in New Scientist):

"The growing disturbance of the global balance of carbon dioxide is without
doubt mankind's greatest single impact on the environment".

http://books.google.com.au/books?id=obHSBCxiJ1YC&pg=PA750&lpg=PA750&dq=…

Thanks for reminding us that the media like to do beat-ups by the way.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 18 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

THE WRITER SOUNDS LIKE A LIBERAL demoRAT!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By JOEUPYOURS (not verified) on 26 Feb 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Whether or not there was any factual basis for a "big cool down" aside, the
media, did in fact, make a huge scare campaign warning that the next ice age
was coming. As a child in middle school during this time, we were taught this
as _fact_ , presented papers researched primarily through media clippings and
worried our little hearts out over how we would live in the new ice tundra
which was our only supposed future. Sure, they were wrong. But I assure you,
that if you lived through it, it certainly happened, you would remember the
horror that only a 12 year old budding mind can have, and you wouldn't make
light of the power of a misinformed media. Perhaps research of local and
regional newspapers would be more meaningful that a few magazine covers to
understand the hype and scare tactics of the time.  
That climate deniers use the 70's Ice Age scare as weapons to continue
polluting is awful. But let's don't deny that it made for a great story back
then, used to scare petroleum consumers to scale back dependency on middle
eastern oil. Sound familiar in any way?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Joan S (not verified) on 15 Apr 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> weapons to continue polluting is awful

>

> Sound familiar in any way?

Anyone else notice the cognitive dissonance?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 15 Apr 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Joan S (not verified)

* * *

> THE WRITER SOUNDS LIKE A LIBERAL demoRAT!

So not a RATpublican then?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 15 Apr 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Perhaps a RepubliCON instead?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 16 Apr 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The sophistication of climate deniers can be summed up by James Inhofe's
ridiculous 2015 stunt of throwing a snowball on the Senate floor, as if "Al
Gore said winter would vanish!" or the entire planet is a particular city in
winter. These people are as nearsighted as moles. They harp on record snowfall
as if it equates to record cold, when it's mostly a combination of greater
evaporation and adequate cold to freeze water vapor. Heat elsewhere is causing
the evaporation, and overall heat is accumulating. Deniers refuse to connect
more than two dots at a time and try to constantly move the goalpost.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By E.A. (not verified) on 05 Jul 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Deniers? Here's a list of articles from the 70's predicting the next ice age
along with a link to the website that listed them. Many of the same scientists
that are predicting global warming predicted global cooling not too long ago.

1970 - Colder Winters Held Dawn of New Ice Age - Scientists See Ice Age In the
Future (The Washington Post, January 11, 1970)  
1970 - Is Mankind Manufacturing a New Ice Age for Itself? (L.A. Times, January
15, 1970)  
1970 - New Ice Age May Descend On Man (Sumter Daily Item, January 26, 1970)  
1970 - Pollution Prospect A Chilling One (The Argus-Press, January 26, 1970)  
1970 - Pollution's 2-way 'Freeze' On Society (Middlesboro Daily News, January
28, 1970)  
1970 - Cold Facts About Pollution (The Southeast Missourian, January 29, 1970)  
1970 - Pollution Could Cause Ice Age, Agency Reports (St. Petersburg Times,
March 4, 1970)  
1970 - Scientist predicts a new ice age by 21st century (The Boston Globe,
April 16, 1970)  
1970 - Pollution Called Ice Age Threat (St. Petersburg Times, June 26, 1970)  
1970 - U.S. and Soviet Press Studies of a Colder Arctic (The New York Times,
July 18, 1970)  
1970 - Dirt Will Bring New Ice Age (The Sydney Morning Herald, October 19,
1970)  
1971 - Ice Age Refugee Dies Underground (Montreal Gazette, Febuary 17, 1971)  
1971 - Pollution Might Lead To Another Ice Age (The Schenectady Gazette, March
22, 1971)  
1971 - Pollution May Bring Ice Age - Scientist Rites Risk (The Windsor Star,
March 23, 1971)  
1971 - U.S. Scientist Sees New Ice Age Coming (The Washington Post, July 9,
1971)  
1971 - Ice Age Around the Corner (Chicago Tribune, July 10, 1971)  
1971 - New Ice Age Coming - It's Already Getting Colder (L.A. Times, October
24, 1971)  
1971 - Another Ice Age? Pollution Blocking Sunlight (The Day, November 1,
1971)  
1971 - Air Pollution Could Bring An Ice Age (Harlan Daily Enterprise, November
4, 1971)  
1972 - Air pollution may cause ice age (Free-Lance Star, February 3, 1972)  
1972 - Scientist Says New ice Age Coming (The Ledger, February 13, 1972)  
1972 - Ice Age Cometh For Dicey Times (The Sun, May 29, 1972)  
1972 - Ice Age Coming (Deseret News, September 8, 1972)  
1972 - There's a new Ice Age coming! (The Windsor Star, September 9, 1972)  
1972 - Scientist predicts new ice age (Free-Lance Star, September 11, 1972)  
1972 - British Expert on Climate Change Says New Ice Age Creeping Over
Northern Hemisphere (Lewiston Evening Journal, September 11, 1972)  
1972 - Climate Seen Cooling For Return Of Ice Age (The Portsmouth Times,
September 11, 1972)  
1972 - New Ice Age Slipping Over North (The Press-Courier, September 11, 1972)  
1972 - Beginning of new ice age (The Canberra Times, September 12, 1972)  
1972 - Ice Age Begins A New Assault In North (The Age, September 12, 1972)  
1972 - Weather To Get Colder (Montreal Gazette, September 12, 1972)  
1972 - British climate expert predicts new Ice Age (The Christian Science
Monitor, September 23, 1972)  
1972 - Scientist Sees Chilling Signs of New Ice Age (L.A. Times, September 24,
1972)  
1972 - Science: Another Ice Age? (Time Magazine, November 13, 1972)  
1972 - Geologist at Case Traces Long Winters - Sees Ice Age in 20 Years
(Youngstown Vindicator, December 13, 1972)  
1972 - Ice Age On Its Way, Scientist Says (Toledo Blade, December 13, 1972)  
1972 - Ice Age Predicted In About 200 Years (The Portsmouth Times, December
14, 1972)  
1973 - New Ice Age coming? (Popular Science, January 1973)  
1973 - The Ice Age Cometh (The Saturday Review, March 24, 1973)  
1973 - Believe new ice age is coming (The Bryan Times, March 31, 1973)  
1973 - 'Man-made Ice Age' Worries Scientists (The Free Lance-Star, June 22,
1973)  
1973 - Fear Of Man-made Ice Age (The Spartanburg Herald, June 28, 1973)  
1973 - Possibility Of Ice Age Worries The Scientists (The Argus-Press,
November 12, 1973)  
1973 - Weather-watchers think another ice age may be on the way (The Christian
Science Monitor, December 11, 1973)  
1974 - Ominous Changes in the World's Weather (PDF) (Fortune Magazine,
February 1974)  
1974 - Atmospheric Dirt: Ice Age Coming? (Pittsburgh Press, February 28, 1974)  
1974 - Support for theory of a cooling world (The Canberra Times, May 16,
1974)  
1974 - New evidence indicates ice age here (Eugene Register-Guard, May 29,
1974)  
1974 - Another Ice Age? (Time Magazine, June 24, 1974)  
1974 - 2 Scientists Think 'Little' Ice Age Near (Hartford Courant, August 11,
1974)  
1974 - Ice Age, worse food crisis seen (Chicago Tribune, October 30, 1974)  
1974 - Imminent Arrival of the Ice (Radio Times, November 14, 1974)  
1974 - Making a BBC Science Special [The Weather Machine] (New Scientist,
November 14, 1974)  
1974 - The Weather Machine (BBC, November 20, 1974)  
1974 - New ice age 'could be in our lifetime' (The Canberra Times, November
22, 1974)  
1974 - Believes Pollution Could Bring On Ice Age (Ludington Daily News,
December 4, 1974)  
1974 - Pollution Could Spur Ice Age, Nasa Says (Beaver Country Times, December
4, 1974)  
1974 - Air Pollution May Trigger Ice Age, Scientists Feel (The Telegraph,
December 5, 1974)  
1974 - More Air Pollution Could Trigger Ice Age Disaster (Daily Sentinel,
December 5, 1974)  
1974 - Scientists Fear Smog Could Cause Ice Age (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel,
December 5, 1974)  
1975 - Climate Changes Called Ominous (The New York Times, January 19, 1975)  
1975 - Climate Change: Chilling Possibilities (Science News, March 1, 1975)  
1975 - B-r-r-r-r: New Ice Age on way soon? (Chicago Tribune, March 2, 1975)  
1975 - Cooling Trends Arouse Fear That New Ice Age Coming (Eugene Register-
Guard, March 2, 1975)  
1975 - Is Another Ice Age Due? Arctic Ice Expands In Last Decade (Youngstown
Vindicator, March 2, 1975)  
1975 - Is Earth Headed For Another Ice Age? (Reading Eagle, March 2, 1975)  
1975 - New Ice Age Dawning? Significant Shift In Climate Seen (Times Daily,
March 2, 1975)  
1975 - There's Troublesome Weather Ahead (Tri City Herald, March 2, 1975)  
1975 - Is Earth Doomed To Live Through Another Ice Age? (The Robesonian, March
3, 1975)  
1975 - The Ice Age cometh: the system that controls our climate (Chicago
Tribune, April 13, 1975)  
1975 - The Cooling World (Newsweek, April 28, 1975)  
1975 - Cooling trend may signal coming of another Ice Age (The Sun, May 16,
1975)  
1975 - Scientists Ask Why World Climate Is Changing; Major Cooling May Be
Ahead (PDF) (The New York Times, May 21, 1975)  
1975 - Summer of A New Ice Age (The Age, June 5, 1975)  
1975 - In the Grip of a New Ice Age? (International Wildlife, July-August,
1975)  
1975 - Experts ponder another ice age (The Spokesman-Review, September 8,
1975)  
1975 - Oil Spill Could Cause New Ice Age (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, December
11, 1975)  
1976 - Deadly Harvest [Film] (Starring: Kim Cattrall, Clint Walker, 1976)  
1976 - The Cooling: Has the Next Ice Age Already Begun? [Book] (Lowell Ponte,
1976)  
1976 - Ice Age Predicted (Reading Eagle, January 22, 1976)  
1976 - Ice Age Predicted In Century (Bangor Daily News, January 22, 1976)  
1976 - It's Going To Get Chilly About 125 Years From Now (Sarasota Herald-
Tribune, January 23, 1976)  
1976 - Worrisome CIA Report; Even U.S. Farms May be Hit by Cooling Trend (U.S.
News & World Report, May 31, 1976)  
1977 - Blizzard - What Happens if it Doesn't Stop? [Book] (George Stone, 1977)  
1977 - The Weather Conspiracy: The Coming of the New Ice Age [Book] (The
Impact Team, 1977)  
1977 - The Ice Age Cometh... (New York Magazine, January 31, 1977)  
1977 - The Big Freeze (Time Magazine, January 31, 1977)  
1977 - Has The Ice Age Cometh Again? (Calgary Herald, February 1, 1977)  
1977 - Space Mirrors Proposed To Prevent Crop Freezes (Bangor Daily News,
February 7, 1977)  
1977 - We Will Freeze in the Dark (Capital Cities Communications Documentary,
Host: Nancy Dickerson, April 12, 1977)  
1978 - Ice! [Book] (Arnold Federbush, 1978)  
1978 - The New Ice Age [Book] (Henry Gilfond, 1978)  
1978 - Winter May Be Colder Than In Last Ice Age (Deseret News, January 2,
1978)  
1978 - Current Winters Seen Colder Than In Ice Age (The Telegraph, January 3,
1978)  
1978 - Winter Temperatures Colder Than Last Ice Age (Eugene Register-Guard,
Eugene Register-Guard, January 3, 1978)  
1978 - International Team of Specialists Finds No End in Sight to 30-Year
Cooling Trend in Northern Hemisphere (The New York Times, January 5, 1978)  
1978 - Little Ice Age: Severe winters and cool summers ahead (Calgary Herald,
January 10, 1978)  
1978 - Winters Will Get Colder, 'we're Entering Little Ice Age' (Daily Record,
January 10, 1978)  
1978 - Geologist Says Winters Getting Colder (Middlesboro Daily News, January
16, 1978)  
1978 - It's Going To Get Colder (Boca Raton News, January 17, 1978)  
1978 - Another Ice Age? (Kentucky New Era, February 12, 1978)  
1978 - Another Ice Age? (Reading Eagle, February 13, 1978)  
1978 - The Coming Ice Age (In Search Of TV Show, Season 2, Episode 23, Host:
Leonard Nimoy, May 1978)  
1978 - An Ice Age Is Coming Weather Expert Fears (Milwaukee Sentinel, November
17, 1978)  
1979 - A Choice of Catastrophes - The Disasters That Threaten Our World [Book]
(Isaac Asimov, 1979)  
1979 - The Sixth Winter [Book] (John R. Gribbin, 1979)  
1979 - The New Ice Age Cometh (The Age, January 16, 1979)  
1979 - Ice Age Building Up (Daily Record, June 5, 1979)  
1979 - Large Glacial Buildup Could Mean Ice Age (Daily Chronicle, June 5,
1979)  
1979 - Ice Age On Its Way (Lewiston Morning Tribune, June 7, 1979)  
1979 - Get Ready to Freeze (Daily Chronicle, October 12, 1979)  
1979 - New ice age almost upon us? (The Christian Science Monitor, November
14, 1979)

          * Note: A couple of the news stories are duplicates in different papers with slightly different titles, this is intentional to show that these types of stories were not isolated to a certain regional paper.

http://www.populartechnology.net/2013/02/the-1970s-global-cooling-alarm…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Anthony (not verified) on 15 Jul 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Here’s a list of articles

Another fool who believes everything he reads in the newspapers.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 16 Jul 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It is a was a real thing we were taught in school in the 1970's the teachers
and scientist tried to scarce the hell out of us.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lorrie (not verified) on 03 Aug 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> It is a was a real thing we were taught in school in the 1970’s

I wasn't.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 04 Aug 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_861us8D9M

**[Yes. Before the effects of human greenhouse gas pollution a new ice age was
a possibility and this was discussed in the 1970s, as was climate change in
general. Not the point of this post, but thanks for the link.**

I suggest you do not get your science from "In Search Of." It was the first
sensationalistic science show leading us into a new era of science-BS all over
the TV.

Meanwhile, have a look at this:
http://scienceblogs.com/gregladen/2015/09/05/scientists-predict-global-…

-gtl]
                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Leonard Nimoy'… (not verified) on 10 Sep 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

My concern is how the findings of so called "consensi of scientists" are used
to influence government policy, and specifically to expand the scope of
government. The 70's scare about another ice age, perpetrated throughout the
entire decade, giving credence to the belief that the oncoming ice age was
attributable to pollution (polluting particles creating a shield inside the
earth's atmosphere that interdicted solar heat from reaching the earth's
surface) formed the impetus for Nixon's creation of the EPA. How many of us
have experienced the negative impact of that department's interference in
commerce and individuals' lives? Now we are confronted more alarmism that will
fuel further encroachments on our livelihoods. When will we ever learn to
recognize the impostors? The answer: never.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Bullington (not verified) on 17 Sep 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Michael Bullington:

> My concern is how the findings of so called “consensi of scientists” are
used to influence government policy,

Right, because government policy should never be influenced by science.

> The 70’s scare about another ice age, perpetrated throughout the entire
decade, giving credence to the belief that the oncoming ice age was
attributable to pollution (polluting particles creating a shield inside the
earth’s atmosphere that interdicted solar heat from reaching the earth’s
surface) formed the impetus for Nixon’s creation of the EPA.

Huh. I don't remember being scared about another ice age, but I did get sort
of alarmed when the Cuyahoga River caught fire that time.

> How many of us have experienced the negative impact of that department’s
interference in commerce and individuals’ lives?

I don't think I've ever met anyone who has. The impact on my own life has been
positive, like water that's safe to drink and air that's safe to breathe.

> Now we are confronted more alarmism that will fuel further encroachments on
our livelihoods.

Yeah! Freedom shouldn't come with responsibility! It's outrageous that anyone
would suggest we pay the full cost of our prosperity. Enjoying the private
benefits of fossil fuel use while socializing the cost of climate change is
our dog-given right!

> When will we ever learn to recognize the impostors?

You, at least, appear to be the genuine science-denying, conspiracy-
theorizing, faux-libertarian article.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Mal Adapted (not verified) on 18 Sep 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Hey Greg -- Sorry to hit you with a dose of Reality and FACTS.

You are a purveyor of prevarications.

"WOW! WORLD’S TOP PHYSICIST AND DEMOCRAT: Obama Backs “Wrong Side” In War On
“Climate Change”, Follow The Money, Carbon Does Far More Good Than Harm"  
By 100% FED Up -  
Oct 15, 2015

"The climate models used by alarmist scientists to predict global warming are
getting worse, not better; carbon dioxide does far more good than harm; and
President Obama has backed the “wrong side” in the war on “climate change.”

So says one of the world’s greatest theoretical physicists, Dr Freeman Dyson
(pictured above), the British-born, naturalised American citizen who worked at
Princeton University as a contemporary of Einstein and has advised the US
government on a wide range of scientific and technical issues.

In an interview with Andrew Orlowski of The Register, Dyson expressed his
despair at the current scientific obsession with climate change which he says
is “not a scientific mystery but a human mystery. How does it happen that a
whole generation of scientific experts is blind to the obvious facts.”

This mystery, says Dyson, can only partly be explained in terms of follow the
money. Also to blame, he believes, is a kind of collective yearning for
apocalyptic doom."

Read more and get educated...

http://100percentfedup.com/wow-worlds-top-physicist-democrat-obama-back…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Greg Allen (not verified) on 21 Oct 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

You are all sacks of shit and we have learned not to trust a single word that
comes out of your mouths. You doctor and falsify data. You slam anyone,
scientist or not, who doubts your hypotheses. You concoct computer models that
turn out to be inaccurate, and then won't fess up. You are bought and paid for
by those who loathe progress and feel guilty for being more advanced than
other countries. Why don't you all admit the actual truth: that there has been
NO WARMING in 18 YEARS and that the SUN is responsible for the temperature on
earth, and THE SUN IS COOLING DOWN NOW

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Dave (not verified) on 15 Dec 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

You deniers are all sacks of shit and we have learned not to trust a single
word that comes out of your mouths. You doctor and falsify data and its
interpretations. You slam anyone, scientist or not, who imposes reality on
your self-serving hypotheses. You concoct your own denier models that turn out
to be inaccurate, and then won’t fess up when reality bites. You are bought
and paid for by those who loathe progress and want to stick with fossil fuels
and feel guilty for not being more advanced than other countries. Why don’t
you all admit the actual truth: that there has been NO HIATUS in 18 YEARS and
that the human-added CO2 is responsible for the temperature on earth, and THE
SUN IS COOLING DOWN NOW yet THE EARTH IS WARMING UP.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 15 Dec 2015 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I grew up in the 60's and 70's and we were inundated with magazine covers and
articles warning of the coming ice age and global cooling. Now it seems
promoters of climate change and global warming are trying to rewrite history
and say it was all a myth, it never happened. That's BS. Is it any wonder
anyone who's been around long enough knows better then to believe the hype and
hysteria the media pushes. The real myth is anthropomorphic global ANYTHING.
The reason we're experiencing climate change is due to the same reasons the
climate has been changing for millions of years. Currently the solar system's
heliosphere has degraded by an estimated 60%, thus allowing increased gamma
radiation from outside our solar system to heat up temperatures on all the
planets in our system. But you won't make any money pushing the truth.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Dave Larson (not verified) on 07 Jan 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

That is not the point if this post.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 07 Jan 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Dave Larson (not verified)

* * *

Now it seems promoters of climate change and global warming ...

Dave! If you see any of these nefarious promoters of climate change, you'd
best capture them and put them in a cage, then notify the FBI. We all need to
do everything we can to stop the promotion of climate change, and keep the
Earth's climate stable. This can only be done by reducing the CO2 emissions
that are occurring globally. Remember, your health, wealth, and family are all
depending on this!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 07 Jan 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I just turned 63 years old and want to know what the hell happen to my George
Jetson flying car :(

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Roger Shearin (not verified) on 19 Jan 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The story was Newsweek, April 28, 1975. The Cooling World. Page. 64. Check it
out.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Jeff Pearce (not verified) on 08 Feb 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The Ice age burdened the earth,s crust and now the ice is gone the crust is
rebounding,rising from the sea and making our mountains grow in height. Right?
no Wrong. The land is not rising it is the sea that is receding from the land.
Once we can realize that fact and it is fact the Ice age fades into the realm
of mythology. The Receding Sea is so obviously simple we simply overlook it.
the book "The Mysterious Receding Seas" spells it all out. Richard Guy

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Richard Guy (not verified) on 17 Feb 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

No, not really.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 17 Feb 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

* * *

The authors here are obviously professional propagandists, if not pathological
liars: substituting a legitimate example of a Time cover showing the cooling
scare of the 70's for this invented comparison ("a friend showed me...").
Here's the real cover that these liars are withholding from you:
http://content.time.com/time/covers/0,16641,19770131,00.html

--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Did you read the post?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

Nope. I owe you an apology. The Time covers don't happen to match with the
cooling scare articles. Damn. But I can't help concluding that the cover
switch was a set up (by your side) to increase confusion, since the cooling
scare was real and widespread, as Pop Tech has shown. It's an irrelevant and
coincidental technicality that the hype did not produce a Time cover.
"Extraordinary Intelligence" is hardly in the climate skeptic business. Just
how much time lapsed between EI's article and yours? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Did you read the post?????

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

Come now, you must be aware of the CIA report outlining reports of disaster
ascribed to cooling. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Read the post.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

Come now, you must be aware of the CIA report outlining disasters ascribed to
cooling. Or does the censorship begin here? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Comment 106:

Anthony

Las Vegas  
July 15, 2015

says a heluva lot more than your post. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Nothing was quantified then and nothing is quantified now--except pseudo-
quantification: "97% of climatologists agree that adding CO2 to the atmosphere
is leading to climate change"? Where did you get that figure and what does it
mean? Is this "climate change" significant or measurable? Is there any
consensus on how or how much the climate should change? Is it serious enough
that we should consider real solutions, like nuclear power? Does anyone in
Asia care that coal plants proliferate there at many times the rate the West
shuts them down? Or should we continue to play the same old games, tax this
and that and pretend we're making a difference? All is junk science. Nobody
really takes it seriously except outcasts like James Hansen, who deserves to
be an outcast but for the fact that he takes his doomsday science seriously.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF, seems like you take your denialist talking points seriously. Do you have
evidence to back any of that up?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 25 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Brainstorms, do I have to do your googling for you? You don't know that China
is building coal plants at the rate of one every week or two? Of course not.
Your mentors like to claim it's for the greater good when they put American
coal workers out of work. That's coal China wants even with the low price of
gas and oil. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 26 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF, I have no mentors. (I think for myself and I take Googling with an
appropriate grain of salt.). Do you have evidence to back any of that up?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Come now, you must be aware of the CIA report"

Where is this report?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Where do the AG Fosters come from? Is there an assembly line building super-
stupid humans somewhere?

Yes, James Hansen is an "outcast" - LOL. Well, true if you append 'in the
minds of a small sect of super-stupid humans.'

This is Steve Goddard, Paul Homewood, JoNova level dumb.

It's interesting that I recently had a related comment over at WUWT that never
made it out of moderation; it read, in part:

"James Hansen is this generation's leading climate scientist. From his early
work on planetary atmospheres, his work with early computer models and
volcanoes, his systematic compilation of the GISS surface temperature dataset,
and the hundreds of papers on which he was lead or co-author make him the
truly a figure that will go down in history. Yet, on 'skeptic' sites his name
is nearly a curse word. Why? Because they don't like the results."

AG Foster surely resembles that remark. I doubt he can even spell Agung or
Pinatubo.

BTW - China just announced a moratorium on coal plants AND ordered many
already under construction to be halted. Another GWPF shrill cry silenced by
reality. Google _that_ AG.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Well, O'Neill, if you have something more up- to-date than this, let's hear
it: http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/03/02/china-coal-bubble-210-power…

But maybe you don't know the difference between a coal mine and a coal fired
power plant.

As for Hansen being an "outcast," I'm of course referring to that being being
the case within his own his alarmist party. For example Naomi Oreskes called
him a "denier" because of his support for nuclear energy:
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/new-form-climate-d…

And he has become persona non grata at the White House for saying of the US -
China policy: "That spin is so gross, it is best described as unadulterated
100% pure bullshit."  
http://www.columbia.edu/~jeh1/mailings/2015/20151127_Isolation.pdf

And of course the IPCC has long ignored Hansen's more outlandish warnings of
the runaway greenhouse effect and the Venus Syndrome. But he does have a few
allies in favor of nuclear energy, even among the climate quacks.

And here's that CIA report: http://www.climatemonitor.it/wp-
content/uploads/2009/12/1974.pdf

As always, the climatics have to be educated from scratch.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

P.S. - since Hansen's name came up, I'd like to recommend anyone that has not
read Spencer Weart's interview with him do so. The transcript for Part I of
the interview can be found here: American Institue of Physics, Oral Histories,
James Hansen - Session 1

If you browse the available transcripts you can find many more informative
oral histories.

Alternatively, you could enjoy a completely fantastical history at WUWT,
RealScience, etc., etc. LOL

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG Foster - funny how suddenly you don't know how to use Google, isn't it
ironic?

From the very same site to which you link - just a little more recent:
energydesk.greenpeac - China stops building new coal-fired power plants,
3-24-2016

Or ecowatch - China puts brakes on new coal plants, 3-24-2016

Or from Reuters - China to halt construction on coal-fired power plants in 15
regions, 3-24-2016

Hansen is an outcast :) Stick with that story. It's like hanging a sign around
your neck saying 'Kick Me" BTW - you realize that the NH has already exceeded
1.5C and is near 2C above pre-industrial. An agreement to limit global warming
to 1.5C _is_ a pipedream.

AG, I suggest you actually _read_ Hansen - not whichever denialist site you
normally frequent. For Venus, you might like to first read Hansen's short
piece Making Things Clearer: Exaggeration, Jumping the Gun, and The Venus
Syndrome 15, April 2013.

Educated from scratch? Like having to teach you how to use Google and the
difference between a coal mine and a coal-fired plant? Yes, it appears we will
have to educate you from scratch - right after you've been deprogrammed. And
deprogramming super-stupid humans is not easy.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Kevin O'Neill

Franklin, WI USA  
March 27, 2016

"Alternatively, you could enjoy a completely fantastical history at WUWT,
RealScience, etc., etc. LOL"

Except that you couldn't. O'Neill makes it all up as he goes.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG Foster - this isn't WUWT. There will be no crowd of simpletons to cheer you
on. If you don't have facts on your side you will be called out.

_You_ chided others for not Googling something, then when more recent news
than your offering was referenced you suddenly lost the ability to use Google.
Additionally, you implied that _I_ didn't know the difference between a coal
mine and a coal plant. Of course the reality is you simply couldn't use Google
to locate the more recent news. Ironic isn't it.

Now, having given you several easily found URLs linking to reports that China
has not only put a moratorium on new coal plants you drop the subject.

Giving you Hansen's actual words on the Venus Syndrome, you drop the subject.

You represent the sect of super-stupid humans about as expected. Thanks for
playing.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Except that you couldn’t."

At least AGF doesn't disagree that he enjoys fantastical histories. Pity that
he thinks they're reality.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"the CIA report"

It's interesting how a lone crackpot (Reid Bryson) can spread his influence
far and wide.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

If O'Neill had bothered to read the articles he links to he would have
learned:  
1) "Environmental group Greenpeace said the rules, if fully implemented, could
involve up to 250 power projects with a total of 170 gigawatts (GW) in
capacity, according to initial estimates." And,  
2) At least 570 coal-fired units with 300 gigawatts of capacity could still
come online, despite dramatic overcapacity of coal in China.  
And he offered this China BS in a strained attempt to assure us all is well in
Alarmsville, that Hansen and Obama and Oreskes see eye to eye, that Hansen now
has nothing to worry about, that China has sworn of coal, etc.

And we still have India, which alone, " by 2020...may have built about 2.5
times as much capacity as the U.S. is about to lose."
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-05-21/the-grim-promise-of-i…

"And Japan’s Kiko Network, an environmental group, says there are 43 coal
projects under construction or planned to be built in the coming years to make
up for the loss of nuclear power capacity after the Fukushima disaster."  
http://dailycaller.com/2015/04/09/japan-defies-obama-plans-on-building-…

And so the rest of Asia, as well as Germany, which is replacing its nuclear
plants with lignite coal while Hansen pulls out his hair.

See, it makes little difference whether you buy into a bankrupt ideology if
the risk remains so unquantified that nobody can agree what we should do about
it. If anyone believed Hansen they ought to take his nonsense at face value
and go nuclear. What do you think, O'Neill, should we take Hansen seriously
and go all out with nuclear technology? Be forewarned, your fellow ideologues
will call you a "denier."  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill at #147, re. the “the CIA report”:  
"It’s interesting how a lone crackpot (Reid Bryson) can spread his influence
far and wide."

As #106 shows, there were few naysayers. Bryson wasn't very lonely. And as the
CIA report shows, a few years of cold weather were all it took to blame every
catastrophe on a few years of cooling. And what the skeptics are saying is it
only took a few years of warming to repeat the stupidity.

97% of scientists agree: we don't have a clue what we should do about it.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"As #106 shows, there were few naysayers"

Actually, if you check through 106 you'll find that a lot of those originated
from the lone crackpot Bryson.

"as the CIA report shows, a few years of cold weather were all it took"

for Reid Bryson, since that is where the claim in the CIA report originated

"to blame every catastrophe on a few years of cooling."

Fixed it for you. Thanks for reminding us that a few years of cold weather was
all it took for Bryson to blame every catastrophe on a few years of cooling.
That's all it takes for a crackpot to make up his claims.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

AG - you wrote:"Brainstorms, do I have to do your googling for you? You don’t
know that China is building coal plants at the rate of one every week or two?
"

But you were _completely_ unaware that China had placed a moratorium on new
coal plants and halted construction on those already underway.

And you were unable to find the reports via Google - instead claiming others
had misinterpreted 'coal mines' for 'coal plants'.

That is the history of this thread on that topic. As for your claim: "And he
offered this China BS in a strained attempt to assure us all is well in
Alarmsville"

Please show a quote of mine that even comes close to resembling your
characterization. All my comments are up there - shouldn't be hard to find.

crickets chirping.......

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

test

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Not gullibe at #40…you got any _proof_ of that, or is that just a personal
opinion, borne of delusions?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Paykasa Bozdurma (not verified) on 28 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The majority of my posts disappear. That can be frustrating. Maybe links have
to do with it, maybe not.

Yes, Bryson was was something of a crackpot, just like Hansen (and Mann and
Jones, etc.). Google "Quark Soup" to get Apple's opinion: "Hansen anymore
seems interested in promoting alarmism at all costs. There's been a whiff of
this throughout his entire career, but this latest paper is just too much to
take seriously." And this has been the opinion of t he IPCC as well, and their
administrators have generally been crackpots, like Pachauri. So Hansen is a
crackpot among crackpots.

Warm is good. Cold is bad. There's a 50/50 chance the surface temp will go up
or down. When it goes up that's usually good. It means we're still recovering
from the LIA. As the lone crackpot Callendar said way back, the CO2 warming
should "save us from the deadly glaciers." And if we're lucky it will, but it
probably won't.

It makes no difference whether we take Hansen seriously. Nuke power is good
but gas will do, and China and the climate don't care one way or the other. It
makes no difference whether we acquiesce to the climate credo if no one can
agree on how to address it. If it were as serious as Hansen likes to think, we
should take his advice. But like he says, the Paris conference and BAU offer
nothing but junk solutions.

So O'Neill, should we invest immediately in massive nuclear technology or dis
Hansen as he deserves? Can you answer that? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Paykasa Bozdurma (#153): "borne of delusions."

"not gullible" is probably right. As I recall I found the original post a few
days ago and now I can't. I think the obscure "Natalina" has taken it down,
totally embarrassed. She suckered for a plant from the climate quacks whose
modus operandi has always been one of tricks and deceit. Mann, Gleike,
Pachauri, the white washes, the forever changing surface record (GISS under
Hansen), Karl et al. Liars all, who will flinch at nothing to advance their
agenda.

A timeline would help a little. When did the trick post first appear. How long
did it take Kirtley to find it and Laden to publish it? And first someone
pretty astute had to notice that there was no correspondence between the Time
covers and the cooling articles. Pop Tech mixes in one of those weather
motivated covers with the cooling doom coverage, quite misleadingly. (I was
misled.)

Sure looks like a setup to me. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

There’s a 50/50 chance the surface temp will go up or down.

That's a demonstrated falsehood.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T will be
rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling. Get it?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Wow. You really ARE as stupid as people are saying.

Go back to your brain-addling propaganda fix, or whatever allows you to cocoon
your mindset in more of that comfort of self-righteousness and false
certainty.

I'm done with you...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I guess Brainstorms' brain got washed out. Or he never took a math class.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"he never took a math class"

If you want to take a math class, then knock yourself out.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Yes, Bryson was was something of a crackpot

At least we all agree that Bryson (the source of many of the citations in

# 106) was a crackpot. That agreement doesn't extend to 97% of todays climate

scientists of course. I'll bet you're not interested in producing a subset of
the list in #106 that isn't sourced from crackpots.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Come on O'Neill, shall we go nuclear or shan't we?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

But Bryson was a crackpot only in the sense that Hansen and your bogus 97% are
crackpots: he like them extrapolated doom from a short record. NOBODY went to
the press in the 70's and said Bryson and all were crackpots. NOBODY knew the
cool spell would be short lived. NOBODY knew whether CO2 would ever do any
good or evil, including Callendar, though he thought it would do some good.
NOBODY took Callendar seriously in his lifetime. And I don't take Hansen
seriously and neither do you, or Oreskes or Obama or the IPCC or China or
hardly anyone else. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> NOBODY knew whether CO2 would ever do any good or evil

What an arrogant ignoramus you are:
https://books.google.com.au/books?id=obHSBCxiJ1YC&pg=PA750&lpg=PA750&dq…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

> OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T will be
rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling.

The amount of stupid packed into that short sentence is astounding.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 29 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG Foster: "OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T
will be rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling."

AG - You do realize that the question is complete nonsense as posed, don't
you? The inability to even ask an intelligent question underlines your
ignorance on the subject.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Hard to say who's funnier, O'Neill or his link. First, on the 50/50 point: "AG
– You do realize that the question is complete nonsense as posed, don’t you?
The inability to even ask an intelligent question underlines your ignorance on
the subject."

My assertion is patently obvious to anyone with a high school science
education. I'm surrounded by idiots.

And his link (from 1976)--marvelously entertaining.

Excerpts:

"The current steady rise of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere poses a major
threat to the stability of natural climate patterns, a threat that if realised
could within 40 years [2016] throw into complete chaos world agricultural
production."

Notice the reference to "natural climate patterns" rather than  
GHG warming, which is never mentioned in the article. Remember this was a
period of cooling. And before reading "global warming" between the lines
consider this line:

"Atmospheric carbon dioxide would, however, reach suffocating levels long
before even a modest fraction of the coal stocks are burned."

We are left to guess whether they speak of suffocating heat or CO2
asphyxiation, which can be a problem at less than 5000ppm, but the context
suggests the latter.

And the predictions:

"The real problem would be faced if coal were to replace the other fossil
fuels when they dry up in 40 years time [2016]."

"[The CO2 level] is set to double its current figure of 332 ppm in less than
50 years [2026]."

So O'Neill's link makes my case better than I could; these guys didn't have a
clue what CO2 would do, or even what would produce it--the article asserts
that biomass was as problematic as oil and gas, that by 2016 we will have run
out of gas and oil, that gas and oil were too scarce to be a problem anyway,
but that by 2016 agriculture would be in chaos due to coal burning. I suppose
George Soros still believes that--just move the date back a little. And of
course they're way off on the CO2 prediction.

There's just not a competent scientist on the planet who takes this climate
doom seriously, and as the O'Neills and other posters insist on demonstrating
here, neither is there an intelligent layman who buys into it. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Sorry, wrong quote.

> NOBODY went to the press in the 70’s and said Bryson and all were crackpots

Bolin went to the press and contradicted Bryson's claims about global cooling
being the thing to worry about.

I'm still waiting for a subset of the list in #106 that isn’t sourced from the
agreed crackpot Bryson.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Bolin went to the press and contradicted Bryson’s claims about global cooling
being the thing to worry about."

Prove it. As for Bryson, the burden is on you: find any articles that CAN be
traced to him. As early as Mar 4, 1970, we have a gov. agency predicting
cooling doom: "Pollution Could Cause Ice Age, Agency Reports (St. Petersburg
Times."

--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

http://docs.lib.noaa.gov/rescue/journals/essa_news/QC801E71970v6no13.pdf

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> My assertion is patently obvious to anyone with a high school science
education.

your assertion is stupid - to this person with a Ph.D. in statistics, and to
everyone else here.

> I am surrounded by idiots.

I would guess that the people to whom you usually talk about this, and who
agree with you, are idiots.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - Do you understand what an ill-posed question even is? Clue: "A problem
which may have more than one solution, or in which the solutions depend
discontinuously upon the initial data."

Now, I said your question was ill-posed. It is. There are numerous solutions
based on what we're using for initial data. Is the randomly selected time
seconds, minutes, days, weeks, months, years? Is it the same time each day,
week, month, year?

That you fail to understand that 'Time of Observation' inherently influences
the result is not surprising.

Just another pseudoskeptic with half a brain.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 30 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> NOBODY went to the press in the 70’s and said Bryson and all were crackpots.

OK smartypants. Prove it.

> NOBODY knew the cool spell would be short lived.

Prove it.

> NOBODY knew whether CO2 would ever do any good or evil

Prove it.

> As for Bryson, the burden is on you: find any articles that CAN be traced to
him.

You dumb clown. Your precious CIA report cites the "Wisconsin study",
Wisconsin being the place where Bryson was professor of earth sciences.

So at least the only agreed crackpot was the one who forecast that the world
would return to the climate regime of the Little Ice Age.

So when are you going to get rid of citations based on claims originating from
agreed crackpots (Bryson at least) from your list?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Me, #154: "Warm is good. Cold is bad. There’s a 50/50 chance the surface temp
will go up or down. "

Me, #157: " OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T
will be rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling. Get it?"

Dean, #171: "your assertion is stupid – to this person with a Ph.D. in
statistics, and to everyone else here."

Goes to show how perfectly incompetent one can be and still have a Phd.
"Random": any time or place in the universe. "Stasis": approached only in deep
space but never perfectly achieved. Assuming a Big Bang the universe has been
cooling ever since, but before the Bang nothing can be known including the
existence of time.

Limiting the discussion to the earth, the interior is probably cooling slowly
as radioactive matter is spent. Tidal heat is slowly decreasing as the moon's
distance increases.  
Solar radiation at this stage is slowly decreasing. All these factors occur
over billions of years.

Let's take an automobile engine. You might say it spends very little time
heating up and more time staying hot or cooling down, but that depends on the
precision specified. In fact the engine warms while it accelerates or climbs,
and cools as it coasts. And while it idles its temperature fluctuates
depending on when the fan kicks in.

Limiting the discussion to global T of the Pleistocene (as one might
automatically expect with climate discussions among reasonable company) my
assertion obviously holds true: it might be possible to show that sea ice
melts faster than it freezes on various time scales, but in the absence of
such specific knowledge we are forced to fall back on the general rule: T does
not remain the same; it goes up or down with an even chance of either.
Moreover the climatic fluctuations are overwhelmed by seasonal and daily
variation. For 6 months or 12 hours the earth warms; then it cools.

So going into the LIA the earth cooled. Coming out of it the earth warmed. At
any given time and on any scale of time or T there is a 50/50 chance of
either. At present we are recovering from the LIA. GHG's might be supposed to
be responsible for some of the current warming but there is no evidence for
this in the troposphere.

At any rate, my statement stands, and I'm surrounded by idiots--Phd'd idiots
or not. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

A G Foster tells us that he spends his days in the Fun House "Hall of
Mirrors".

No one is surprised. He favors the mirror that makes his head look big.

It's all an illusion. He never believes anyone who points this out to him,
preferring to insult them.. as he goes back to admiring the distorted image of
himself.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Re #173:

First the trivia: The CIA never mentions Bryson in the text; only Kutzbach
from Wisconsin. Its bibliography lists 4 technical papers from Bryson,
including "Climate Modification by Air Pollution." Peterson et al, in their
farcical "The Myth of the 1970s Global Cooling Scientific Consensus," list
only three Bryson papers in their charted tally: 2 "neutral" (1974, 77) and
one "cooling" (1976); Bryson published 11 papers in 1974 alone.

The notion that Bryson was a maverick is far fetched. That the climate was
cooling was little argued. That the cooling was man made as Bryson argued was
certainly disputed as it is today, but many modern warmists continue to blame
the cooling of the 70's on aerosols. Stephen Schneider condoned Bryson's
communicating the "urgency of the situation" but not the "certainty."
Schneider had no trouble jumping on the warming band wagon when it came
around. If you just switched "global cooling" to climate change Bryson would
fit right in today. Like Schneider and Barrett and many others then, and
Hansen and a host more now, he was a climate alarmist --an anthropogenic
climate change alarmist. And he was generally wrong, as have been the modern
alarmists: 97% of climate models run high.

But O'Neill, I still can't get an answer from you: should we invest in nuclear
energy like Hansen says? Or his Hansen too extreme for you? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf@174: Your string of unrelated "science sounding" comments make no sense,
and in no way support what you are trying to say.

It is of no use trying to discuss things with someone as deeply uninformed as
you.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Well why should I waste time with you any more than with Brainlesstorm? Nobody
has offered an iota of criticism of substance. And of course no idiot can.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

# 177: "It is of no use trying to discuss things with someone as deeply

uninformed as you."

You might start by offering a rebuttal. Something beyond, "I'm a Phd. and you
don't know squat." I'll try to make it easier for you. Suppose you have equal
odds of living in either hemisphere, north or south. I could safely give even
odds that the seasonal weather is warming or cooling in your area. Or suppose
that you have even odds of living in any time zone on the globe. The chances
are even that at this moment the outside temperature is rising or falling. So
tell us that makes no sense and see if it helps your credibility. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

You know, Dean, that Ph.D.'s don't argue high school-level subject matter with
kindergarteners...

They may try to teach kindergarteners some of the basics of high school-level
subjects...

...But kindergarteners aren't taken to starting hostile disputation with their
superior should the Ph.D. offer to teach them.

Because kindergarteners don't hew assiduously to mindless ideologies and value
those ideologies and self-centered interests higher than learning something
valuable.

There are those who are teachable, and then there are those who are hopelessly
useless, to themselves and to society.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG Foster - I said your question was ill-posed and that has not changed.

I started with time, but we could do the same with geography.

If one posits a given locale, a given time, and a reference frame, then it's
possible to calculate odds. Otherwise your question has multiple solutions
depending on the data. It is almost the definition of an ill-posed question.

BTW. The odds that the odds are 50% are virtually nil. Given a random time
interval it is overwhelmingly more likely that the second temperature will be
colder. The only way to change this is to change the question - make it less
ill-posed.

Once you figure out why the odds are the second temperature is likely to be
colder you will be on the right track - i.e., you will have displayed at least
the ability to think outside your preconceived notions.

My inclination is that you can't even grog the fact your question is ill-
posed, much less figure out why the answer with the fewest assumptions is
colder.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

# 180: Still name calling, devoid of substance. Zero points.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> The CIA never mentions Bryson in the text; only Kutzbach from Wisconsin.

You dumb deliberately dense clown. The text says "The second group, at the
University of Wisconsin, is under Reid Bryson and John Kutzbach, both
mentioned earlier."

So when are you going to get rid of citations based on claims originating from
agreed crackpots (Bryson at least) from your list?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Nobody has offered an iota of criticism of substance. And of course no idiot
can. –AGF

We're already aware that you can't.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

181: Ah yes, I missed the single mention on p.26. That no doubt precludes any
influence from Barrett at ESSA (the for runner of NOAA -- Bryson was careful
by comparison.) Pretty much irrelevant. We still can't get a commitment from
O'Neill on whether we should go with nuclear technology. Is he capable of
admitting fallibility in his hero, or of the uselessness of current remedies?
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> You know, Dean, that Ph.D.’s don’t argue high school-level subject matter
with kindergarteners…

I know. I'm done, but I do feel tainted by his stupidity aura.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Yeah, I felt I needed a shower afterward, too. ::shivver::

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 31 Mar 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

And here folks, you have a microcosm of the religion of climate doom. Despair
of any good argument, all ye who enter here. When every last prognostication
fails they'll just say, April Fools! --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Re. (current, but changeable) #181: "BTW. The odds that the odds are 50% are
virtually nil. Given a random time interval it is overwhelmingly more likely
that the second temperature will be colder."

What gibberish.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

But yes, the earth is slowly cooling down (as I said above), and more
importantly, as we approach another big or little ice age we will cool down in
the shorter term. Ultimately the coolers were right: we will generally have
more to fear from cooling than warming. Even now. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> I missed

So when are you going to get rid of citations based on claims originating from
agreed crackpots (Bryson at least) from your list?

Or is all we get from you a shyte list sourced from crackpots?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> the religion of climate doom

You mean your list sourced from crackpots.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"But yes, the earth is slowly cooling down "

Any day now! Really! It will! It was in 1990, but then it warmed up. And then
it was cooling in 1998, too! But then it warmed up again, but really, any day
now the cooling will commence!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T will be
rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling."

Are we talking localized temps, spatially averaged temps or temporally
averaged temps (or both), averaged locally or globally? If this one random
selected time interval how long is the interval? Minutes, days, months,
decades? What criteria would you use to determine if the change in that
interval is significant or you just saying any random fluctuation works? Or
are you wanting to compare two randomly selected time intervals (of
indeterminate length) side-by-side?

That's just the start of the things we need to know to answer the question. As
others have pointed out, as the question stands it is nonsense although the
seed of the idea does have promise as an interesting exercise for students.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Dan Andrews (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - there are two O'Neill's posting in this thread; referring to "O'Neill"
(again) shows your lack of attention to detail.

Now, I've told you your question is ill-posed and yet you haven't even tried
to defend it.

Time (sampling)  
Location  
Reference Frame(total time period considered)

In the long run the sun will die out. That will last for eternity. I.e.,
sampling over the life of the universe will have more than 99.999999% of the
temperatures at or near absolute zero.

In the long, but shorter run - say a trillion years) the sun will increase in
brightness, become a red dwarf and then a white dwarf. This will dominate for
most of the sun's remaining life. So in this timeframe the odds are of
warming.

Now, as we shorten the scale both the sampling period and the reference frame
must be known. At shorter and shorter periods we also need to know the
location.

As I said, your question was ill-posed. You were unable to defend it or supply
a decent answer (50% LOL).

In fact, I suspect you cannot concoct a single well-posed question where the
odds are 50% other than sampling at sub-minute intervals and making the
reference frame extremely short.

Thanks for playing.

A)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Sorry - 'red giant' for 'red dwarf' in the above.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

K O'Neill and Andrews: you're splitting hairs. At any point on the globe and
on nearly all scales of time, there is within a percent of a percent of a
percent a 50/50 chance that that place is either warming or cooling. Your
inability to see the truth of this basic, elementary point speaks poorly of
your philosophical skill. How can I teach such thick skulled people?

Marco, pinheads come out of the woodwork here. A normal person would notice
the parenthetic, "as I said above," and check to see what I said above. As
even K O'Neill and Andrews recognize, in the long term the earth is cooling.
Over the last 15 years it hasn't done much of anything. That could change for
the better with a little warming. The LIA was no fun.

I wonder what percentage of O'Neill's spell their name with two L's. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill: You have only scored the cheapest points possible. You dwell on
the irrelevant and ignore what matters. I repeat, it matters not whether we
cite the credo if we can't agree on the discipline. Your hero Hansen says
anything but nuclear won't cut it. So the radicals among the zealous label him
a "denier." They don't like his solution.

Of course it boils down to the magnitude of the problem: the risk must be
quantified. If it were as high as Hansen insists, we would be fools not to
agree. Bryson said we're doomed; Hansen says we're doomed. Kyoto like
solutions only reveal one's hypocrisy. Gore doesn't really believe the junk he
preaches--he just gets rich like a televangelist.

I don't really believe you're capable of learning anything from it, but I
might just take you up on the list challenge. So far we have one point a
piece. Care to place any bets?  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - " on nearly all scales of time" LOL. What fraction of eternity is that
again? What fraction of the rest of the sun's lifespan? Even when explained to
you you can't understand it. Pretty much what I predicted several comments
back.

Nonsense. As I said, you can't come up with _any_ scenario - other than very,
short sub-minute sampling, where the odds are nearly 50%. If you could, you'd
propose one or offer a well-posed question.

The fact you can't speaks volumes.

P.S. the correct spelling would have two ells (the original Gaelic Ua Néill).
There is a high correlation between single ells (or O'Neal spelling) and
immigration through ports other than the northeastern USA.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> You have only scored the cheapest points possible.

What pathetic hypocrisy. You cite a cheap list of mainly practically
inaccessible newspaper articles for your claims of scientists unconditionally
forecasting global cooling and you have the hide to accuse me of only scoring
cheap points????????

Don't make me laugh.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Over the last 15 years it hasn’t done much of anything.

15 years is quite often not long enough to prove anything. So the above claim
is just a strawman. However, even the last 15 years (since the beginning of
2001 specifically) has shown statistically significant global warming in
GISTEMP and NOAA land/ocean.

Also, GISTEMP, HADCRUT4, NOAA and Berkeley all show statistically significant
warming over the last **5 years** since the beginning of 2011. Global warming
is now roaring away.

But global warming denialist clowns like agf keep saying "the pause, the
pause".

Sorry, the "pause" is dead. Let it rest in peace.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 01 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

# 199 or KO: " As I said, you can’t come up with _any_ scenario – other than

very, short sub-minute sampling, where the odds are nearly 50%."

A thoroughly meaningless statement when "nearly" remains unquantified, unless
it were taken as a definition.

And I already gave two examples, hemisphere and time zone. I leave it to you
to quantify "nearly" in those two examples. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 02 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The matter in Chris O'Neill's skull is not grey.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 02 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

201: "Sorry, the “pause” is dead. Let it rest in peace."

Yeah, after dozens of papers were written trying to explain it, and Oreskes
hollering for the word to disappear from the community vocabulary, Karl et al
suddenly make it disappear with such atrocious junk science that even Michael
Mann and Ben Santer protested. And then the records were adjusted to
accommodate Karl's junk science, and poof, the pause was gone. You can fool
some of the people all the time -- without even trying.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 02 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - No, you never responded with any well-posed question. Your remark on
hemispheres (not addressed to me, but to #177 - not my comment) shows exactly
why the question is ill-posed; you get a different result depending on
hemisphere, time of day, time of year, etc. You are _unable_ to post a single
well-posed question. You can't. You haven't. You never will.

I will repeat; to get a meaningful answer you need to specify a location, a
sampling period, and the timeframe over which we will sample. Even giving you
these criteria that will lead to a well-posed question, you can't find a
scenario that's 50-50.

Ignorance is one thing - we're all ignorant on one subject or another - but
now you're just showing us you stupidity, an inability to learn.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 03 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> after dozens of papers were written

The operative word here being "after". "The pause is dead" is what you write
**after** the pause has finished.

> Oreskes hollering for the word to disappear from the community vocabulary

No shit. Wouldn't that be sensible **after** the pause has finished.

> Karl et al suddenly make it disappear

Maybe you should complain to Roy Spencer who has brought it to an end too
(along with every compiler of surface records, but we all know they're a
global conspiracy).

The "pause" is dead. Stop torturing it. It's not pretty to play with dead
bodies. Let it rest in peace.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 03 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Once again, #154: There’s a 50/50 chance the surface temp will go up or down."

# 157: "OK, given a randomly selected time, there is a 50/50 chance that T
will

be rising and a 50/50 chance that it will be falling."

These are essentially true statements. The second is less general than the
first, and granted, no uncertainties were given, but the inane quibbling over
such a basic statement is absurd. As I said before, I'm surrounded by idiots.
The matter in both O'Neills' skulls is not grey. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 03 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Two different claims: 1) there never was a Pause; 2) the Pause is over. The
Niño makes it look like the pause is over but that remains to be seen.
Oreskes' ban on the word came at the end of 2013 when the Pause was alive and
well. Karl et al claimed there never was a Pause. Then the the surface T
records were adjusted according to Karl et al, making the Pause disappear. But
Spencer said a year and a month ago:

"The “pause” in global warming is becoming increasingly difficult for the
climate establishment to ignore, which is a good thing. They are now coming up
with reasons why there has been a “pause” (a term I dislike because it implies
knowledge of future warming, which no one has), and spinning it as if it is
bad new for us."

And you're mixing him in with the quacks? As always, you don't have a clue
what you're talking about, but you keep babbling on. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

To Greg Laden:  
Your format is horrendous. Numbers are apparently assigned when a post begins,
and the writer may sit on it for hours before submitting. Then no time of day
is indicated by which to identify a post. A recipe for endless confusion,
baked and burned. Is there no remedy for this? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"These are essentially true statements."

No they are essentially incorrect statements. Let's take the 'randomly
selected' time-period January to July: the global temperature is likely to be
rising in this period (January is on average almost 4 degrees Celsius cooler
than July).

Please note that my response is mainly for the lurkers, as I don't think AGF
will ever understand the point Kevin O'Neill made, and that I made even more
specific.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Marco's only post from this year (#193):

April 1, 2016  
“But yes, the earth is slowly cooling down ”

Any day now! Really! It will! It was in 1990, but then it warmed up. And then
it was cooling in 1998, too! But then it warmed up again, but really, any day
now the cooling will commence!  
=============================================  
Somehow Marcos imagines he has said something relevant here. And his latest:

" Let’s take the ‘randomly selected’ time-period January to July: the global
temperature is likely to be rising in this period (January is on average
almost 4 degrees Celsius cooler than July)."

This pinhead thinks he can cherry pick a "random" time frame. I thought April
Fools was over. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG writes - "This pinhead thinks he can cherry pick a “random” time frame. "

AG - _You_ are the pinhead. I told you your question was ill-posed, Marco
illustrates the point. Unless you supply a location, sampling period and
reference timeframe the answers are all over the place.

Yet you _can't_ supply those data criteria because any set of criteria you
actually select will disprove your point.

I've already shown how sampling over eternity will lead to cooler; I've shown
how sampling over the life of the sun will lead to warmer. That's the problem
with an ill-posed question; different assumptions lead to contradictory
answers.

There are an infinite number of possibilities - but you can't find even _one_
that yields your preferred answer. LOL.. Not ONE! That's what I would expect
from an actual pinhead. Own it. Wear it.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - Pause? Are you still on about that? Please show me the pause in any
scientific graph of Ocean Heat Content. Then explain why the oceans, with a
heat capacity thousands of times more than the atmosphere, are not a better
gauge of the earth's energy flow.

The whole 'pause' meme was based on a bait-and-switch; the earth is not the
atmosphere. The 'A' in AGW does _not_ stand for 'Atmosphere.' AGW is a theory
of how the _earth_ will warm due to human influences, mainly CO2 and
associated feedbacks.

Deniers - of which you are one - fail to realize or accept basic physics.
Radiative transfer is a fact. GHGs warming the planet is a fact. There is no
global scientific conspiracy. Only nutjobs believe in one.

That these impacts of GHGs are oftentimes not immediately visible in surface
temperatures should surprise no one. There is plenty of natural variation
(i.e., weather). If we saw ocean heat content dropping, then a better
scientific explanation would have to be found. That has not been the case.
Ocean heat content shows there never was any pause in the earth's energy
balance.

But even surface temps now give lie to the whole pause meme - so it should die
even for those that don't understand that it was a manufactured denier meme in
the first place.

We will avidly await your explanation on OHC. Just as we avidly await your
simple data criteria for 50-50 question. In other words, none of us will be
holding our breath.

AG: P.S. - I once wrote an essay about people like you. You can find it
reposted as a comment. In it I ask a simple question. So which of the four
glass slippers are you wearing?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Re. Kevin@#213, 4/4: nothing but alchemy.

Are you also foolish enough to deny the pause? The pause about which dozens of
papers have been written in explanation? The "pause" which always referred to
surface T? Surface T, which was the only T record fussed over until the pause
came along? Surface T from which the alchemists conjured up a hockey stick?
The hockey stick which the skeptics called voodoo science, but which was only
relevant if the ocean was ignored?

And now you want to tell me surface T doesn't matter because the ocean is
bigger? What do you imbeciles think we've been trying to tell you nincompoops
for the last 20 years? And you think you're teaching us when you spit our own
arguments back at us?

111 out of 114 climate models run hot; never fear, Kevin knows more than all
those modelers, and why none of their models were worth a damn-- the heat was
going into the ocean! Therefore, says Kevin, the skeptics don't know squat.  
Kevin, are you able to tell us why surface T flat lined while ARGOS picked up
some barely measurable warming? Why at some particular time and not some
other? And you're gonna wait for my explanation, as if you had one?  
And since the ocean is capable of sinking heat without necessarily heating the
atmosphere, as the skeptics have always held, why should we worry about GHG's?

I sure as hell won't wait for a coherent answer. And if you can't get these
simple questions straight, how will you ever go anywhere in probability and
cosmology? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Spencer said a year and a month ago

Spare us the ancient history lesson.

> The Niño makes it look like the pause is over but that remains to be seen.

Can you give up this crap for God's sake?

The so called "pause" was invented because every global temperature record did
not show "statistically significant" warming since 1998 right up until the
beginning of 2015 (but it was close for quite a while). That condition has now
ended. **Every** global temperature surface record now shows statistically
significant global warming since 1998. Even Roy Spencer's official noisy
satellite radio reception shows statistically significant warming since the
end of 1998.

Statistically significant warming => no "pause"

What does it take to get this through your thick skull?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The stupidity of AG Foster apparently knows no bounds. The simple fact is that
if I can so easily cherry pick a period in which warming is much more likely
to occur than cooling, it is _impossible_ to pick "any random period" in which
it is just as likely to warm as it is to cool. After all, "any random period"
includes the specific period I chose. That means the claim AG Foster made is
actually wrong, because there must be specific conditions for that "random
period" to exclude the possibility someone by accident choses e.g. the period
January to July (or July to January for that matter).

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> The pause about which dozens of papers have been written in explanation?

Just because there was a temporary "pause", viz no statistically significant
surface temperature warming for a climatically insignificant period, doesn't
mean scientists are not entitled to research it. Just like they research the
ongoing, and now statistically significant since 1998, global warming.

> Surface T, which was the only T record fussed over until the pause came
along?

Don't worry. You can fuss over it again now, if that's all you're capable of
understanding.

> only relevant if the ocean was ignored

WTF are you bullshitting about? The hockey stick reconstructions were for the
whole northern hemisphere or globe. They did not exclude the oceans.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 04 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - the entire 'pause' was _based_ on an El Nino - moron. Compare El Nino
years only to El Nino years; compare La Nina years only to KLa Nina years;
compare ENSO neuitral years only to ENSO neutral years; what does that tell
ya? Every trend line is up consistently!

Denier morons just can't keep their stories straight - was the 'pause' due to
El Nino? Yes, but somehow then we should ignore El Nino ony when it _ends_ the
'pause.' You have zero ability to explain _earth's_ warming. Zero ability to
explain ocean heat content.

Ignorant, stupid, insane, or just plain evil? Which glass slipper are you
wearing AG?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@106. Anthony :

Late here I know but skimming though your list I saw

> 1979 – A Choice of Catastrophes – The Disasters That Threaten Our World
[Book] (Isaac Asimov, 1979)  
>  1979 – The Sixth Winter [Book SF novel] (Douglas Orgill & John R. Gribbin,
1979)

(Corrections and emphasis added.)

I happen to have - and have read and reread - both those books and they don't
exactly add up to support of the belief in global cooling or an imminent ice
age.

One of those, 'The Sixth Winter', is an enjoyable, interesting Science Fiction
novel which is based on the premise of solar minima leading to a new abrupt
ice age. Its a good read but we now know the premise is NOT what is happening
nor really likely to happen. Even within the novel itself it notes in a
fictional report for the novel's fictional President on the heroes (& novels)
thesis :

> ELEVEN It is, of course, my duty to inform you that this is one of several
models now being postulated as the final trigger for Ice Age conditions.

>

> TWELVE I cannot emphasise too strongly that it is premature to draw any such
dramatic conclusions from the present run of rather unusual conditions with
recurrent 'blocking highs'.

(Capitalisation & italicisation original.)

Source : Pages 22-23, 'The Sixth Winter', Douglas Orgill & John Gribbin,
Futura Publications 1980.

So its a speculative SF "If then" novel which includes caveats inside the text
- hardly a source for seriously claiming that something actually _is_
happening or even going to happen.

The other example would have Isaac Asimov - of whom I am a big fan BTW -
rolling in his grave.

Asimov's A choice of Catastrophes is a wide ranging non-fiction set of essays
about possible future calamities which very briefly touches upon the possible
scenario of a future Ice Age among a great many other possibilities such as
the death of our Sun or collision with it, bolide impacts and nuclear war. Oh
& the Greenhouse effect too for instance :

> Since 1900 for instance, the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere has
risen from 0.029 per cent to 0.032 per cent. It is estimated that by the year
2000, the concentration may reach a figure of 0.038 per cent, an increase of
some 30 per cent in the century. This must be the result, at least in part, of
the burning of fossil fuels, though it may also be due, in part , to the
retreat of forests which are more efficient as carbon dioxide absorbers than
are other forms of vegetation. ... (snip -aside on breathing) .. It does not
take much of an increase in the carbon dioxide concentration to intensify the
greenhouse effect appreciably.

&

> There are those, in fact, who point out that if the carbon dioxide content
increases above a certain point, the slight rise in the ocean's average
temperature will release carbon dioxide from solution in the ocean water,
which will further enhance the greenhouse effect, raising the ocean
temperature still higher, releasing still more carbon dioxide and so on. Such
a 'runaway greenhouse effect' might raise Earth's temperature finally to
beyond the boiling point of water and make it uninhabitable; and that would
surely be a catastrophic consequence of burning fossil fuels."

Source : Pages 310 - 311, 'A Choice of Catastrophes : The disasters that
threaten our world'', Isaac Asimov, Hutchinson & co, 1979.

Also, y'know, this :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iz1g55H6XgA

Is what Isaac Asimov was actually saying about this issue back in the 1970's -
to be precise 1977 - back when Niki Lauda was winning the F1 championship,
Jimmy Carter was US President and before we knew Pluto had even one moon let
alone five of them. 'Bout the time Viking was landing on Mars.

To then use these sources to pretend Isaac Asimov thought the world was
cooling or that scientists in general then did, is at best and with maximum
charity, horribly mistaken and disingenous and at worst outright dishonesty
and blatantly lying.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Oh back in the 1980's (just - but that's still three decades in the past.
Yyyii-ikes! ) Isaac Asimov was saying this -consistently & scientifically
accurately :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AEPhf0SHQEk

How dare these (almost indecipherable & unprintable obscenities) now try to
use one of his books as a cite for their (putting it way too politely)
rubbish?

Shameless flippin' factually erroneous douchebags!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

D'oh! The italicisation referred too inmy quote from The Sixth Winter was the
line :

I cannot emphasise too strongly

For clarity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

C O'Neill contradicts himself between 215 and 216, and he contradicts K
O'Neill between 216 and 217, where KO says:  
"AG – the entire ‘pause’ was _based_ on an El Nino – moron."

It's hardly clear what KO means to say; maybe he supposes the Pause is a
statistical artifact of a Niño step function and has no real meaning, or
whether he blames global warming on Niños in a tautological sort of way. Or
maybe he really means to invoke natural variation. But I'm not inclined to
give him any benefit of doubt--he is an arrogant fool who ignores the vast
disagreement among the experts, as reported here:

LINK DELETED

I'm pretty much wasting my time with anyone named O'Neill.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - foster - the quotes around 'pause' should give you a clue. If English
isn't your first language, then you'll learn about 'air quotes' someday.

Deniers - like yourself - claim the 'pause' only ended because of a large El
Nino - but the 'pause' only existed because of a larger El Nino. So, it's
deniers that want it both ways.

As I said, compare El Nino years, La Nina years, and ENSO neutral years
respectively. The trend for all three subsets is steadily upwards. Comparing
like to like removes any influence of El Niino/La Nina and shows what any
iintelligent person already knew. Deniers - like yourself- do not qualify as
intelligent persons, sadly.

Still waiting on OHC explanation.  
Still waiting on a well-posed 50-50 proposition.

Crickets chirping .......

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> C O’Neill contradicts himself between 215 and 216

The claim of a moron who thinks the "pause", whatever it was, continues. He
probably doesn't even understand the difference between "was" and "is".

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 05 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Does the "pause" continue? Who knows ? Was there a pause? CO says yes; KO says
it was an invention of deniers. True, some preferred to call it a "slow down"
or 'hiatus," but few blamed it on Niños. Too bad Laden won't allow a link to
the list, but here's just one explanation for the pause that has nothing to do
with Niños: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/345/6199/897.abstract

So rest assured, when Kevin O'Neill imagines himself sitting on orthodoxy
calling out heretics he doesn't have the slightest clue, much less does he
come to grips with the real essence of the question, why are the models all
wrong?:  
http://skepticalscience.com//pics/ProjvsObs.png  
The predictions have been as bad as during the cool scare.

KO: "Still waiting on OHC explanation."  
I wonder what he's talking about.

KO: "Still waiting on a well-posed 50-50 proposition."  
Since he steadfastly refuses to accept a practical setting (quaternary surface
T) I'll play his game one more minute: will the universe expand forever or is
there enough dark matter to halt it? In the former case all finite time ranges
becomes infinitesimal, and so any corresponding ΔT; the odds of warming or
cooling remain equal at zero. In the latter heating and cooling balance out.
The odds remain even: 50/50. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG, I don't allow links to science denial sites.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

> Was there a pause? CO says yes

Rubbish. I said there was a "pause", viz something called a "pause". That
doesn't mean that "pause" is a correct choice of name, just a name that some
people rightly or wrongly use.

> few blamed it on Niños.

Absolute crap. 2011 and 2012 were the strongest pair of La Ninas on record and
just happened to be near the end of the so called "pause".

In any case, statistical significance doesn't care if there were or were not
El Ninos/La Ninas in any particular period. That's why statistical
significance matters. If there is statistical significance then the warming is
more than just that produced temporarily by El Ninos/La Ninas or any other
type of noise.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Greg Laden

April 6, 2016  
"AG, I don’t allow links to science denial sites."

Do you burn books too?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris at 217: "Just because there was a temporary “pause”, viz no
statistically significant surface temperature warming for a climatically
insignificant period, doesn’t mean scientists are not entitled to research
it."

It's good that Chris's nonexistent "pause" is temporary--that makes it easier
for it to have an end even when it doesn't exist. I tell you these are
intellectual giants we're dealing with. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

A G Foster:  
Should we be allowed to drop turds in your living room when we come to visit?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf, you've demonstrated you aren't very bright with the 50/50 thing, and not
very honest with the statements about the pause, but: this is a science blog,
not a denialist blog. This is not a public space but a private one. Why does
having a policy of not promoting sites that actively spread disinformation and
lies seem odd? Cries of censorship are really stupid, especially since you're
still here spouting your crap.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

So you too condone book burning, while implicitly admitting that this is
nothing but a propaganda site which necessarily deems free thinkers as counter
propagandists. Very interesting.

But note, as I have pointed out from my first appearance here, that the
ideological goal is merely a confession of guilt and acquiescence to looming
doom -- a doom from which no certain expiation has been offered, except that
of Hansen, whom Oreskes lumped in with the denier camp for his nuclear heresy.
Next thing she'll want to outlaw the internet. I think I'll go find a cat
house to shower and pray. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - Still unable to propose a well-posed question. Surprise. /snark

I've already explored the infinite universe. Sorry, in that case the odds are
_NOT_ 50-50 but that we will measure a temperature different from today that
is colder - the odds are 99.9999% that it will be colder. Of course the 9s
after the decimal are infinite.

Your 2nd suggestion also shows the ill-posed nature of your question -
different results with different assumptions. Sorry, loser. Only one of the
assumptions is correct.

You need a location, a sampling time, and a reference timeframe. You can't
provide _one_ not one single instance of 50-50. The simplistic ones you have
chosen have different answers depending on assumptions. I.e., almost a
textbook case of ill-posed.

OHC - crickets chirping. Since you obviously have a difficult time reading,
try #213. Please show us the 'pause' in OHC. Please tell us how the earth
equals the atmosphere of the surface only.

Please tell us how the 'pause' exists if we remove El Ninos from the data - or
if we only compare El Nino years to El Nino years; La Nina years to La Nina
years; ENSO neutral years to ENSO neutral years. I'll keep asking and you'll
keep making a fool of yourself.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> So you too condone book burning, while implicitly admitting that this is
nothing but a propaganda site which necessarily deems free thinkers as counter
propagandists. Very interesting.

No. Whether you miss the point due to ignorance, willfully ignore the point,
or are simply likely (the last is by far the most likely thing), you are
wrong. The notion that you are a thinker of any kind, let alone a "free
thinker", is ludicrous, since the ability to think means you have the ability
to learn, and you have clearly demonstrated the inability to learn anything.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Do you burn books too?"

He's not burning the science denial websites.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Chris’s nonexistent “pause”

No-one said the so called "pause" that I'm talking about, viz lack of
statistically significant warming in the **SURFACE** temperature for a
climatically insignificant amount of time, e.g. 15 years, does not exist.
You're just playing with semantics.

So stop making shit up agf.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Or much more accurately, did not exist.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I wonder what happened to agf's cheap newspaper articles?

Obviously went into the bin wrapped around the kitchen scraps long ago.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

nothing but a propaganda site

So now they're calling Science propaganda.

Sounds like something straight out of 1984.

A G Foster apparently has his knickers in a twist because he doesn't get to be
Big Brother.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Where does one begin in the company of rabid doomsday cultists who ban the
books of their critics? (the skeptics don't do that!) What are they afraid of?
Truth?

Well I'll start by eating a little crow: one of my examples was a little off
and another way off: daily T. One has to get beyond 40 latitude to have any
summer days long enough for warming time to exceed cooling, and as for
seasonal warming, the opposite is often, maybe usually the case: the span
between min annual T and max is a little longer than the cooling down period,
especially in places like San Francisco, surrounded by water.

As for a universe with critical dark matter, it is a closed system, and it's a
mystery to me how anyone can suppose that its contraction period could be
anything but a thermodynamic mirror image of its expansion. Odds of random
warming: 50/50.

KO: "Please tell us how the ‘pause’ exists if we remove El Ninos from the data
– or if we only compare El Nino years to El Nino years; La Nina years to La
Nina years; ENSO neutral years to ENSO neutral years."

The relevance escapes me. Do you want to delete the Niño years? Subtract
anomalies? But UAH is flat between 2002 and 2014 which span includes no Niños:
DENIALIST SITE LINK DELETED

...as it was in all records until recently. The pause or non-pause was
worrisome enough for Karl et al that they felt the need to adjust the record
once again to make it go away. Still, I'm required to separately link the
excuses for it--excuses for something that no longer exists in revisionist
history. Here are a few:

The Montreal Protocol (successful reduction of emissions):  
http://www.nature.com/articles/ngeo1999.epdf?referrer_access_token=_OEl…

Reduced solar activity:
http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperInformation.aspx?PaperID=41752

Coverage bias (Cowtan and Way: include the Arctic):
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qj.2297/abstract

I could provide links to different lists but this is very dangerous knowledge
which must be kept from the eyes of the uninitiated. And KO knows it's all
Niños anyway, and these other warm mongering climatologists don't know
anything.

--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

On to C O'Neill's fixation with "cheap newspaper articles." They always derive
from the pronouncements and conventions of scientists. Plenty of experts are
mentioned by name, usually government employed, but Bryson isn't cited in any
non-paywalled articles until 1974, so the notion that Bryson got the ball
rolling is an invention of C O'Neill's little head. Bryson was the Paul
Ehrlich and James Hansen of global cooling: trouble was assured. And Bryson
had a considerable following among scientists to varying degrees.

During the 70's it was learned from sediment and ice cores that interglacials
were short and onsets of glaciation could be rapid, that we could be due for
another big ice age. This recognition coincided with the last and coldest
decade of a 30 year long cooling period, widespread tropical famine temperate
crop failures. The cooling scare was as ill defined as the warming scare is
now--a number of scenarios over disparate time frames could be meant. There
was a solid consensus that we were due for another ice age eventually. The
current interglacial had lasted already as long as the newly discovered
average, and the LIA could well be taken as the new norm, with the warming up
to the '40s being anomalous. Armadillos were heading south, polar ice and
glaciers and deserts were growing, crops were failing, food stores shrinking,
and it was looking like climate could cause trouble. Nor Bryson nor any other
expert ignored GHG heating, but it was obviously losing. Bryson blamed
pollution: man was to blame. Most were skeptical, preferring to blame the sun
or Milankovitch or whatever.

In 1974 the NAS climate convention concluded we don't know enough: the cooling
might continue; it might not. 50/50 odds were as good as any. At the end of
the year NASA boss James Fletcher NASA boss reported Mariner 9 showed Martian
dust storms lowered surface T 20C, "confirming that much more smog aerosol
pollution could indeed set off another ice age on Earth" (Fletcher's words).

Back then no climate cult took over the hysteria--they left it for the media,
and often the press provided well researched and balanced reports, presenting
views differing from Bryson's. So nobody polled the scientists, and nobody
labeled the skeptics quacks. Few claimed the science was settled, but nearly
all recognized that we were fortunate to be living between ice ages. That
remains true today. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG writes: "As for a universe with critical dark matter, it is a closed
system, and it’s a mystery to me how anyone can suppose that its contraction
period could be anything but a thermodynamic mirror image of its expansion.
Odds of random warming: 50/50."

Wrong, first - contraction is only a probability in itself. So, only one
outcome is correct. But assume that it is correct, then the earth will cease
to exist at some point long before a singularity is formed. So, you have -
again - failed to prove anything other than your question is ill-posed.

What part of ill-posed don't you understand? If your question leads to
multiple different answers, then you need to rephrase the question. Basically,
you just keep proving your ignorance over and over again.

You have a religious belief, nothing can prove it wrong. That's why deniers-
like yourself - hate science. You don't understand it and it calls into
question your deeply held _faith_ in your own ideology.

We see the same thing in economics. How many times do we have to rerun the
mantra of cutting taxes will reduce the deficit, lift all boats, and give
everyone a pony before economic deniers realize it's all a charade? Remeber
the doom and gloom that every conservative predicted with Clinton's first
budget? Remember the doom and gloom with Obama's? Remember the converse with
Dubya's tax cuts and Reagan's?

Reality is known to have a liberal bias - that's why deniers hate reality.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG writes : "UAH is flat between 2002 and 2014"

Umm - UAH? Which version - and why should we use it instead of some other
measure> And is that statistically significant? What is the relevance of a
statistically insignificant piece of data? You're really just being stupid.

Not to mention - what's the relevance of temperatures (UAH) at 4km above the
surface to anything? It's neither surface temperature nor the _earth's_
temperature.

As for "The relevance escapes me. " The so called pause was based on the 1998
El Nino year. If you want to compare trends, without the trend being corrupted
up or down by La Nina or El Nino it should be obvious what you do - exactly as
I suggested.

AGWis a theory of how the _earth_ warms. Again, the atmosphere is a small part
of the earth. OHC better reflects the earth's energy budget. Of course you
ignore that because there are no denier talking points from trash
pseudoskeptic sites that can explain OHC. Where's the pause in OHC? Nowhere to
be found.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Endless BS. OHC is calculated from thermometers that supposedly measured
thousandths of a degree. It is the shortest and least reliable of T records.
Surface T is the most difficult to compile--or replicate--or define. SST
reflects the exact problems of OHC that you harp on, suggesting a one to one
equivalence between land and sea is arbitrary and meaningless. Satellite
measuring of the lower troposphere has the same advantages over ground
stations as SAT measured SLR has over tide gauges. You have to be educated
from scratch. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 07 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> This recognition coincided with the last and coldest decade of a 30 year
long cooling period

What are you such a font of shit agf? The data does not enable the 1960s to be
claimed as the coldest decade of that 30 year period:
http://www.woodfortrees.org/plot/gistemp/from:1940/to:1970/compress:120…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 08 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> UAH is flat between 2002 and 2014 which span includes no Niños

There were El Niños of various strengths in 2002-03, 2006-07 and 2009-10.

Clearly, agf is trying for the "font of all made up shit" award.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 08 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> C O’Neill’s fixation with “cheap newspaper articles.”

Not my fixation. You're the one who's citing them.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 08 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

By some criteria we are always in either Niño or Niña conditions. Problems of
definition are discussed here:
http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/staff/trenbert/trenberth.papers/defnBAMS.pdf

And the cooling alarmists were well aware that the SH warmed as the NH cooled:  
http://www.woodfortrees.org/plot/hadcrut3vnh/from:1940/to:1990  
So yes, the decade from 1965 to 1975 was the coolest since 1943 when the NH
cooling began.

And that, folks, is the best Chris O'Neill can do. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 12 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - Try http://xkcd.com/1606/

Obviously they already anticipated your ill-posed question. But then XKCD has
always been good at pointing out stupidity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin ONeill (not verified) on 12 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

4/13 1345GMT  
The point source sat around forever and ever. And ever. And then one day it
blew up. And expanded forever and ever. And ever. Never to collapse again.
Forever.

Genesis does better.

As for the other pinhead named O'Neill, my post hasn't shown up yet. Here is a
close approximation:

By some criteria (SOI) we are always in either Niño or Niña conditions. There
are big Niños and little ones, with no standard definition of what constitutes
a Niño: http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1997BAMS...78.2771T

The coolers of the '70's had more data and were more interested in NH T than
global; they were aware that the small southern land masses were warming. And
the decade from 1965-1975 was the NH coldest since 1943:
http://www.woodfortrees.org/plot/hadcrut3vnh/from:1940/to:1980/plot/had…  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> The coolers of the ’70’s had more data ...

The fact that you keep repeating the lie that science in the 70s was all about
"cooling" reinforces the fact that you are simply a congenital liar with no
intention of making a serious discussion.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> By some criteria we are always in either Niño or Niña conditions.

Pity your mind was already made up. Closed minds are like that.

> the SH warmed as the NH cooled

So **NOW** the NH gets mentioned. In any case, there was no significant change
in global or any hemispheric temperature from the 1950s to the early 1970s.
The last statistically significant cooling period ended in the 1950s.

> the cooling alarmists

No-one is denying there were crackpot human-caused cooling alarmists. Funnily
enough, even though Bryson claimed humans were going to cause global cooling,
he also claimed it was impossible for humans to cause global warming through
CO2 emissions. This was in complete contrast to genuine climate scientists
like Schneider who stated that possible further global cooling was
**CONDITIONAL** on there being further rises in sulphate aerosol emissions.
Brain dead and dishonest global warming denialists like afg **ALWAYS** forget
to mention this condition that Schneider stated. Such denialists are nothing
but dishonest scum.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Here's a NH T graph from 1982:  
https://www.aip.org/history/climate/xtemps82.htm  
...showing 0.8C cooling between 1938 and 1972: significant, downhill, coldest
last--till the early '70s. They didn't google WFT.

CO: "Funnily enough, even though Bryson claimed humans were going to cause
global cooling, he also claimed it was impossible for humans to cause global
warming through CO2 emissions."

This is another CO lie. Compare: "Bryson contends that sometime after 1930,
the cooling effect of more dust in the atmosphere began to overpower the
warming effect of carbon dioxide."  
http://www.pennsylvaniacrier.com/filemgmt_data/files/Ominous%20Changes%…  
(p.95, 3rd column)

And another load of BS:  
StevoR  
Adelaide hills, South Australia  
April 5, 2016

Asimov took the threat of cooling seriously, as reported here:  
https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=TP1jAAAAIBAJ&sjid=LvkDAAAAIBAJ&pg…

Getting the truth out of a doomsday cult that bans the books of skeptics is
like pulling badgers' teeth. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"dean  
United States  
April 13, 2016  
"The coolers of the ’70’s had more data …  
"The fact that you keep repeating the lie that science in the 70s was all
about “cooling” reinforces the fact that you are simply a congenital liar with
no intention of making a serious discussion."

Dean's head is in an unflushed toilet blowing bubbles. He might try reading
the articles from PopTech's list and see how many cooling skeptics he can find
there or anywhere else. Go ahead you moron, put together a sourced list of
global warming warners from the '70s. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Let's see what the literature says, AGF:  
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/2008BAMS2370.1

Not that this scientific evidence will change your opinion - your 'sanity'
seems to depend on never accepting facts that contradict your opinion - but
lurkers may be interested to know the facts.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> showing 0.8C cooling between 1938 and 1972

Stupid dumb clown. Nothing but a brain dead pair of cherry-picks. Absolutely
zilch about the claimed accuracy of that graph either. Regardless of your
stupid dumb claim, that graph and any other graph does not show any
significant change, cooling or warming since the 1950s (1956 to be precise)
until the 1970s, as I stated above.

agf:

> This is another CO lie.

Arrogant and ignorant clown. Bryson 2007:

"Of course it’s going up. It has gone up since the early 1800s, before the
Industrial Revolution, because we’re coming out of the Little Ice Age, **NOT
BECAUSE WE'RE PUTTING MORE CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE AIR**."

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 13 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1500GMT  
Marco cites Peterson, Connolley and Fleck's childish contrivance. Let's take a
look:  
1) Their chart has Bryson and Dittberner in both the cool and neutral columns
just a year apart.  
2) It has Schneider in the cool and warm columns 3 years apart.  
3) It has Idso in the warm column.  
4) Bryson, for one, published about a dozen articles per year. His output
alone would overwhelm the sparse scattering of papers presented by PCF.  
5) "Warmers" like Mitchell could say (in 1977): "This invites an alternative
view of the comparative warmth of the 20th century, as being not a recovery
from the Little Ice Age but perhaps only an interruption of it" ("The Changing
Climate," p.58).

Budyko was the exception, but he did provide a graph:  
http://s90.photobucket.com/user/dhm1353/media/Climate%20Change/budyko_1…  
...showing once again what a lying fool is C O'Neill. This perfect retard sees
no difference between, "Of course it’s going up. It has gone up since the
early 1800s, before the Industrial Revolution, because we’re coming out of the
Little Ice Age, NOT BECAUSE WE’RE PUTTING MORE CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE AIR," and
" it was impossible for humans to cause global warming through CO2 emissions."

The evidence from melting glaciers leave no room for doubt that a major
portion of current warming is due to LIA recovery: the receding glaciers
continue to reveal logs from the MWP that were buried by advancing glaciers.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

More D'oh! from AG. There is no 'recovery' in physics. You have forcings and
they determine the earth's energy budget. We don't 'recover' from ice ages -
little or otherwise. The forcings change and the earth responds. Jesus, what a
nitwit.

AG has gone the full-denier of science again. It is a well-established fact
that CO2 and other GHGs warm the earth. Scientists figured this out using pen
and paper (not even an abacus!!) between 100 and 200 years ago.

AG should write his treatise on the (lack) of radiative transfer properties of
GHGs and his explanation of physics. A Nobel prize awaits.

LOL from here to eternity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Kevin O'Neill repeatedly insists on proving he's as stupid as his namesake.
Take up your mindless semantics with Mitchell, you moron. He's the one who
said, " This invites an alternative view of the comparative warmth of the 20th
century, as being not a recovery from the Little Ice Age but perhaps only an
interruption of it."

And if it's all about forcings, you idiot, tell us what forced the LIA (or
unforced it). My hell what a collection of imbecilic trolls hang out here.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> NOT BECAUSE WE’RE PUTTING MORE CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE AIR,” and ” it was
impossible for humans to cause global warming through CO2 emissions.”

You brain dead moron. If global warming is "NOT BECAUSE WE’RE PUTTING MORE
CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE AIR" when we're putting it in the air then our CO2 is
not causing causing global warming i.e. it is not possible for our CO2 to be
causing global warming.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> 1) Their chart has Bryson and Dittberner in both the cool and neutral
columns just a year apart.

We're all agreed that Bryson was a crackpot so nothing surprising about his
inconsistency.

> 2) It has Schneider in the cool and warm columns 3 years apart.

i.e. the first being "the most misinterpreted and mis-used paper in the story
of global cooling". It was "the first foray into climate science for
Schneider". "Rasool and Schneider were trying to extend the newly developed
tool of climate modeling to include the effects of aerosols, in an attempt to
sort out two potentially conflicting trends— the warming brought about by
increasing carbon dioxide and the cooling potential of aerosols emitted into
the Earth’s atmosphere by industrial activity."

"An INCREASE BY A FACTOR OF 4 in global aerosol concentrations, could be
enough to trigger an ice age (Rasool and Schneider 1971)." i.e. Rasool and
Schneider's prediction was CONDITIONAL on a FACTOR OF 4 INCREASE in global
aerosol concentrations. As I pointed out earlier, brain dead and dishonest
global warming denialists like afg **ALWAYS** forget to mention this condition
that Schneider stated. Such denialists are nothing but dishonest scum.

> 3) It has Idso in the warm column.

Idso's a crackpot so who knows what he's capable of.

> 4) Bryson, for one, published about a dozen articles per year. His output
alone would overwhelm the sparse scattering of papers presented by PCF.

No-one disagrees that crackpots, including ones we agree on like Bryson, can
be very prolific.

> 5) “Warmers” like Mitchell could say (in 1977): “This invites an alternative
view of the comparative warmth of the 20th century, as being not a recovery
from the Little Ice Age but perhaps only an interruption of it” (“The Changing
Climate,” p.58).

It must have taken the global warming denialist industry a while to find that
quotation out-of-context. Mitchell went on to say:

> Beyond such vague statements as these, disturbingly little can be said about
the probable course of natural climate in the decades and centuries ahead.
Moreover, a number of man’s activities are being ingested by the climate
system, adding further uncertainty to an already uncertain future of climate.
The need for better understanding of the climate system, in all its aspects,
is a clear and present one.

Mitchell was clearly hypothesising above, and he went on to point out the
great uncertainty that existed at the time. Global warming denialists like agf
are too dumb to understand that scientific uncertainty is not set in stone and
can be reduced as time goes by. Just because there were very large
uncertainties in climate science in the 1960s and 1970s does not in any way,
shape or form mean that we have a similar level of uncertainty now, especially
about the long term global temperature trend.

> Budyko was the exception

No, Budyko was the rule, i.e. most climate scientists in the 70s were
expecting a global warming trend. Your crackpot friend Bryson was the
exception. And BTW, Budyko's graph does not contradict my point about no
significant hemispheric or global cooling since 1956. The statistically
significant global cooling occurred before and up to 1956. Significant cooling
died in 1956. R.I.P. statistically significant global cooling 1956.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

This isn't even funny anymore. C O'N has now invalidated PCF because the
papers were written by quacks. And Schneider wasn't a true cooler because his
scenarios were unrealistic.

There comes a time when you have to call it quits. C O'N can throw out
bullshit faster than I can clean it up. Anyone who can't see through it, well,
you're destined to remain a doomsday cult fanatic. If I were to demand of this
particular doomsday cultist a few examples of predictors of global warming
from the 70s--not of possibilities but prognoses of dangerous warming--he
would just ignore it and blow more smoke. And listen up any seekers of truth:
this is the norm; this has been the modus operandi from top to bottom for 30
years now. They have to ban the dangerous websites to keep their deluded
fanatics deluded. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> what forced the LIA

That would be the moderate amount of orbital forcing over the past 1,000
years: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orbital_forcing

agf is as ignorant as they come. Arrogant in spite of that too.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 14 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - either GHGs have (well established) forcing properties or they don't.
Which is it? You claim they don't - contravening two centuries of scientific
study. That's the little nuthouse you live in.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1600GMT  
C O'Neill: "That would be the moderate amount of orbital forcing over the past
1,000 years."  
Sure. Find a single authority that agrees with you.  
Problems:  
1) How many W/m^2 has insolation been reduced in the last thousand years at
what critical latitude?  
2) With orbital forcing the southern hemisphere receives more insolation while
the north receives less. Yet the LIA was global, not northern.  
3) What caused the warmth before and after the LIA?  
4) What about TSI?  
5) What about North American depopulation?  
Arrogance? Yup.

K O'Neill: Straw man. Salby is an outlier, criticized by Singer here:
http://www.americanthinker.com/articles/2012/02/climate_deniers_are_giv…

Where do you get the silly notion that skeptics uniformly deny your sacred
physics? The alarm is not based on primary forcing; it's based on hypothetical
feedbacks.

But the primary forcing should be seen empircally in the lower troposphere,
which is another reason UAH is critical. If UAH don't measure it, it aint
happening. Moreover we expect divergence between surface T and TLT, and all we
see is convergence, apparently due to repeated adjustments.

"Nuthouse," says the doomsday cultist who approves the banning of books of the
free thinkers. And who must be educated from scratch. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Marco cites Peterson, Connolley and Fleck’s childish contrivance. Let’s take
a look:"

Ah, the dismissal because the result is not to AGF's liking.

" 1) Their chart has Bryson and Dittberner in both the cool and neutral
columns just a year apart."

That's what happens if they say something different just one year apart.

" 2) It has Schneider in the cool and warm columns 3 years apart."

Ibid.

" 3) It has Idso in the warm column."

That's because Idso actually predicted warming.

" 4) Bryson, for one, published about a dozen articles per year. His output
alone would overwhelm the sparse scattering of papers presented by PCF."

Well then, go ahead, cite those papers of Bryson in the investigated time
period in which he predicted cooling. It must be easy if he published about a
dozen a year. There is a good reason you will not find many papers: Bryson did
a lot of work on paleoclimate and _not_ on future climate.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> This isn’t even funny anymore.

You were never very funny. Mainly just stupid.

> C O’N has now invalidated PCF because the papers were written by quacks.

Where did I say the papers were written by quacks (apart from Bryson and
Idso)? You're just making shit up as usual.

> Schneider wasn’t a true cooler

No shit Sherlock. But that doesn't stop some science denialists from
pretending that Schneider was a 70’s scientist "predicting the next ice age".

> faster than I

Take your time. If you weren't so interested in making speedy responses then
they might not have so much crap in them.

> Anyone who can’t see through it

Just a pity you can't actually argue it.

> If I were to demand a few examples of predictors of global warming from the
70s–not of possibilities but prognoses of dangerous warming

You're funny. The only substance we ever got from you clowns were predictions
from the 70s of the **CONDITIONAL** possibility of global cooling but now that
you no longer deny that's all you've got, you move the goalposts onto
demanding predictions from the 70s of dangerous warming. Sorry but I'm not
going to take your bait. Your claims of scientists "from the 70’s
(unconditionally) predicting the next ice age" have been shown to be a
completely dishonest sham and there is no point in trying to move on until
denialists have disowned this dishonest sham. Have you disowned the dishonest
sham of scientists "from the 70’s (unconditionally) predicting the next ice
age" yet?

Until you do you can get lost.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> the moderate amount of orbital forcing over the past 1,000 years.”  
>  Sure. Find a single authority that agrees with you

It's just amazing. These science denialists like to say "it's the Sun" when it
suits them but then when circumstances change they turn around and say "find a
single authority" that says it's the Sun.

You just can't make up self-contradiction like this.

Anyway, Imbrie stated a cooling trend from the Milankovitch cycles that
started 6,000 years ago: http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980Sci...207..943I

The wikipedia article on Milankovitch cycles also has other citations e.g.
"Recent Warming Reverses Long-Term Arctic Cooling" by Kaufman et al.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0330GMT  
C O'N: "Anyway, Imbrie stated a cooling trend from the Milankovitch cycles
that started 6,000 years ago"  
Yet the LIA followed the MWP and was followed by early 20th century warming.
So what do you think you've explained, you moron? Of such intellect are the
doomsday cultists.

And Marco is no better. Marco, pinhead, Bryson didn't change from warmer to
cooler and back to warmer from year to year. You show that they did--I'm not
stupid enough to believe such nonsense. And neither are PCF: they're just a
bunch of liars who figured they could say anything and get away with it, with
gullible doomsday cultists like you to eat it up. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 15 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG the Denier writes; " The alarm is not based on primary forcing; it’s based
on hypothetical feedbacks."

Wrong. The _physics_ is based on primary forcing _and_ associated feedbacks.
There, fixed that for you.

So, you accept the forcings of CO2, a GHG, but deny the forcings of water
vapor, a GHG. ?!?

Meanwhile, the globe warms, all denier memes lose traction, and the beat goes
on. Cooling anyday now. Really, anyday.

Much like the screams of hyperinflation, skyrocketing interest rates, dollar
debasement, and job destruction from the ACA or stimulus package. Always
wrong. Always on the wrong side of history.

Economic reality deniers and climate change deniers are two peas in a pod.
Very small, not very bright peas.

It's the sun! It's cosmic rays! It's the wind! It's anything but CO2.

AG - if it ain't CO2, then what is the primary forcing causing 2015/2016
temperatures to be so much higher than the 97/98 El Nino?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Yet the LIA followed the MWP and was followed by early 20th century warming.

Stupid, I told you the type of forcing that could have led to the LIA. Yet
again you move the goalposts and ask about something else. I'll pander to you
this time because you are so incredibly stupid. GHG forcing didn't become
sufficient to cause statistically significant global warming until at least
the 21 year period 1917-1938. (1917 was a cold year.) So you can go to hell
with your stupidity on this subject now.

> Bryson didn’t change from warmer to cooler and back to warmer from year to
year.

Amazing. You defend your agreed crackpot. A consequence of your stupidity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> It’s the sun!

Or in the case of the LIA, it's not the sun!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Marco, pinhead, Bryson didn’t change from warmer to cooler and back to warmer
from year to year."

He changed his views in the articles in that period. It's that simple. You can
read the papers yourself. Of course, it is much easier for you to just dismiss
it, because your poor ideology cannot handle facts that are contrary to your
ideology.

The fact is that _you_ are the one that is a pinhead, and _you_ think you can
just get away with lying.

This is you, AGF:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qJh6EQ5gv7g  
"rest assured, Hy Brasil is not sinking"

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

That's it... AG the Denier is really just a comic actor. Come here to
practice, that's all.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0600GMT  
K O'Neill: "So, you accept the forcings of CO2, a GHG, but deny the forcings
of water vapor, a GHG. ?!?"

Of course I never said anything remotely similar, but straw men and lies are
the best he can babble. O'Niell you indescribably retarded idiot, if water
vapor or clouds provided any feedback like the doomsayers predicted, why do
97% of the models run hot? And I repeat, you fool, I never said CO2 doesn't do
anything. That's just a mindless doomsday dogma, held by religious fanatics. I
said, most skeptics allow for primary GHG forcing. NOBODY agrees on any figure
for ECS. Do you understand the significance of that, you fool? Your camp has
never agreed on how much feedback GHG's should produce. Why else do you think
the models are all over the place, you idiot?

The other O'Neill persists in even greater stupidity (if that were possible),
claiming I moved the goal posts. I asked what forced the LIA, K O says orbital
cycles, which is what Bryson and Kukla and the rest of the coolers said, and
what Mitchell allowed for. If that were true we would certainly be due for
another LIA or big one in short order, but there is no danger of KO's head
exploding--he's far to stupid to recognize his own tail. Hey idiot--what
caused the MWP? You have to be able to answer that before you can answer the
other question. You're absolutely hopeless.

One idiot to go--Marco: "He changed his views in the articles in that period.
It’s that simple."

No commentary necessary. Fools are never aware that they are fools. Even so I
might engage in a little civility if I were not dealing with perpetual liars
who don't know the meaning of the word. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"AG the Denier is really just a comic actor."

I wonder how likely it is he is an engineer. More than a few times we've had
instances where the limited knowledge of science fails to muzzle the stupid
and flat-out wrong stuff they've said.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

If so, the odds are that he's an electrical engineer. They seem to be the most
avid at biting off the hand that's fed them their careers. Quite hypocritical,
and somewhat astonishing.

What is it about EE's that the field attracts so many hugely insecure types?

There is another explanation, suggested by Og himself: "Fools are never aware
that they are fools." I think he's trying to self-diagnose as an advanced case
of pernicious Dunning-Kruger disease.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> I never said CO2 doesn’t do anything. That’s just a mindless doomsday dogma

How would CO2 not doing anything cause a doomsday? Surely if increasing it
does not cause it to get any warmer than it is now then there would be no
doomsday. You are seriously illogical.

> I asked what forced the LIA, K O says orbital cycles

It was me who pointed out orbital forcing. You have a memory problem too as
well as a logic problem. You really are all-round stupid.

> If that were true we would certainly be due for another LIA or big one in
short order

Certainty is a symptom of stupidity. agf is too stupid to consider that CO2
forcing can change faster than orbital forcing.

I still haven't seen agf disown the dishonest sham of scientists “from the
70’s (unconditionally) predicting the next ice age” yet, even though he
chooses not to get lost.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 16 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"No commentary necessary."

And yet you give commentary _without even having read the articles in
question_. This is typical of people like you: you are so afraid that the
facts contradict you, that you have no option but to make stuff up, such that
it soothes your mind and you can retain your preferred delusions.

I also would like to note for lurkers that AGF completely ignored my challenge
to find all those scientific papers by Bryson that predict cooling, even
though it should be so easy if AGF is right. After all, AGF claims Bryson
published a dozen a year in the period in question, and that those should be
enough to dismiss the results in the paper I cited.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Certainty is a symptom of stupidity. It's also a key characteristic of
Dunning-Kruger Syndrome.

"The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so
certain of themselves, and wiser people so full of doubts."  
-- Bertrand Russell

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@253. A G Foster :

> And another load of BS: StevoR - April 5, 2016

>

> Asimov took the threat of cooling seriously, as reported here:  
>  https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=TP1jAAAAIBAJ&sjid=LvkDAAAAIBAJ&pg…

Actually no.. That;s not Isaac Asimov that's the editor of the Spokane Daily
Chronicle misrepresenting Asimov's book and overlooking the fact that Asimov
was NOT in fact predicting global cooling but quite the reverse. The book also
covered a lot of other things with only a passing reference to possible ice
ages and possible solutions rather than saying it was anything truly likely.

I've already referred you to Isaac Asimov's own words on this issue here in
1977 but, once again, watch :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iz1g55H6XgA

& in 1989 here :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AEPhf0SHQEk

What part of what Isaac Asimov said in those clips and others do you not
understand exactly?

I also refer you again to the actual quotes from the book itself noted in my
comment # 219.

Furthermore, I'll add - looking at the actual text - that Asimov has a
footnote at the bottom of page 311 which reads :

> To be sure, the greenhouse effect is countered by the fact that industrial
activity is also putting more dust into the air. This causes the atmosphere to
reflect more sunlight back into space than it ordinarily would, and this would
tend to cool the Earth. Indeed, we have had some unusually cold winters in the
1970's. In the end though, the warming effect of the carbon dioxide is sure to
win the race - especially if we take measures to clean up the atmosphere when
its pollution reaches dangerous levels.

(Emphasis added.)

Source : Pages 311, ‘A Choice of Catastrophes : The disasters that threaten
our world', Isaac Asimov, Hutchinson & co, 1979.

Asimov was, as we now know correct and farsighted here in accurately
explaining both the phenomenon of global dimming and global warming and
predicting that the later would indeed win out over the former.

> Getting the truth out of a doomsday cult that bans the books of skeptics is
like pulling badgers’ teeth. –AGF

What do you know of pulling out badgers teeth? What a weird metaphor you make
& whatever have badgers ever done to you (or you them) I wonder?

And who here has called for books to be banned?

Not giving another online platform to promote Denier disinformation and
websites is another thing altogether.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@279. Marco :

> I also would like to note for lurkers that AGF completely ignored my
challenge to find all those scientific papers by Bryson that predict cooling,
even though it should be so easy if AGF is right. After all, AGF claims Bryson
published a dozen a year in the period in question, and that those should be
enough to dismiss the results in the paper I cited.

Yes indeed - and there's a lot of other challenge sand facts that AGF keeps
ignoring too.

Come on Foster, how about actually addressing the challenge Marco raised there
and the challenge pose din #270 by Kevin O'Neill :

          1. So, you accept the forcings of CO2, a GHG, but deny the forcings of water vapor, a GHG. ?!?

&

          1. AG – if it ain’t CO2, then what is the primary forcing causing 2015/2016 temperatures to be so much higher than the 97/98 El Nino? 

Plus

          1. Have you disowned the dishonest sham of scientists “from the 70’s (unconditionally) predicting the next ice age” yet? 

From #267 Chris O'Neill.

Among other things.

Badger got your tongue /typing fingers now AGF?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

PS. From the Spokane daily Chronicle editorial linked in #253 by AGF and
included in the quote from that in #281 - third paragraph :

> The author claims that a change in the average temperature of only one or
two degrees could trigger the next ice age, but chances are that such a
catastrophy (sic) would not occur for a couple of thousand more years.

Emphasis added.

Additionally, the penultimate paragraph notes :

> .. the author suggest that men in the future may even use giant mirrors,
placed in near space, to reflect sunlight that ordinarily would miss the earth
(sic) onto earth (sic) during the cooling phases and reflect sun rays away
from earth (sic) if ice-melting threatens.

Emphasis added.

(As I understand it, Earth should be capitalised being a proper name and to
distinguish from a synonym for soil.)

Again, this is an editorial which basically misrepresents and over emphasises
one small part of an excellent book speculating on various potential future
catastrophes of many sorts including entropy over astronomical aeons, the heat
death of the cosmos, the (then expected) "big Crunch"idea, black holes
destroying or disrupting our solar system and planet, the chances of our Sun
colliding with another star, asteroid and comet impacts and changes, etc ..
from a scientific perspective.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0330GMT

Still searching for intelligent life. StevoR quotes Kevin O'Neill saying: "1.
So, you accept the forcings of CO2, a GHG, but deny the forcings of water
vapor, a GHG. ?!?"

I repeat, idiot, I never said any such thing. If you don't believe me try to
find where I said such a thing as the pinhead Kevin claims I said. How can you
be so stupid?

So if you can't even get that right why should I take your word over the
Spokane editor who reports Asimov took the cooling threat just as seriously as
he took the warming threat in his book, " A Choice of Catastrophes – The
Disasters That Threaten Our World"?

As for PCF, I must speak as to children. The issue is alarmism. PopTech
addresses this issue admirably. PCF barely touches it. Alarm is part and
parcel of the press, not of scientific papers. Accordingly PCF intentionally
confuse parameters to make a case that there was no cooling alarm in the 70s.

How does Idso end up in the warmers' column? By publishing to the effect that
aerosols can't explain present cooling (like Mitchell). He thought aerosols
would combine with CO2 to warm the air. For PCF that merits a warm ranking,
when in fact Idso's position on pollution left the cooling period unexplained:
neither CO2 nor aerosols were sufficient to stop the cooling, and pollution
control couldn't help. At least Bryson had a solution: stop polluting. Idso
and Mitchell had none. And according to a later historian: "While Mitchell
continued to insist that humanity was 'an innocent bystander' in the cooling
of the past quarter-century, in 1971 he calculated that our emissions might
begin to cause substantial cooling after the end of the  
century" (p.8, notes 3, 5: https://www.aip.org/history/climate/pdf/Aerosol.pdf
--this paper doesn't make it into PCF) .

Returning to the pedagogy, a sampling which can at any time portray Bryson as
a warmer is a farce, pure and simple. This does not have to be explained to
intelligent people. When the radical cooler Bryson shows up in a neutral
column, a capable thinker naturally asks, what gives? Did Bryson go on a
forced sabbatical? Was he made to recant while muttering under his breath, but
it's really cooling? Did he find some flaw in his earlier calculations which
he later resolved? I leave it to you idiots to explain it. Thinkers have
better things to do. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - who wrote "“Of course it’s going up. It has gone up since the early
1800s, before the Industrial Revolution, because we’re coming out of the
Little Ice Age, NOT BECAUSE WE’RE PUTTING MORE CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE AIR,”

Hmm ... seems like a denial of the radiative transfer properties of GHGs to
me.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> It has gone up since the early 1800s, before the Industrial Revolution

You're just making shit up as usual. The industrial revolution was starting in
a lot of countries in the early 1800s (even before 1800 in Great Britain).
Also, there was zero trend in global temperature from 1850 to 1910, let alone
anything statistically significant. So even with the early CO2 emissions to
help, "coming out of the Little Ice Age" was producing **ZERO** global warming
over that period.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> It has gone up since the early 1800s, before the Industrial Revolution

Actually, that quote originally came from Bryson. Sadly, although probably not
surprisingly, Bryson was not beyond making things up.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 17 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> a sampling which can at any time portray Bryson as a warmer

Unless you can show where in PCF Bryson was portrayed as a "warmer", I will
know yet again that you are making shit up.

> Bryson shows up in a neutral column

Here is the first page of Bryson's piece from 1974. People can make up their
own mind about what Bryson was saying but I can't see anything in that about
any prediction for the future.

In any case, who cares if you put everything Bryson wrote in the coolers'
column? It might inflate the number of "scientific" papers in "support" of
cooling "predictions" but that just means that the cooling "prediction" papers
column is heavily populated by papers from someone who everyone agrees was a
crackpot. This is hardly supportive of the notion of a "scientific consensus"
of a cooling prediction. Just means the cooling prediction was the prediction
of an agreed crackpot.

> How does Idso end up in the warmers’ column?

Pretty easy to find the answer to that question (unless you're stupid like
agf). Just look up the paper's abstract:

"Thus, anthropogenically produced tropospheric aerosols cannot be looked on as
offsetting the warming tendency of increased carbon dioxide: their concurrent
buildups must inexorably tend to warm the planet's surface."

So it's pretty easy to answer agf's question, unless you're stupid like agf of
course.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 18 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@284. A G Foster :

> Still searching for intelligent life. StevoR quotes Kevin O’Neill saying:
“1. So, you accept the forcings of CO2, a GHG, but deny the forcings of water
vapor, a GHG. ?!?”

>

> I repeat, idiot, I never said any such thing.

So do you accept the forcings of carbon dioxide and not deny the forcing -
feedback actually - of water vapour?

Was that a "yes" or 'no"then?

Still seeking intelligence from you, dude.

Also what;s your answer to the other two questions I asked you in comment #282
- and what do you have against badgers anyhow?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 18 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0625GMT

Both O'Neill's persist in attributing to me a quote that C O'Neill introduced
and attributed to Bryson at #256. And StevoR attributes a quote to me which K
O'Neill invented at #270. So far everyone who's engaged me in discussion has
proved a liar. Even when C O'Neill quotes me correctly he ignores the context:
"Returning to the pedagogy, a sampling which can at any time portray Bryson as
a warmer is a farce, pure and simple. This does not have to be explained to
intelligent people. When the radical cooler Bryson shows up in a neutral
column, a capable thinker naturally asks, what gives?"

Calling Bryson a "warmer" would be hypothetical; showing up in a "neutral
column" would be factual. And any who look at CO's link will see that the
"neutral" classification is more than stretched: it's typical PCF bullshit.

And StevoR demands some kind of confession from KO's invention! Could it get
any stupider? What a waste of time arguing with such an unparalleled
collection of lying jackasses.

There were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson. There were NO warming
alarmists in the 70s--only a few non-alarmist warmers like Budyko. The cold
scare of the '70s was precisely analogous to the warm scare of the present and
none of the deniers' denials can make the old cold scare go away, no matter
how much they lie. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 18 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> O’Neill’s persist in attributing to me a quote that C O’Neill introduced and
attributed to Bryson at #256

No I **DON'T**. I pointed out immediately afterwards:

"Actually, that quote originally came from Bryson. Sadly, although probably
not surprisingly, Bryson was not beyond making things up."

Along with your other incompetencies, you also have a persistent reading
problem.

Also, I don't directly attribute it to Bryson. I cited Wisconsin Energy
Cooperative News who attribute it to Bryson.

> everyone who’s engaged me in discussion has proved a liar

People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.

> Calling Bryson a “warmer” would be hypothetical

So your hypothesis that Bryson was a "warmer" is a farce. I don't think anyone
disagrees that your statements are a farce.

> And any who look at CO’s link will see that the “neutral” classification is
more than stretched

All you had to do was point out the words that Bryson used for a cooling
prediction. The fact that you didn't means he probably didn't put one in that
article. But what do I care? You can put every last damned paper by Bryson in
the cooling column if you want. We agree that he's a crackpot so his cooling
predictions don't mean jack shit. But that didn't stop newspapers from using
him as a "scientist predicting global cooling".

> There were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson.

You're a compulsive liar agf. Apart from crackpot Bryson, you have identified
exactly **ZERO** climate scientists who **UNCONDITIONALLY** predicted cooling.

> There were NO warming alarmists in the 70s

You're such a compulsive liar agf. Bolin 1976:

“The growing disturbance of the global balance of carbon dioxide is without
doubt mankind’s **GREATEST SINGLE IMPACT** on the environment”****

> non-alarmist warmers like Budyko

WTF is a "non-alarmist" warmer?

BTW, thanks for acknowledging my answer to your question about how Idso ended
up in the warmers’ column. Pity you're not capable of answering your own
questions.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 18 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - I didn't attribute the quote to you, I started it with "AG – who wrote
..."

It was a question. You, unfortunately, never clearly attributed the quote. I
couldn't tell if they were your words or Brysons's. But the fact remains, you
used the quote to support your argument. Generally one uses information one
_agrees_ with to support one's arguments - otherwise one is arguing in bad
faith.

Now, if you disagree with Bryson on CO2 and the radiative properties of GHGs
it's very easy to clear things up by saying so. Of course you
haven't/can't/won't do so.

Thanks for playing.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1600GMT  
Pulling a leg out of coolist alarm does not make Idso a warmer; it makes him a
realist. The alarmists don't care much whether it's warming or cooling. They
just want to sound alarm bells: we're doomed, we're doomed, and it's all our
fault. Here are some simultaneous parameters:  
1) Warmer/cooler  
2) Alarmist vs. agnostic  
3) Modeler vs. observer  
The alarmists of either stripe tend to be modelers while the agnostics are
observers, epitomized by Bryson's partner and rival, Verner E. Suomi, a
pioneer in satellite weather data. Idso, Lindzen, and Landsberg, among others,
were cautious and critical of the doomsayers, as Idso and Lindzen continue to
be.

A more rational appraisal than PCF would take to task doomsayers of any
stripe, and not pick and choose criteria for the moment which ultimately have
little to do with the study of science induced hysteria. For example, if an
Idso paper is rated (uncharacteristically) warmist for downplaying the effect
of aerosols, then a Budyko paper which accepts the cooling effect of aerosols,
together with a high sensitivity of ice ages to minimal temperature changes
(Budyko 68), should be listed in the warm column:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2153-3490.1969.tb00466.x/p…  
By the same token when North, or Lindzen and Farrell take issue with the
overly sensitive and ice prone models of Budyko and Sellers, they should be
classed with the skeptical Idso, when of course Lindzen and Idso we really
skeptical of climate instability generally.

So we see again the farce that is PCF: as political advocacy it is useless to
the history of science. Its intention is purely to obfuscate, to neutralize
the rhetorically useful analogy of the cold scare to the warm scare. It is the
forerunner to the junk science of Cook and Lewandowsky which the modern
alarmists so gullibly advertise. It fails to provide or adhere to any logical
criteria or definitions; it merely goes through the motions--sufficient to
brainwash the masses.

Even Mercer was nothing of the radical warmist that Hansen is. The IPCC could
swallow Mercer; Hansen's doom gets short shrift. As do his solutions. So I
repeat, it matters little whether we sucker for the likes of PCF if nobody
takes Hansen's solutions seriously. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1610GMT  
Crap. I meant to say, " then a Budyko paper which accepts the cooling effect
of aerosols, together with a high sensitivity of ice ages to minimal
temperature changes (Budyko 68), should be listed in the COLD column."

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

KO: "Now, if you disagree with Bryson on CO2 and the radiative properties of
GHGs it’s very easy to clear things up by saying so. Of course you
haven’t/can’t/won’t do so."

KO, you don't even know what Bryson's views were. You are not capable of
posing a question worth addressing. None of you are. Nobody agrees on ECS.
Nobody knows what fraction of modern warming is natural LIA recovery or GHG
induced. Most skeptics would attach a non-negative value to it, as would
Bryson. You're a waste of time. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf falls back on the creationist action when caught repeatedly in lies and
misrepresentations: "you just don't understand reality"

It's pretty fair to say this moron has been bested.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By dean (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1715GMT  
Does anyone have a clue what "dean" is talking about?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Nobody knows what fraction of modern warming is natural LIA recovery or GHG
induced."

AGF: The gift that keeps on giving.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG - completely ignores the point that he was quoting someone (? Bryson) in
support of his denier argument. Now, AG, were you arguing in bad faith by
quoting a statement you disagree with or are you a CO2/GHG denier?

Thanks for playing.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

P.S. - it should be noted that the Bryson quote AG used has ALL CAPS that were
not in the original.

Hmmm ... one might infer that AG was trying to emphasize his CO2 is not
warming the planet denier views - but of course we'll never know since he
refuses to actually state his position.

A reasonable person will of course remember that if it looks like a denier,
walks like a denier, sounds like a denier - it's probably AG ... er, a denier
:)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Kevin O'Neill (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> does not make Idso a warmer

Stupid moron. The PCF list was not a list of people it was a list of papers
and what those papers said.

> then a Budyko paper which accepts the cooling effect of aerosols, together
with a high sensitivity of ice ages to minimal temperature changes (Budyko
68), should be listed in the cold column

Aside from Budyko 68 probably stating the **CONDITIONAL** effect of aerosols,
it was from 1968. Last time I checked, 1968 was not in the 1970s which is what
the PCF list is about. Amazing the crap that agf tries to make into an
argument.

> North, or Lindzen and Farrell should be classed with

Stupid clown. The list was about papers, not people. I guess when you have
your lies pointed out, e.g.

> > There were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson.

>

> You’re a compulsive liar agf. Apart from crackpot Bryson, you have
identified exactly ZERO climate scientists who UNCONDITIONALLY predicted
cooling.

>

>> There were NO warming alarmists in the 70s

>

> You’re such a compulsive liar agf. Bolin 1976:

>

> “The growing disturbance of the global balance of carbon dioxide is without
doubt mankind’s GREATEST SINGLE IMPACT on the environment”

then the only thing you're capable of is trying to hide your lies with a
smokescreen of non-sequiturs. You're pathetic.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0240GMT  
There are two kinds of people here, those who drool out of the left side of
their mouth and those who drool out the right. I just don't see anyone or
anything worth responding to. I'm swimming in slobber. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@291. A G Foster : You still haven't really answered that question regardless
of who the quote was from.

As #293 Kevin O'Neill correctly noted.

You also have failed to answer the second question from #282 :

>           1. AG – if it ain’t CO2, then what is the primary forcing causing
2015/2016 temperatures to be so much higher than the 97/98 El Nino?

Please do so.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Meanwhile in related news from reality :

> Last month marked the hottest March in modern history and the 11th
consecutive month in which a monthly global temperature record has been
broken, US officials say. Officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) said that the string of record-setting months is the
longest in its 137 years of record-keeping. ... (snip) .. Planet-wide, the
average temperature was 1.22 degrees Celsius above the 20th century average of
12.7C, NOAA's report said.

>

> "This surpassed the previous record set in 2015 by 0.58F (0.32C), and marks
the highest monthly temperature departure among all 1,635 months on record."

Source : http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-20/hottest-march-in-modern-
times/734…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 19 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1350GMT  
StevoR:  
What on earth would make you ask whether I or Bryson or any other CACC skeptic
doubts the GHG effect of water vapor? It overwhelms CO2, as the realists have
been saying for decades, and there is very little CO2 IR bandwidth not covered
by water vapor. Water vapor and cloud feedback have always been the great
unknowns which the alarmists assumed to be positive and significant, but which
time has shown to be fairly insignificant.

As for the T rise in this Niño year SAT measured TLT is the highest measured--
over its short history. But when NOAA depicted the radiosonde record to prove
it, it left the first 20 years off the graph (google "Real Science" + "noaa-
radiosonde-data-shows-no-warming-for-58-years/"). 1959 was warmer than 2015.
1943 was not doubt hotter still.

Why does NOAA do that? It's no different from NASA GISS, which was run for
years by James Hansen. Hansen and Obama have done to NASA and NOAA what Obama
has done to DOJ: https://pjmedia.com/blog/every-single-one-since-2009-obamas-
doj-civil-r… (or google: "Every Single One: Since 2009, Obama's DOJ Civil
Rights Division Hired ONLY Leftist Lawyers(Hundreds!) " ). GISSTEMP has been
fiddled with to the point that it is good for warmist propaganda only, as the
Carl et al fiasco proved beyond doubt.

So supposedly unprecedented warming which is not unprecedented according to
radiosondes or unadjusted surface T needs no apology by way of GHG forcing or
LIA recovery or big Niños or PDO or AMO or any other natural cause. ECS to a
CO2 doubling remains unknown.

And many glaciers continue to uncover MWP forests as they melt, in both
hemispheres. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"What on earth would make you ask whether I or Bryson or any other CACC
skeptic doubts...."

Any other what skeptic?

" It overwhelms CO2, as the realists have be...."

The what has been saying?

What language are you writing to write in?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Aside from Budyko 68 probably stating the CONDITIONAL effect of aerosols, it
was from 1968. Last time I checked, 1968 was not in the 1970s which is what
the PCF list is about. Amazing the crap that agf tries to make into an
argument."

Well gosh, it's not as if he had a valid argument; he needs to use an
imaginary one.

The fact of the matter is that the few climatologists who wrote about the
cooling effects of aerosols in the late 1960s and early 1970s all qualified
their cooling projections on the likelihood that humanity would continue to
spew sulfides into the atmosphere unchecked. Most climatologists agreed the
warming effects of CO2 would be much greater than the cooling effects of
SO2---- and gosh, they were 100% correct.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF doesn't know that Tony Heller is either really stupid or really evil. What
he showed for that older radiosonde data is only the 100 mb level _where the
stratosphere contributes significantly to the signal_ and which is far above
the other levels shown by NOAA.

Now, why is that important? Of course, since you are so smart, AGF, you will
know that the stratosphere is expected to cool when the troposphere warms due
to an increased GHG forcing. Oh dear...Tony Heller provides you with data that
_supports AGW_!

When you use radiosonde data for the troposphere you get this:  
https://tamino.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/ratpac850.jpeg

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1645GMT  
Marco: What will you do with the first chart which shows 1/16 as hottest ever
only at 500mb?

Desertphile: The PCF chart starts in 1965. Aerosols were one of several lines
of argument: 1) Insolation was steadily decreasing; 2) The present
interglacial had already outlasted the average; 3) interglacials could end
suddenly; 4) the LIA could be taken as a precursor to the norm. I already
pointed out that Idso and Budyko rejected the efficacy of aerosols. I might
point out that Hansen among many continues to blame the cool decades on
aerosols, in spite of the fact that Asia has probably outmatched the previous
output of the West. I think the consensus was that aerosols could usher in the
next ice age sooner than it would otherwise arrive, just as GHG's might be
expected to delay the next big ice age or LIA. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Moving the goalposts there, AGF?

Come on, just admit it, you were fooled by Tony Heller, you know it, and you
are embarrassed.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1850GMT  
Well Marco, one way to tell would be to extend the surface to 100mb graph to
the present, and show that it's compatible with ratpac850-300 (which it
isn't). Go for it. For the lazy here's where 2015 rates by altitude:  
• Radiosonde data (58 yr record)  
– ~5,000 ft (850mb): 2nd warmest  
– ~10,000 ft (700mb): 3rd warmest  
– ~18,000 ft (500mb): warmest  
– ~30,000 ft (300mb): 2nd warmest  
– ~40,000 ft (200mb): 14th warmest  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/briefings/201601.pdf  
(bottom). So would 2015 top an extension of surface to 100mb? Not very likely.
Something's fishy at NOAA.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 20 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> GISSTEMP has been fiddled

along with HadCRUT4, Berkeley, NOAA, JMA, Karl, etc, etc. They're all part of
the global conspiracy y'know.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"[....] GISSTEMP has been fiddled [....]

V: along with HadCRUT4, Berkeley, NOAA, JMA, Karl, etc, etc. they’re all part
of the global conspiracy y’know

Even the world's birds changed their migration habits to join the conspiracy!
And the world's ice masses are in an it too. Damn them!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Chris O'Neill (not verified)

* * *

agf:

> I already pointed out that Idso rejected the efficacy of aerosols.

A dishonest claim by agf as usual. Because they demonstrate his dishonesty and
contradict his claim of NO warming alarmist (scientists) in the 70s, agf
cannot bring himself to quote Idso's words:

"Thus, anthropogenically produced tropospheric aerosols cannot be looked on as
offsetting the warming tendency of increased carbon dioxide: their concurrent
buildups **MUST INEXORABLY** tend to warm the planet’s surface.”

Idso only rejected the efficacy of aerosols relative to the **INEXORABLE**
warming from carbon dioxide.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> you are embarrassed

Agf doesn't get embarrassed. He's completely shameless.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> one way to tell would be to extend the surface to 100mb graph to the present

Stupid clown. Doesn't even realise that 100mb is usually well into the
Stratosphere.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1400GMT  
CO says: "Thus, anthropogenically produced tropospheric aerosols cannot be
looked on as offsetting the warming tendency of increased carbon dioxide:
their concurrent buildups MUST INEXORABLY tend to warm the planet’s surface."

The poor drooler will never understand the meaning of the words "tend" or
"quantify." Nobody disputes such a statement, least of all Idso at any point
in his career. And yet Idso and son are renowned skeptics. Will that ever
register in CO's brain? Nope. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"And yet Idso and son are renowned skeptics."

No, he is not a skeptic, nor is he "renowned." Idso is a known denier of
observed reality who has denied reality for political gain and economic greed.
See the web page about him here:

http://www.desmogblog.com/craig-idso

(By the way, all well-known scientists are renowned skeptics, Sub-Genius.)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

> He’s completely shameless.

Or he's too socially primitive to accept that his attempts at saving face are
just making him look ridiculous--the core of head in the sand denial.

At this point you're just talking to agf ostrich butt.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Obstreperous A… (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@306.A G Foster :

> StevoR: What on earth would make you ask whether I or Bryson or any other
CACC skeptic doubts the GHG effect of water vapor? ..

Your comments here upthread.

> .. It overwhelms CO2, as the realists have been saying for decades, and
there is very little CO2 IR bandwidth not covered by water vapor. Water vapor
and cloud feedback have always been the great unknowns which the alarmists
assumed to be positive and significant, but which time has shown to be fairly
insignificant.

Oh my FSM seriously ya schmuck? No. See :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAtD9aZYXAs&list=PL029130BFDC78FA33&ind…

From back in 2009 - but entertainingly and memorably explaining an accurate
scientific explanation that goes back much further.

Just how dumb exactly do you think climatologists are, dude? Just how ignorant
of scientific facts and history here are you?

> Why does NOAA do that? It’s no different from NASA GISS, which was run for
years by James Hansen.

Because they're actual climatologists and scientists who know what they are
talking about and doing? Nah, couldn't be could it?

(Do I really need a sarc tag?)

Obama? Pretty sure he had nothing to do with doing any actual science here but
if you know about any peer reviewed paper he's published - as opposed to just
listened to and respected, then please let me know.

> And many glaciers continue to uncover MWP forests as they melt, in both
hemispheres. –AGF

Many glaciers, melting, in both hemispheres. hmm .. now I wonder why that
might be?

(Also citation needed - even just name say five specific examples of such
petrified forests?)

Oh & again, what do you think explains the current global overheating if it
isn't being caused by GHG emissions from Humanity?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@306.A G Foster : StevoR: What on earth would make you ask whether I or Bryson
or any other CACC skeptic doubts the GHG effect of water vapor?

I'm still waiting to learn WTF a "CACC skeptic" is.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by StevoR (not verified)

* * *

V: Oh & again, what do you think explains the current global overheating if it
isn’t being caused by GHG emissions from Humanity?

Anything and everything except human-released greenhouse gases, obviously. You
know: the invisible, never-specified reasons no scientists are aware of but
only deniers of the laws of physics are aware of. Jesus, maybe, or space
aliens, or Sedona Vortexii.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by StevoR (not verified)

* * *

" So would 2015 top an extension of surface to 100mb? Not very likely. "

Of course it would be unlikely, since at 100 mb you are looking at the
stratospheric contribution, which is expected (and shown) to cool when the
troposphere warms due to GHG forcing. Hence also the reason 200 mb is so low
on the list for 2015: stratospheric contamination in the signal.

I explained that to you before, but unexpectedly, this apparently went
straight over your head. After all, it contradicts what you hold as true.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> the meaning of the words “tend”

Talk about brain-dead.

tend: " to usually do a particular thing"

http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/tend

Stick to lying agf. You won't look quite so dumb e.g. this is a good lie:

> There were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1730GMT  
Let me repeat myself:

A G Foster

April 19, 2016  
0240GMT  
There are two kinds of people here, those who drool out of the left side of
their mouth and those who drool out the right. I just don’t see anyone or
anything worth responding to. I’m swimming in slobber. –AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2010GMT

StevoR thinks I'm making up the "petrified" trees (of course they're not
petrified, being only a few centuries old). All the doomsday cultists have to
be educated from scratch. Here are some samples:

Mendenhall Glacier:  
http://juneauempire.com/outdoors/2013-09-13/ancient-trees-emerge-frozen…  
Exit Glacier:  
http://www.nps.gov/kefj/learn/nature/upload/The%20Retreat%20of%20Exit%2…  
Jorge Montt Glacier:  
http://www.clim-past.net/8/403/2012/cp-8-403-2012.pdf  
Bering Glacier (p.ix):  
https://books.google.com/books?id=TlZG658NZYcC&pg=PR9&lpg=PR9&dq=dating…  
Eight glaciers from Prince William Sound (all with forest remnants):  
http://web.cortland.edu/barclayd/publications/1999b_Holocene.pdf  
A collection of Canadian glaciers:  
http://www.uwpcc.washington.edu/documents/PCC/menounos_2009.pdf  
Five Patagonian glaciers:  
http://www.researchgate.net/publication/222560014_Little_Ice_Age_fluctu…  
And Holocene remnants generally (from western Canada), including MWP (Table
2):  
http://www.uwpcc.washington.edu/documents/PCC/menounos_2009.pdf

All these glaciers have uncovered remnants of ancient forests which grew when
the world was much warmer, before the LIA just a few centuries ago. That’s why
glaciologists reject CRU’s temperature reconstructions generally, as far back
as Groves and Switzur 1994:
http://ruby.fgcu.edu/courses/twimberley/EnviroPhilo/Glacial.pdf

…and continuing till the present. –AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

# 2200GMT

Marco

April 21, 2016  
” So would 2015 top an extension of surface to 100mb? Not very likely. ”

Of course it would be unlikely, since at 100 mb you are looking at the
stratospheric contribution, which is expected (and shown) to cool when the
troposphere warms due to GHG forcing. Hence also the reason 200 mb is so low
on the list for 2015: stratospheric contamination in the signal.

I explained that to you before, but unexpectedly, this apparently went
straight over your head. After all, it contradicts what you hold as true.  
==========================  
Poor Marco illustrates once again a total inability to carry on a scientific
discussion. The "surface to 100mb" would refer to an integral of T measurement
from surface to lower stratosphere, and the average would not have 2015 as the
hottest year. All the poor pinhead would have to do is find or create a graph
which extends the other to the present. The concept goes over his head. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"and the average would not have 2015 as the hottest year."

Well, go ahead then, AGF. Provide us with the plot.

But note once again that you are introducing stratospheric interference, and
the stratosphere COOLS when the troposphere WARMS due to GHG forcing. You are
thus making an analysis that makes little sense.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"That’s why glaciologists reject CRU’s temperature reconstructions generally,
as far back as Groves and Switzur 1994:
http://ruby.fgcu.edu/courses/twimberley/EnviroPhilo/Glacial.pdf"

That reference does not support your claim. They even provide examples of
glaciers that in 1987 (30 years ago) had already retreated further than at
anytime during the MWP!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 21 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> The “surface to 100mb” would refer to an integral of T measurement from
surface to lower stratosphere

No shit Sherlock.

As Pauli would say, "not even wrong".

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 22 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@327. A G Foster : Well,it is nice to see links to real science papers from
you - good interesting sources actually.

They don't really show what you think they do though as #330 Marco has
observed.

Note that none of these sources are actually arguing for what you are - i.e.
that their scientific observations refute the climatological consensus in any
way. They use dendrochronology to date glacial advances - and retreats and,
hmm .. Someone else used tree rings for something in an another thorough study
didn't they?Who does that remind me of , some guy ..no, some Mann .. who
established some "hockey stick" graph or other! One of a great many since
confirmed by multiple lines of scientific evidence. Given your acceptance of
the dendrochronology used to date these glaciers pre-LIA here; I'm sure you
accept the dendrochronological based work of that Mann - yeah? ;-)

Yes, there was a Little Ice Age and forests before that in some areas that are
now been returned from melting ice.  
That certainly doesn't refute the current Global Overheating phenomenon
though.

Again, I ask you, if humans (& the known & well established physics of how
GHG's trap infra-red radiation) aren't causing the current rise in global
temperatures then what is?

Please note that Solar activity, Milankovitch astronomical glacial cycles and
a lot of other things have already been considered and eliminated as causative
factors here.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 23 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0010GMT (Apr 23 GMT)  
Reposted 2230GMT

# Marco says: "Well, go ahead then, AGF. Provide us with the plot."

Marco, you're the one who says Heller is cheating by comparing

the two. Let's see you do better. But the critical point

you're missing Is that NOAA has 2015 hottest only at 500mb, not

higher OR LOWER (in altitude)! Which thoroughly contradicts the

RATPAC innovation. The takeaway being Carl has done to

radiosondes what he did to GISSTEMP: revised the history to make

data match theory.

As for your non sequitur from Groves and Switzur, my list

included examples from "Holocene remnants generally (from western

Canada), including MWP (Table 2)":  
http://www.uwpcc.washington.edu/documents/PCC/menounos_2009.pdf  
...showing precisely such glaciers as you refer to. Even now a

small percentage of glaciers in both hemispheres is growing,

generally due to increased precipitation. Not all glaciers grew

enough during the LIA to survive early 20th century warming, and

not all modern glaciers had melted and warmed enough during the

MWP to grow forests. The point to take away (from Groves and

Switzur) being that glaciologists universally accept the LIA

which the Hockey Stick attempted to do away with.

So to remind all lurkers, I've shown the following chasms within

the "settled science":  
1) There is little agreement as to proposed solutions to GHG

warming, e.g., Oreskes vs. Hansen on nuclear power.  
2) There is little agreement on ECS, i.e., how much warming is to

be expected as per models.  
3) Glaciologists never accepted Bradley and Jones 92, 93's

attempt to do away with the LIA (the whole purpose of Groves and

Switzur 94).  
4) Mann (most famous for the Hockey Stick) does not accept Carl

et al's attempt to do away with the pause.

And now it is the same Carl of NOAA who we see trying to revamp

the radiosonde data. The science is hardly settled, and claims

that it is reveal hopeless corruption.  
--AGF

Addendum, 2235GMT  
StevoR  
Using tree rings to establish chronology is a heluva lot different than using
them to determine T. You know, one ring per year, or thereabouts? How do you
think C14 dating got corrected? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 23 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"The takeaway being Carl has done to radiosondes what he did to GISSTEMP:
revised the history to make data match theory."

Amazing how Karl apparently is so all-powerful that he even influences how
NASA does its analysis.

"The point to take away (from Groves and Switzur) being that glaciologists
universally accept the LIA which the Hockey Stick attempted to do away with."

If by "the Hockey Stick" you mean MBH98/99, interesting to see you propose a
new meme: that MBH98/99 tried to get rid of the LIA. It didn't, of course, but
for a conspiracy nutter like yourself (see above), any story that fits your
beliefs will do. Regardless of veracity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 23 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Amazing how Karl apparently is so all-powerful that he even influences how
NASA does its analysis

and Hadley and JMA and Berkeley and ...

It's all part of the worldwide global warming conspiracy y'know.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 23 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Marco (not verified)

* * *

agf:

> the following chasms within

>

> the “settled science”:  
>  1) There is little agreement as to proposed solutions to GHG

>

> warming

Brain-dead moron thinks that a problem doesn't happen if you can't come up
with a solution.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 23 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0030GMT  
"Amazing how Karl apparently is so all-powerful that he even influences how
NASA does its analysis."

How little y'all know. See http://www.nature.com/news/climate-change-hiatus-
disappears-with-new-da…  
NCDC, GISSTEMP and RSS have already adopted Karl's pause busting innovation.
No more need for all those 'the ocean ate my warming' papers.

And "If by “the Hockey Stick” you mean MBH98/99, interesting to see you
propose a new meme: that MBH98/99 tried to get rid of the LIA. It didn’t, of
course..."

Well go to Figure 5b on page 783 and kindly inform us when the LIA starts if
you think it's there:
http://www.meteo.psu.edu/holocene/public_html/shared/articles/mbh98.pdf  
Or better yet, use the HS from BH99:  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:T_comp_61-90.pdf  
...and try to find the LIA there. Next you'll be telling us skeptics invented
the hockey stick. But you dupes are sure good for laughs: I tell you
glaciologists don't buy the hockey stick and your knee jerk response is to
claim the HS includes the LIA. Time to give up.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Hey, AGF, what do you think of the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Project?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tciQts-8Cxo&list=PL029130BFDC78FA33&ind…

&

http://berkeleyearth.org/summary-of-findings/

> StevoR  
>  Using tree rings to establish chronology is a heluva lot different than
using them to determine T. You know, one ring per year, or thereabouts? How do
you think C14 dating got corrected? –AGF

Properly by dendrochronology experts which you are not and peer reviewed.

Doing a bit of cherry-picking :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrxE3uwHECs&list=PL029130BFDC78FA33&ind…

I see - you'll use the science data when you (mistakenly) think it supports
your case and conveniently ignore it when it refutes your arguments. Quelle
surprise!

Oh & you still have';t answered my question :

If humans (& the known & well established physics of how GHG’s trap infra-red
radiation) are _not_ causing the current rise in global temperatures then what
is?

Please note that Solar activity, Milankovitch astronomical glacial cycles,
cosmic rays and a lot of other things have already been considered and
eliminated as causative factors here.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 24 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Project

All part of the great global warming conspiracy.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 24 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I think AGF's hot air is causing the plant to warm uncontrollably.

His self-righteous attitude is a problem that hashappened, and no one's come
up with a solution there.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1510GMT  
StevoR doesn't know the difference between tree ring dating and tree rings as
climate proxies and he still thinks he's smart enough to keep teaching us
about it! StevoR, even you can count tree rings (I think). But the size of the
rings indicates growth rate, which is mainly a function of precipitation.
Trying to tease temperature out of them is something the experts are pretty
leery of, but that certainly didn't slow down the CRU crew. Some at CRU were
appropriately skeptical on the radical nonsense coming out:  
http://www.di2.nu/foia/1062592331.txt  
To repeat such criticism now from outside the inner circle is to be
automatically labeled a denier. The CRU majority admitted in the early '90s
that they had no clear evidence of an anthropogenic signal in the air, and
shortly after came the Pause. So no, there remains NO clinching evidence for
man made warming; as Bryson insisted, we're still coming out of the LIA. The
glaciologists agree. The radical lying climate fanatics have duped the liberal
world, but the skeptics know better.

And you moron, StevoR show me a video about cherry picking?? My hell, the CRU
invented the practice. M Mann is the champion cherry picker of all time. Mann
has been abandoned by the scientific community generally. He is only supported
now by the ignorant and the dishonest. And that characterizes everyone here.
Mark Stein has compiled a book full of scientific disparagement of Mann's
crap: http://www.yalescientific.org/2015/11/book-review-a-disgrace-to-the-pro…

StevoR informs us that Milankovitch cycles have been eliminated as a potential
factor in current warming. Aint that rich? StevoR you know-nothing blabberbox,
the warming is occurring IN SPITE of decreasing insolation. We have to
understand what caused the LIA before we can understand why it ended. It ended
long before CO2 became a factor, but the glaciers continue to catch up to MWP
conditions. Hell, Glacier Bay is still rebounding an inch per year due ice
loss from LIA recovery. Do you know what that means? I won't even try to
explain it to you. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Meanwhile back in reality :

https://climatecrocks.com/2016/04/23/is-a-new-temp-record-already-locke…

Ohh shit. :-(

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

That graph ..

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

And now StevoR mindlessly parrots the propaganda from the newly modified
(Karlized) GISSTEMP. They've fiddled with T history so bad they wouldn't know
a record year from a hole in the ground. UAH shows records, but that's a
pretty short history. Still, as we pull further out of the LIA record years
are to be expected and hoped for. The more distance we put between us and the
LIA the better. The LIA was no fun.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> record years are to be expected

No they're not. They're Karlized.

You've got to keep your shit straight.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Mark Stein has compiled a book full of

defamation.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> How little y’all know. See http://www.nature.com/news/climate-change-hiatus-
disappears-with-new-da…

Indeed. Newspaper journalist Tollefson has to make up this shit:

> That finding, which contradicts the 2013 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

Karl and **every other global surface temperature record** does nothing of the
sort. IPCC 2013 said there are **TEMPORARY** slowdowns in the rate of global
warming and that's exactly what happened in **every global surface temperature
record**.

No need for Tollefson to make up his shit.

> No more need for all those ‘the ocean ate my warming’ papers.

The brain-dead think they have to mean 'the ocean eats global warming
**forever** '. Looks like the brain-dead will never get over the "pause" not
lasting forever.

> I tell you glaciologists don’t buy the hockey stick

Sure ya tell us. And they don't believe this lake exists either:

"In 1973 Tasman Glacier had no terminal lake and by 2008 Tasman Lake was 7
kilometres (4.3 mi) long, 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) wide, and 245 metres (804 ft)
deep."

As I said, stick to lying agf. You won’t look quite so dumb e.g. this is a
good lie:

> There were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> as Bryson insisted, we’re still coming out of the LIA

You have to be pretty brain-dead to cite someone you've agreed is a crackpot.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Glacier Bay is still rebounding an inch per year due ice loss from LIA
recovery

Dumb clown doesn't understand the difference between ground level and surface
air temperature. Most isostatic rebound is from ice age (> 10,000 y ago) ice
removal BTW.

> I won’t even try to explain it

You're not capable of having anything explained to you anyway.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 25 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1400GMT  
Working backwards:  
1) Glacier Bay rebound is blamed entirely on LIA recovery:
http://fairweather.alaska.edu/chris/epsl_larsen.pdf  
2) Tasman Glacier's anomalous behavior is explained by debris insulation
delaying LIA recovery: "THE CONTEMPORARY RETREAT OF TASMAN GLACIER, SOUTHERN
ALPS, NEW ZEALAND, AND THE EVOLUTION OF TASMAN PROGLACIAL LAKE SINCE AD 2000"  
Robert C. Dykes, Martin S. Brook and Stefan Winkler

"Contrary to their western counterparts, the termini of the larger, debris-
covered glaciers of the Aoraki/Mt Cook region, situated on the eastern flank
of the Southern Alps, have shown a pattern of fluctuations less intimately
connected to the regional climate trends over the last century" (p.142).

"The formation of these proglacial lakes has further decoupled these glaciers
from changes in climate, with the transition to calving termini appearing to
over-ride climatic  
inputs" (Ibid., PDF online).

O'Neill's blanket condemnation of Tollefson's piece is most unfortunate for
his dogma, as it reports the demise of the Pause which had been accepted by
the IPCC's 2013 report (9.2). It's not obvious what part of Tollefson's report
O'Neill objects to; he seems motivated only by self justification. He denies
the Pause generally, but he more recently denied that any data sets had
adopted Karl's Pause buster. Therefore he demonizes Tollefson for reporting
that such was indeed the case. And he probably denies that the IPCC ever
accepted the Pause.

It will be interesting to see whether BEST updates its graphs comparing BEST,
NOAA, GISS and HadCRUT, after seemingly going to so much pains to align them,
but the new divergence is slight. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 26 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

From September 1969 to December 1971 I was in College at Oshkosh and I
distinctly remember receiving a Newsweek or Time Magazine which said on the
Front Cover, "New Global Ice Age Coming" Underneath at the Bottom it said,
"Climate Scientists predict New Global Ice Age." It was either a Time Magazine
or a Newsweek Magazine. I had a subscription to Newsweek while a Resident
Assistant at Oshkosh. I clearly remember it as it seemed extremely out of the
ordinary and I read the article inside the magazine. These same Catastrophic
Climate Change Chicken Little Falsifiers morphed into a New Global Warming
Climate Change Disaster agenda when their Ice Age Agenda from Pollution proved
false. They are as false today as they were in the 1970's. In 1850 the amount
of Carbon in the air was about the same as it is today, .04%...Man's use of
fossil fuels is not causing massive climate change. They are lying just like
they were lying in the 1970's.There are hundreds of reasons for regular and
normal climate change and man's use of Fossil fuels is a tiny, tiny factor. In
the 1300's there was a period of time where Earth's temperatures soared and
were extremely hot, more than in previous centuries. These FLat Earth Global
Warming theorists would have predicted massive Earth Calamities, rising
oceans, death to coastal cities, Polar Bears floating on ice floes (Which they
rest on while hunting) and the End of the Earth if we didn't do what they
said! It is like Chicken Little saying "The Sky is Falling, the Sky is
falling." Climate Change Falsifiers are saying, "Beware! Climate Change
Disasters are coming, Climate Change Disasters are coming! " Their Global Ice
Age Disaster was False and so are their Catastrophic Climate Change Disasters.
Remember that most Earth Inhabitants once believed the Earth was Flat based on
their "proven science." Government Climate Scientists tell us the same things
today; that their "science" is accurate and we should simply "trust them."
Their science is based on you believing their fear mongering based on False
and short term climate data fed into their computer models. It is all based on
assumptions and politically motivated calculations. They don't include 300-500
year periods or 1000 or 5,000 or 10,000 year periods. The Pacific and Atlantic
oceans have gone into their cooling phase simce 2010 and it will produce
cooler temperatures for the next 45 years just like from 1977 to 2010 the
Oceans went into their warming phases and produced warmer Earth temperatures.
From 1944 to 1977 the Oceans were in their cooling Phase producing cooler
Earth temperatures and that is why Climate Scientists then predicted a New
Global Ice Age based on short term computer model data...Don't listen to them!
They are trying to deceive you to control the masses Globally and push their
extremist Environmental agenda which will eliminate clean inexpensive coal
energy and shove expensive solar and wind down our throats. Even Germany the
world's renewable energy leader must use coal when wind and solar do not meet
their nation's energy needs, which is often. Catastrophic Climate Change is a
lie and future generations will laugh and call them fools in the same class as
the Flat Earth believers. Stay true to the truth and not the lying Babel from
Government controlled and paid false climate change falsifiers.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Plautz (not verified) on 26 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Most of your information about climate is incorrect.

But you are really good at paragraph length!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_Bygregladen on 26 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![Profile picture for user

gregladen](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/HumanEvolutionIcon350-120x120.jpg?itok=Tg7drSR8)

In reply to by Michael Plautz (not verified)

* * *

Thank you for your insightful comment. It gave me a lot of information to
contemplate. Plus your put down is childish as hell. But your comment is
simply your opinion. I have found that people who disagree with the False
science of Catastrophic Climate Change Disasters always receive derogatory
comments, put downs, bullying and mockery from those who believe these lies.
Maybe you cannot help your arrogant attitudes and prideful disdain of the
lower classes and anyone who disagrees with you and who does not support your
ideology. The Flat Earth Believers were the same way. Eventually they
eliminated their opponents, those who taught the Earth was round, by murdering
or imprisoning them. I sense the same attitudes in you. Degradation of
opponents is a typical liberal leftist extremist environmentalist tactic.It
makes it easier in "your" eyes to dismiss any evidence that does not agree
with your agenda. But I do wish you a nice day. May God Bless you and His son
Jesus open your eyes to the truth. Don't mock Him or you will be fighting a
battle you cannot win. I pray your eyes are opened to the Truth of Salvation
and who really is in control of the Climate.  
PS. I don't care about paragraph length. The information is the same.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Plautz (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by gregladen

* * *

Michael Plautz: ".... and I distinctly remember receiving a Newsweek or Time
Magazine which said on the Front Cover, “New Global Ice Age Coming” Underneath
at the Bottom it said, “Climate Scientists predict New Global Ice Age.'"

Yes: magazines constantly misrepresent what scientists said. So what? This has
always been the case, since the invention of magazines.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Michael Plautz (not verified)

* * *

Newsweek was supportive of climate scientists of the 1970's and printed
exactly what the scientists were saying. This magazine article and many
thousands of others from that time period stated exactly what the climate
scientists of that time were saying and their predictions with Quotes by those
scientists. They were not mis-representing anyone. Magazines in those days
were actually concerned with finding the truth about what anyone said and
actually printed their remarks and conclusions without twisting the truth like
they do today.  
You cannot dismiss the truth about what the False Climate Scientists in the
1970's were saying by saying the magazines mis-represented the climate
scientists. They did not. I read hundreds of articles in the 1970's about the
Global Ice Age that government climate scientists were predicting. They lied
and were false back then and they lie and are false today. Do not associate
yourself with liars or you will become as foolish as they are.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Plautz (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Desertphile (not verified)

* * *

"Newsweek was supportive of climate scientists of the 1970’s and printed
exactly what the scientists were saying"

Newsweek printed a headline ("The Cooling World") that was the opposite of
what the world's climatologists were saying at the time and still are
saying--- and the opposite of what the scientists the article was attempting
to quote said. Shit, even the Newsweek article stated the exact opposite of
the fucking headline! Dr Rasool and Dr Schneider bitched and complained at the
time, and the reporter (Peter Gwynne) apologized for the incorrect headline
(even though reporters don't write headlines and he didn't write the Newsweek
one).

THE FCKNG _WRITER_ of the Newsweek article you pretended, above, to summarize
said you're full of shit.

Be ashamed.

70s ice age: the facts that refute the claim.

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and Aerosols: Effects of Large Increases on Global
Climate:  
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/173/3992/138

http://ams.confex.com/ams/pdfpapers/131047.pdf

http://scienceblogs.com/stoat/Myth-1970-Global-Cooling-BAMS-2008.pdf

http://www.wmconnolley.org.uk/sci/iceage/

http://www.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/weekinreview/warm1956.pdf

http://www.atmos.ucla.edu/~brianpm/download/charney_report.pdf

Study debunks 'global cooling' concern of '70s:  
http://www.usatoday.com/weather/climate/globalwarming/2008-02-20-global…

The global cooling mole:  
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2008/03/the-global-coolin…

Killing the myth of the 1970s global cooling scientific consensus:  
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/2008BAMS2370.1

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Michael Plautz (not verified)

* * *

Like I said earlier, those of us who disagree with you are subject to mockery,
swearing, vulgar language, bullying, derogatory comments and put downs. It
makes no sense whatsoever to try to even debate with someone who loves to use
swear words and treat humans who disagree with them like a piece of crap. It
is no wonder no one else comments on your site except those of you who are
extremist environmentalists with your own radical agenda. You believe your own
lies, so I would be wasting my time to even try to debate with you. Enjoy your
delusion, it won't last much longer.  
I am not referring to the same Newsweek Magazine that you are. I also don't
have time to waste with someone who seems to have smoked their mind already
and is in a dense fog.  
I am still waiting for Desertphile to act like a human being instead of a
Neanderthal man from the Global Ice Age predicted by Climate Government
Controlled "so called" "scientists" from the 1970"s.  
I could show you hundreds of articles I still have from the 1970's showing
climate scientists predicting a Global Ice Age and vastly cooling temperatures
because the Earth Oceans had gone into their cooling phase and they severely
Mis-interpreted the data. They always will and they always have done so.  
Please tell Chris O'Neill that he will never be invited to a forum on Climate
Change with "respected" scientists. All he can do is spout what any ignorant
fool will say: "Now that the brain-dead agf has run out of arguments.....What
a dishonest and pathetic piece of scum he turned out to be."  
Normal Brain Active humans do not treat other humans with such disrespect and
disgust. It is like a group of ignorant pack animals ganging up to attack
anyone who "Dares" to Disagree with your Chicken Little, The Sky is Falling,
The Sky is Falling, Nonsense.  
Have fun in your own world, and I pray you do not devour one another some day.
That is what pack animals do.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Plautz (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Desertphile (not verified)

* * *

Michael Plautz: "Like I said earlier, those of us who disagree with you
ar...."

It's called "lying." You lied and were caught, again.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 29 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Michael Plautz (not verified)

* * *

agf:

> Glacier Bay rebound is blamed entirely on LIA recovery

Well lucky, lucky, lucky Glacier Bay. That paper also points out:

"in Fennoscandia [1] and Hudson Bay [11], where ongoing isostatic rebound has
been exponentially decaying since the terminal phases of deglaciation from the
Last Glacial Maximum"

Dumb clown still doesn’t understand the difference between ground level and
surface air temperature.

> transition to calving termini

OK. Tipping points can produce more rapid than usual change. This is hardly
good news about the consequences of global warming.

> It’s not obvious what part of Tollefson’s report O’Neill objects to

How dumb can you get? I'll quote it **AGAIN** :

> That finding, which **contradicts** the 2013 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

Karl (2015) actually says:

> A more comprehensive approach for determining the 0.10 significance level
(supplementary materials), which also accounts for the impact of annual errors
of estimate on the trend, shows that **NOT** the 1998–2012 trend was positive
at the 0.10 significance level.

Not statistically significant. Just the same as the IPCC (2013) said about the
1998-2012 trend.

Saying that Karl (2015) contradicted the IPCC (2013) is like saying that Karl
stating 2014 was a record warm year contradicts the IPCC saying 2012 was not a
record warm year. A plain stupid claim of contradiction. As I said, no need
for Tollefson to make up this shit.

> he probably denies that the IPCC ever accepted the Pause

You are full of shit. As I stated above, the IPCC (2013) said the 1998-2012
trend was not statistically significant. Karl (2015) agrees the 1998-2012
trend was not statistically significant.

> It will be interesting to see whether BEST

BEST are part of the Great Global Warming Conspiracy after all.

BTW, even Bryson said his prediction of global cooling was conditional on
human generation of aerosols. He just thought that generation of aerosols
would get out of control. In any case,

> there were plenty of cold alarmists besides Bryson

is a good lie.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

What is it about Wisconsin and climate crackpots?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

It is sad that you cannot debate the facts but resort to mockery,
condescension, calling names and bullying to prove your point, whatever that
may be. I am not interested in your childish put downs. I stand up to bullies
and don't let your garbage infiltrate my core of who I am. Your derogatory
comments are fit for the trash bin of history. Maybe the water in your State
is the problem. We here in Wisconsin are just fine with the actual truth and
will not cower in fear from your puny and foolish attacks. I have someone who
loves me so I could care less what you say and think about my character. Too
bad you know nothing about who I am or what I do or who I support and help.
Your lack of insight and understanding will be your undoing.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Michael Plautz (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Chris O'Neill (not verified)

* * *

1330GMT  
Laden's jester in residence offers the following ungrammatical paragraph:

"Karl (2015) actually says:

"A more comprehensive approach for determining the 0.10 significance level
(supplementary materials), which also accounts for the impact of annual errors
of estimate on the trend, shows that NOT the 1998–2012 trend was positive at
the 0.10 significance level.

"Not statistically significant. Just the same as the IPCC (2013) said about
the 1998-2012 trend."  
============================================  
Ungrammatical, that is, because of the intrusive "NOT," which O'Nell inserted.
The original reads:  
"A more comprehensive approach for determining the 0.10 significance level
(supplementary materials), which  
also accounts for the impact of annual errors of  
estimate on the trend, shows that the 1998–2014  
and 2000–2014 trends (but not 1998–2012) were  
positive at the 0.10 significance level" (p.1471, penultimate paragraph).  
https://www.nas.org/images/documents/Climate_Change.pdf

How can a guy like O'Neill stand to live with himself?  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Oh my God. How brain-dead can agf get?

According to agf:

> the intrusive “NOT,” which O’Nell inserted

and then **IMMEDIATELY** quotes:

> (but **NOT** 1998–2012)

My emphasis on the "not" of course because of agf's severe cognitive
incapacity.

Hard to know if agf has a reading problem as well as being brain-dead. The
latter can influence the former of course.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

mp:

> Newsweek printed **exactly** what the scientists were saying.

Sure. If you say so. Who are we to question you?

Reid Bryson from Wisconsin was a climate crackpot

Michael Plautz from Wisconsin is a climate crackpot.

Ergo, what is it about Wisconsin and climate crackpots?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1320GMT  
And of such are the priests of climate doom: Pachauri, Mann, Oreskes, Gleick,
O'Neill. Whether through original sin or their own waywardness, they are
totally depraved. And the dangerous, heretical books that could alert you to
their depravity are banned. Thinking skeptically is poison for the soul.

Now what you do with your faith is entirely up to you. Live in the sticks and
burn firewood if you like, or drive a volt. Vote democratic socialist, support
the European Union (CRU's patron). But don't listen to neo-deniers like James
Hansen! Safe nuclear energy might just solve the problem, and that's really
the last thing we want. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Still waiting for Michael Plautz to apologize for lying to us.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Now that the brain-dead agf has run out of arguments all he can resort to is
ad hominems. What a dishonest and pathetic piece of scum he turned out to be.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"I could show you hundreds of articles I still have from the 1970’s showing
climate scientists predicting a Global Ice Age "

Well, go ahead then, show us those hundreds of articles that you still have.
Scientific articles, please, not newspaper articles that claim some scientist
said something.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

“I could show you hundreds of articles I still have from the 1970’s showing
climate scientists predicting a Global Ice Age ”

Marco: Well, go ahead then, show us those hundreds of articles that you still
have. Scientific articles, please, not newspaper articles that claim some
scientist said something.

_CRICKETS_

I already posted several links (above) that demonstrate the claim is false---
yet he keeps repeating the falsehood. Back in my grand parent's time they
called this "lying;" these days it's called "Hey, everyone has a right to
their opinions and all opinions are equally valid even when they are contrary
to observed reality."

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 29 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Marco (not verified)

* * *

mp:

> Please tell Chris O’Neill that he will never be invited to a forum on
Climate Change with “respected” scientists.

Neither will you so what's your point?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 28 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> he will never be invited to a forum on Climate Change with “respected”
scientists.

By the way, at least I'm not the one calling climate scientists liars. Can't
imagine getting too many invitations for calling them that!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 29 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

“I could show you hundreds of articles I still have from the 1970’s showing
climate scientists predicting a Global Ice Age ”

.... in about 21,000 years. No one claimed scientists do not predict that
another glacial period will happen (which, by the way, Earth is still in).

Your falsehood is that in the 1970s some scientists predicted another ice age
_SOON._ You were exposed as a liar.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 29 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Has AGF answered my question in #338 yet?

> If humans (& the known & well established physics of how GHG’s trap infra-
red radiation) are _not_ causing the current rise in global temperatures then
what is?

Hmm .. I'm guessing no?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 30 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@353. Michael Plautz :

> Plus your (Greg laden's - ed) put down is childish as hell. But your comment
is simply your opinion.

The blogger's opinion is also based in solid science and reality as observed
by an overwhelming climatological expert consensus.

> I have found that people who disagree with the False science of Catastrophic
Climate Change Disasters always receive derogatory comments, put downs,
bullying and mockery from those who believe these lies. Maybe you cannot help
your arrogant attitudes and prideful disdain of the lower classes and anyone
who disagrees with you and who does not support your ideology. The Flat Earth
Believer were the same way. (EDIT : Erm, actually not historically true.)
Eventually they eliminated their opponents, those who taught the Earth was
round, by murdering or imprisoning them. I sense the same attitudes in you.
Degradation of opponents is a typical liberal leftist extremist
environmentalist tactic.It makes it easier in “your” eyes to dismiss any
evidence that does not agree with your agenda.

So .. no childish insults, or political childish polemical attacks there, no
sirree, just all the bits I've italicised. And maybe more. I was going to
contrastingly put the substance of your argument against climate reality in
bold but I couldn't find anything applicable.

Is this intentional satire or or are you for real here?

If you are intentionally satirical -congratulations ya got me! It is sometimes
pretty hard to tell at least for me! ;-)

> But I do wish you a nice day. May God Bless you and His son Jesus open your
eyes to the truth. Don’t mock Him or you will be fighting a battle you cannot
win. I pray your eyes are opened to the Truth of Salvation and who really is
in control of the Climate.

So .. God controls the climate eh? Which god and with what supporting evidence
for, well, any part of that non-sequiteur may I ask?

> PS. I don’t care about paragraph length. The information is the same.

Firstly, what information exactly?> Secondly, improved readability and
presentation helps your case and could make you somewhat more convincing if
you actually had a case to put. Thirdly, yes we can tell and yes that is your
erroneous personal opinion not objective quantifiable fact.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 30 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Damn. Italics within blockquotes don't work here do they? Okay take II :

> ... the False science of Catastrophic Climate Change Disasters .. lies. ...
your arrogant attitudes and prideful disdain .. The Flat Earth Believer were
the same way. (EDIT : Erm, actually not historically true.) ... typical
liberal leftist extremist environmentalist tactic. ..

So .. no childish insults, or political childish polemical attacks there, no
sirree, just all the bits I’ve cited there.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 30 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@341. A G Foster :

> StevoR doesn’t know the difference between tree ring dating and tree rings
as climate proxies and he still thinks he’s smart enough to keep teaching us
about it!

Actually I'm citing the experts who do know what they're talking about here.
Y'know scientists. I'm not claiming any personal expertise so I'm going to
listen to & respect those who are experts in their field. Just as I don't do
my own plumbing or wiring but leave those to plumbers and electricians.

> The CRU majority admitted in the early ’90s that they had no clear evidence
of an anthropogenic signal in the air, and shortly after came the Pause.

Er , nope and nope. I take it you are relying on the misinterpreted taken out
of context stolen Climate Research Unit of East Anglia "climategate"
manufactroversy which have been repeatedly debunked?

The "Pause" .. like those other Denier PRATT's is also a complete myth as
plenty of scientific evidence has since shown :

http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2013/11/05/climate_pause_nope…

(Plenty of links there and actual NASA rocket climate scientist speaking.)

> StevoR informs us that Milankovitch cycles have been eliminated as a
potential factor in current warming. Aint that rich? StevoR you know-nothing
blabberbox, the warming is occurring IN SPITE of decreasing insolation.

Er, doesn't that actually support what I'm saying here and tell you that the
climatologists consensus is correct?

We know where the Milankovitch cycles are trending and we've observed what the
climate is doing and these are going in opposite directions so, yes,
Milankovicth cycles - like solar activity have been eliminated as causing the
present planetary overheating.

> We have to understand what caused the LIA before we can understand why it
ended.  
>

>

>> And, funnily enough, we *do * understand this at least those who do & know
the science do. See, for instance :

>>

>> https://www.skepticalscience.com/coming-out-of-little-ice-age-intermedi…

>>

>> & http://earthsky.org/earth/volcanoes-might-have-triggered-the-little-ice…

>>

>>> Hell, Glacier Bay is still rebounding an inch per year due ice loss from
LIA recovery. Do you know what that means?

>>

>> Isostatic rebound - where rock rises following being pressed down by the
weight of ice over aeons - yes I do know what that means and what its
significance is.

>>

>> You, it seems, do not. It doesn't mean - as you seem to wrongly think -
that Global Overheating isn't real and it doesn't refute any climate reality.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 30 Apr 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Once again, StevoR doesn't know the difference between a tree ring chronology
and tree ring density proxy, nor is he capable of admitting such, but he
blabbers on with gibberish. Not a single competent person or argument has
shown up here, so I think I'll take my arguments elsewhere. For the record,
Glacier Bay was added to the evidence of MWP forests covered by LIA glaciers
to illustrate to the novices how thoroughly the hockey stick is refuted by
glaciology, but even that argument goes over the heads of everyone here. So
the lists I'm working on of global cooling fanatics, I'll reserve for a more
critical audience. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 01 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> MWP forests covered by LIA glaciers to illustrate how thoroughly the hockey
stick is refuted

Brain-dead moron agf doesn't realise that his MWP followed by a LIA followed
by his "rebound", regardless of cause, forms a hockey stick.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 02 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1940GMT  
Didn't I ask O'Niell once before to point out the time of demarcation between
MWP and LIA on the hockey stick? Did he? Can he? Only if he gets stoned first.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 02 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

A G Foster "[....] the time of demarcation between MWP and LIA on the hockey
stick [....]"

"The" hockey stick is MBH98; you are complaining because scientists did not
include data no scientists had at the time. LOL!

The MCA occurred in the Northern Atlantic region, parts of China, and other
northern regions from c 950 CE to c 1,100 CE. "The" hockey stick went back to
year c 1,400 CE.

Do you really believe M, B, and H should have included data no one on the
planet had at the time?

Why did you switch your lies from the human-caused cooling of the 1970s, to
the MCA? Are you finished lying about the 1970s ice age myth?

http://www.meteo.psu.edu/holocene/public_html/shared/articles/mbh98.pdf

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 02 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by A G Foster (not verified)

* * *

0315GMT (3May16)  
Desertphile adds his name to the growing list of posters here who speak with
perfect confidence about things they know absolutely nothing about. DP, the
stick derives from MBH99 which goes back a thousand years and attempts to
revise a long history of climate reconstructions, all vastly superior to it.
Do you think the MWP and LIA were inventions of modern skeptics? That's what
you're saying! But even if we go back only 600 years we would have no trouble
finding temperatures warmer than 1945. Then again, maybe the Koch brothers
planted all those MWP logs in all those glaciers. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 02 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@379. A G Foster : Didn't I ask you quite a few times before :

If humans GHG emissons - & the well established basic physics of how these
trap infra-red radiation - are _not_ causing the current rise in global
temperatures then what is?

Yes, I did and yet you haven't answered my question. Pity, you'd almost
certainly win a Nobel prize if you could prove your case here and set a whole
new physics paradigm.

Oh & no, it isn't natural causes or cycle as explained here :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq8_l6s89uY

"5 Climate Change isn't it natural from potholer54"

Also thought you'd tucked tail and run @ #377. No such luck eh?

As noted already previous natural changes such as the Little Ice Age (caused
by a combination of volcanic activity and prolonged solar minimum) & Medieval
Warming Period aren't the same as the current Global Overheating because we
don't have these natural factors causing the current exceptionally high and
rapid planetary heating.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 02 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"If humans GHG emissons – & the well established basic physics of how these
trap infra-red radiation – are _not_ causing the current rise in global
temperatures then what is?"

_CRICKETS_

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by StevoR (not verified)

* * *

Two days later and my last post hasn't shown up. I'll keep this short. If
Desertphile had bothered to check Wikipedia he would see he was wrong on every
count: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hockey_stick_controversy  
Or maybe he plays with crooked, broken hockey sticks.

Open challenge: find a glaciologist who doesn't invoke the LIA in explaining
glacier behavior. And for our purposes we'll define the MWP as the warm time
before the LIA.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1700GMT  
If there is any validity to StevoR's dubious explanations for the LIA then the
same explanations would apply to current warmth: a lack of volcanic activity
and resumed solar irradiance. And there remains the probable but as yet
unquantified anthropogenic component, still not detected in the troposphere
where it should first be identified.

But compare Wikipedia's LIA graph with its hockey stick graph and you will see
how far apart are StevoR and Desertphile, i.e., MBH vs. the world:  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Ice_Age  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:T_comp_61-90.pdf  
See, you don't have to have the foggiest notion what you're talking about as
long as you bow to the credo.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

" If Desertphile had bothered to check Wikipedia he would see he was wrong on
every count: "

And yet all of the world's experts on thesubject, without exception, agrees
with me about "the" hockey stick. How do you explain your delusion?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2030GMT  
And to add to Wiki's disagreement (above) is Ed Cook of the self same CRU. He
calls Mann's work a "mess," holds Bradley in contempt, and Mann beneath
contempt: see http://www.di2.nu/foia/1062592331.txt  
And remember Stein's book. Sorry, DPhile, Mann is universally considered a
quack, except by the alarm machine.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@385. A G Foster :

> If there is any validity to StevoR’s dubious explanations for the LIA then
the same explanations would apply to current warmth: a lack of volcanic
activity and resumed solar irradiance.

So you are claiming the same things that caused the LIA -volcanic activity and
solar activity are responsible for the present Global Overheating then, AGF?

Your problem - which you'll no doubt remain in willfully ignorant denial of -
is that, of course, both factors have already been considered and ruled out by
climatologists because they aren't actually as ridiculously stupid as the
Denialists would claim they are.

We know its not our daytime star that's to blame :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Sf_UIQYc20&list=PL029130BFDC78FA33&ind…

Climate Denial Crock of the Week - Solar Schmolar by greenman3610.

Plus since AGF keeps hammering the MWP please watch and think about this clip
as well :

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrKfz8NjEzU&list=PL029130BFDC78FA33&ind…

As for the second volcanic idea - again that's another PRATT (Point Refuted
Already a Thousand Times) from AGF as explained here among many other places :

http://www.skepticalscience.com/coming-out-of-ice-age-volcanoes.htm

> Foster and Rahmstorf (2011) used a multiple linear regression approach to
filter out the effects of volcanic and solar activity, and the El Niño
Southern Oscillation (ENSO). They found that volcanic activity, as measured by
aerosol optical thickness data (AOD) has only caused between 0.02 and 0.04°C
per decade warming from 1979 through 2010 (Table 1, Figure 2), or about 0.06
to 0.12°C warming of the surface and lower troposphere, repsectively, since
1979 (out of approximately 0.5°C observed surface warming). ... (snip graph)
.. Like Foster and Rahmstorf, Lean and Rind (2008) performed a multiple linear
regression on the temperature data, and found that although volcanic activity
can account for about 10% of the observed global warming from 1979 to 2005,
between 1889 and 2006 volcanic activity had a small net cooling effect on
global temperatures. Thus volcanoes have not caused the long-term global
warming over the past century, and can explain only a small fraction of the
warming over the past 25 years.

So quelle surprise AGF your supposed alternative causes for the Global
Overheating phenomenon have been debunked repeatedly long ago by actual
climate scientists.

If you disagree with these debunkings well, please watch the clips linked here
and read the scientific papers cited and explain exactly where and how and why
you think they are wrong with supporting scientific evidence.

Or, y'know just run away again, which ever you choose.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 04 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The brain-dead agf, since he is brain-dead, never did realise his total
misunderstanding of Karl (2015), **EVEN THOUGH HE QUOTED IT HIMSELF** :

> A more comprehensive approach for determining the 0.10 significance level
(supplementary materials), which  
>  also accounts for the impact of annual errors of  
>  estimate on the trend, shows that the 1998–2014  
>  and 2000–2014 trends (

>

> **BUT NOT 1998–2012**

>

> ) were positive at the 0.10 significance level” (p.1471, penultimate
paragraph).

The IPCC previously stated that the 1998–2012 trend was NOT significant.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 05 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1430GMT  
Never argue with a fool, it says somewhere. StevoR, if X makes it cold, then
not X does not make it cold. Not cold is warm. The LIA was cold; the present
is not. So, IF your explanation for the LIA was valid (it probably isn't) then
the the termination of your supposed causes brought an end to the LIA. In any
case the LIA is gradually coming to an end for whatever reasons, but it will
take some time for the glaciers to revert to pre-LIA conditions, as seen by
the MWP forest evidence. We cannot know what causes current warmth if we do
not know what caused the LIA.

AS for the other fool, I quoted Karl correctly; O'Neill did not. He left out
this:

the 1998–2014 and 2000–2014 trends (but

...when he changed "not" to "NOT," and inserted no ellipsis (...) to indicate
the deletion, which is a major no-no. And of course cutting the sentence in
the middle of a parenthesis is an even worse no-no, but this is the sort of
thing one can expect from a perfect idiot.

All this is irrelevant; Karl is full of crap as even a con man like Mann could
tell you (or especially a con man like Mann):

"It has been claimed that the early-2000s global warming slowdown or hiatus,
characterized by a reduced rate of global surface warming, has been
overstated, lacks sound scientific basis, or is unsupported by observations.
The evidence presented here contradicts these claims."  
http://www.meteo.psu.edu/holocene/public_html/Mann/articles/articles/Fy…

Now O'Neill will not be able to make much sense of that subtitle but the
reader of average intelligence will. Mann is making a feeble attempt to
rehabilitate himself by calling out Karl's BS. Too late for the science though
--as I tried to inform the morons way back (O'Neill characteristically denied
it)--NOAA and NASA have already adopted Karl et al. This leaves Mann et al at
odds with GISS and NCDC. The settlers should find this unsettling.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 05 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> He left out this:

>

> the 1998–2014 and 2000–2014 trends

You just don't get it you brain-dead moron.

**THE IPCC WAS NOT TALKING ABOUT THE 1998-2014 AND 2000-2014 TRENDS**

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill: "You just don’t get it you brain-dead moron. THE IPCC WAS NOT
TALKING ABOUT THE 1998-2014 AND 2000-2014 TRENDS"

Well... what he "gets" and what he claimed he "gets" are likely to be two
different things: he is lawyering (i.e. engaging in politics), not sciencing.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Chris O'Neill (not verified)

* * *

1620GMT  
Well, Chris O'Neill, when you accuse "Nature's" Tollefson of lying you should
at least quote and reference where the IPCC 2013 report shows this to be the
case. Your credibility is down to zero, you know. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill: "The IPCC previously stated that the 1998–2012 trend was NOT
significant."

The IPCC said that because all of the world's experts in the subject said it;
Dr Philip Jones said it. "A G Foster" wants people to believe that some
scientist some where has said the trend was/is statistically significant---
when none have said so. The cultist is attacking an imaginary claim, which no
scientists defend, because he knows he cannot attack what scientists do assert
and therefore to defend.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0105GMT (5/7/16 GMT)  
Well, DPhile, if the IPCC said that why don't you tell us when and where they
said it. CO'N man can't. But significance is in the eye of the beholder:  
1. Dozens of papers have been written to explain the "insignificant" pause.  
2. Oreskes campaigned to have the word banned.  
3. Karl et al wrote a paper denying the pause.  
4. NOAA and NASA adopted Karl et al.  
5. Fyfe and Mann et al wrote a paper debunking Karl et al.

Back at 334, 335 Marco and CO'N man ridiculed the notion that NOAA and NASA
adopted Karl et al, so I linked Tollefson at Nature, whom CO'N man immediately
called a liar. He prefers to demonize his allies rather than admit a mistake.
Take his word for anything at your own risk.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> you should at least quote and reference where the IPCC 2013 report shows
this:

>

> **THE IPCC WAS NOT TALKING ABOUT THE 1998-2014 AND 2000-2014 TRENDS**

>

> to be the case.

You utterly stupid moron. Where is a **2013** IPCC report going to talk about
trends to **2014**?????????????????????????

The IPCC 2013 only talked about trends up to 1998-2012. The only mention of
the 1998-2012 trend by Karl was where he said it was **NOT** significant,
**AGREEING WITH THE IPCC 2013.**

Only crap journalists like Tollefson and brain-dead morons like agf who repeat
his crap claim they **DISAGREED.**

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Back at 334, 335 Marco and CO’N man ridiculed the notion that NOAA and NASA
adopted Karl et al, so I linked Tollefson at Nature,"

Actually, I ridiculed your claim that Karl et al did anything to GISTEMP. You
still haven't been able to figure out how enormously stupid you sounded there.
Tollefson doesn't support your view in any way.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@390. A G Foster :

> ..StevoR, if X makes it cold, then not X does not make it cold. Not cold is
warm.

No. Not-cold is not-cold, warm is something else.

Its quite possible to be neither feeling cold nor hot, even not really either
warm or cool.

Also Cold can be caused by Y as well as or instead of X. Therefore, just
because it is cold does NOT mean that X is causing it - and ditto for heat
too.

You can be warm because you've put on an extra blanket or because its hot
outside or because you are next to a roaring fire, et cetera..

Now in this case specifically the causation of the Little Ice Age is known to
be a result of several factors including reduced solar insolation and
increased volcanic activity.

Today during this current Overheating hothouse trending planetary environment,
here's nothing special far as I'm aware with volcanic activity levels and
solar irradiance is lower than usual and these have been studied, observed and
calculated and found NOT to be causative factors in the current observed
planetary heating.

What part of that do you fail to understand or reject on what factual basis
and what evidence to have to support your claims? (Hint : None. Because
reality is not supporting AGF here.)

> ... So, IF your explanation for the LIA was valid (it probably isn’t) ..

Its not _my_ explanation for the LIA, it is what the various scientific
studies have shown. Did you miss all the linked and cited sources in my #388
here?

You,AGF, are saying the scientific consensus there like the one on Global
Overheating is wrong because **___??? And that we should believe you over all
those real climate scientists because ** __??? (Fill in the blanks if you
can!)

> .. then the the termination of your supposed causes brought an end to the
LIA. In any case the LIA is gradually coming to an end for whatever reasons,
but it will take some time for the glaciers to revert to pre-LIA conditions,
as seen by the MWP forest evidence. We cannot know what causes current warmth
if we do not know what caused the LIA.

That's just fractally wrong - wrong on every level.

AGF keeps on spewing up repeatedly debunked PRATTs as though repeating them
makes them right somehow - which never works. But is a typical anti-science
tactic.

To sum up yet again :

Yes, climatologists do have a good understanding on what caused the LIA, no
we're not just "reverting" to MWP conditions naturally. Yes, humans are
causing the current global Overheating phenomenon and, yes these basic facts
have been very well and clearly established by multiple lines of scientific
evidence collected and understood by actual climate scientists for well over a
hundred years now. (Starting with Svante Arrhenius in 1896.)

At this point - well, even earlier really - AGF is just sticking his head in
the sand singing la-la-la can't-hear you.

> Now O’Neill will not be able to make much sense of that subtitle but the
reader of average intelligence will.

Whelp, that sure rules _you_ out then doesn't it AGF!

@395. AGF :

>           1. Dozens of papers have been written to explain the
“insignificant” pause.

Which have it needs to be added shown that actually there was really no so-
called "pause" and that Global Overheating has continued.

BTW. AGF are you a believer in that mythical "pause" or are you sticking to
chanting your "Just LIA natural recovery" crock because these two false claims
are mutually incompatible and contradictory. Note that the "pause" assumes
Global Warming was and is real before a certain arbitrary point at which it
somehow stopped or slowed - which, again, we know now didn't actually happen
anyway.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

^ Correction :

> "1. Dozens of papers have been written to explain the “insignificant”
pause."

>

> Papers which have, it needs to be added, shown that actually there was
really no so-called “pause” and that Global Overheating has continued.

As explained here - complete with links :

http://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/20…

> Perhaps the best-known myth is the so-called “pause” or “hiatus” in global
warming. This year, six individual studies have looked into this and found it
incorrect. I have co-authored one of the studies, and I’ve written about some
of the others here and here.

>

> Well just today, another paper was published by Stephan Lewandowsky, James
Risbey, and Naomi Oreskes that comes to the same conclusion. The paper is
titled, “On the definition and identifiability of the alleged “hiatus” in
global warming”.

& as summarised by Naomi Oreskes :

> So the bottom line is: there is no pause, and there has never been one. The
rate of global warming does fluctuate—but this has been known for a long time.
Whether or not any particular fluctuation has an identifiable cause—like the
effects of ocean heat uptake or an El Nino-- is an interesting question, but a
fluctuation is not a pause, and it is important to be clear that the recent
fluctuation is not statistically anomalous compared with other fluctuations we
have seen, relative to the longer-term warming trend.

Of course deniers gunna deny but that's the scientific reality.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 06 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Fyfe and Mann et al wrote a paper debunking Karl et al.

It did nothing of the sort. You're just making shit up as usual. Mann et al
point out:

"we investigate whether the slowdown **and its recent recovery** were
predictable."

Karl et al. pointed out the recovery, just like Mann et al.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 07 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill: It did nothing of the sort. You’re just making shit up as
usual. Mann et al point out: “we investigate whether the slowdown and its
recent recovery were predictable.” Karl et al. pointed out the recovery, just
like Mann et al.

Heh. Anyone who passed a high school chemistry class could have predicted the
slowing of increasing global average temperature was temporary. Sheeeit,
anyone who looked at GLB.Ts+dSST could and can see time periods when warming
slowed temporarily.

Gosh: I hereby predict that within the next 25 years there will be another
slowing of the warming of Earth's global average temperature, and it will be
temporary.

http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1002/2016GL068159/full

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 07 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Chris O'Neill (not verified)

* * *

http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1002/2016GL068159/full :

"Considerable attention has been paid to a **temporary** slowdown in large-
scale surface warming that began during the early 2000s and persisted into the
**early** 2010s."

It is no longer the **early** 2010s. There are people who are incapable of
understanding that concept.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 07 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2005hrs.5May16GMT  
It's a regular bullshitting convention, so put on your hip waders 'cause knee
boots won't cut it. A sampling: compare #'s 396 and 397, nicely juxtaposed and
wholly contradictory. O'Neill maintains Tollefson is a liar and Marco says I
misrepresented him. Obviously they can't both be right, but don't expect them
to sort that one out (Marco is in effect calling O'Neill a liar).

Marco goes on to say: "Actually, I ridiculed your claim that Karl et al did
anything to GISTEMP. You still haven’t been able to figure out how enormously
stupid you sounded there. Tollefson doesn’t support your view in any way."

Marco is clueless as always, as the 2nd and 3rd paragraphs in Tollefson's
story clearly tell:

"That finding, which contradicts the 2013 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is based on an update of the global
temperature records maintained by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). The previous version of the NOAA data set had showed
less warming during the first decade of the millennium.

"Researchers revised the NOAA data set to correct for known biases in sea-
surface-temperature records and to incorporate data from new land-based
monitoring stations that extend into the Arctic — an area where observations
are sparse. The updated NOAA data set also includes observations from 2013 and
2014; the latter ranked as the warmest year on record."

And for further confirmation see the Fyfe, Mann et al paper, especially figure
1 which labels the revised NOAA graph NOAA-Carl:
http://www.meteo.psu.edu/holocene/public_html/Mann/articles/articles/Fy…  
And for further corroboration of my take on it see Tollefson again:
http://www.nature.com/news/global-warming-hiatus-debate-flares-up-again…

These trolls of Laden's never get anything right, nor do they care whether
they get anything right. They are here to obfuscate, to load the blog with
bullshit and drown out the sound of the honest whistle blowers.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2035.8May16GMT  
And CO'N man keep up babbling about Reid Bryson being a lone ice doom prophet.
Here's a preliminary list of like thinkers culled from PopTech:

Dr. Earl W. Barrett of the ESSA Research Laboratories, Boulder Colo., says the
planet's total environment 'is being altered, perhaps disastrously and
irreversibly, by human activities.

Meteorologist Paul Cato says pollution "could bring on a new Ice Age that
would cover states like Florida with 400 feet of water" (sic).

Cites William Cobb of NOAA, who in original version refers to a new ice age as
only a possibility: https://news.google.com/newspapers

Dr. Tadashi Yano. Says nearly one degree drop already occurred.  
“Air pollution may cause another ice age, warns a Japanese meteorologist...”

Hubert Lamb

Cesare Emiliani "fears a new Ice AGe could come within 2000 or 3000 years, or
even earlier if man's contribution to climate changes--through pollution,
deforestation, and other means--should alter the present balance"

Francis Stehli, geologist with Case Western Reserve University: "...the world
is headed for another Ice Age within 200 years." 1/73

"Lamb predicts another LIA; Jiri Kukla predicts a big ice age. Dansgaard
predicts only 10 to 20 years more cooling. Murray Mitchell and Steven
Schneider assert CO2 warming and particulate cooling cancel each other out."

James McQigg

Kenneth Hare, U of Toronto, former president of Britian's Royal Meteorological
Society says, "Bryson is the most important figure in climatology today...I'm
naturally a lot more conservative than he is, but I take what he says very
seriously indeed."

Helen Kukla

George Denton

James Fletcher NASA chief

Cites a skeptical Donald Gilman of the NWS. "Bryson has many supporters.
Others aren't convinced. 2/2/75

E W Wahl and T L Lawson:  
“...one might express this in an even more general way by ,asserting that we
really are still in the “Little Ice Age” which was interrupted only briefly
for something like 70 yr by a temporary warm spell in the Northern Hemisphere
.”

Dendrochronolgists Samuel Epstein and Crayton Yapp 1/2/78

Madeleine Briskin of U of Cincinnati: "...almost all my colleagues agree we're
entering a cold phase" 2/10/78

Drs. Lenoa M. Libby of UCLA and Louis J. Pandolfi. 1/16/79

Maynard Miller, U of I, Alaska glaciologist: "...we are in the middle of or
long overdue for some kind of Ice Age." "...we are apparently dropping into a
cooling phase." 6/5/79  
========================================  
So far I've found only one warming warning, near the end of the decade:  
Verner E. Suomi, chairman, Woods Hole NAS panel, 1979:  
"A wait-and-see policy may mean waiting until it is too late."

Excerpts:  
1977 - Has The Ice Age Cometh Again? (Calgary Herald, February 1, 1977)  
Horrible titular grammar. Article by Bruce Ingersoll (Chicago Sun-Times).
Cites Bryson: "I catch hell from my colleagues for being a doomsayer."

1978 - Little Ice Age: Severe winters and cool summers ahead (Calgary Herald,
January 10, 1978)  
UPI Cites Madeleine Briskin of U of Cincinnati. "...almost all my colleagues
agree we're entering a cold phase."

Repeat:  
Kenneth Hare, U of Toronto, former president of Britian's Royal Meteorological
Society says, "Bryson is the most important figure in climatology today...I'm
naturally a lot more conservative than he is, but I take what he says very
seriously indeed." --1974 - Ominous Changes in the World's Weather (PDF)
(Fortune Magazine, February 1974)  
============================================  
And we're just getting started. That global cooling scare was as real as it
could be, and the real deniers are the liars and ignoramuses who deny it.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> They are here to obfuscate, to load the blog with bullshit and drown out the
sound of the honest whistle blowers.

What an appalling full-of-shit shameless hypocrite you are.

> O’Neill maintains Tollefson is a liar

or bullshitter in claiming Karl 2015 contradicts the 2013 IPCC report.
Absolutely true. Tollefsen is making shit up.

> and Marco says I misrepresented him.

Marco: "Tollefson doesn’t support your view in any way - that Karl et al did
anything to GISTEMP."

Notice the difference: Tollefsen is making shit up about Karl contradicting
the IPCC. Agf is making shit up that Tollefson said Karl did something to
GISTEMP. Hell, Tollefsen doesn't even mention GISTEMP.

Two different things. But the utterly stupid agf is too brain-dead to realise
there is a difference.

> Marco goes on to say: “Actually, I ridiculed your claim that Karl et al did
anything to GISTEMP. You still haven’t been able to figure out how enormously
stupid you sounded there. Tollefson doesn’t support your view in any way.”

>

> Marco is clueless as always, as the 2nd and 3rd paragraphs in Tollefson’s
story clearly tell:

>

> “That finding, which contradicts the 2013 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is based on an update of the global
temperature records maintained by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). The previous version of the NOAA data set had showed
less warming during the first decade of the millennium.

You are such a moron agf. GISTEMP is not the same thing as the NOAA data set.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Cites William Cobb of NOAA, who in original version refers to a new ice age
as **only a possibility** : https://news.google.com/newspapers

Duh, yes. I did point out that the predictions by virtually everyone who
predicted an ice-age was **conditional** (on air pollution in the form of
aerosols) and thus only a possibility.

But as we all know, agf is too brain-dead to understand the difference between
conditional and unconditional.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Marco is clueless as always, as the 2nd and 3rd paragraphs in Tollefson’s
story clearly tell:"

Upon which a quote follows that mentions only NOAA, but not GISS (and thereby
NASA)...

And _I_ am supposed the one who is clueless?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Hell's teeth.

I omitted this blog from my bookmarks accidentally a few months ago. I come
back and this garbage is -still- going on.

Greg, I salute you. My grumpy old lady nature would have grrrrown irresistible
and shut this down long ago.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By addledlady (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Foster #404

Nice Gish Gallop BTW with considerable name dropping and quotes out of context
I suspect, although I have yet to examine each one in detail, which of course
is the aim of a Gish Gallop — similar to that of a document dump.

However one stood out to me, that quote attributed to Cesare Emiliani.

Now those exact words only crop up in one source I could find Popular Science
Jan 1973 and they are of editorial origin and not a direct quote from
Emiliani.

On the ice age prospect, largely a media driven storm built upon concerns of a
possible nuclear winter, Wiki has a reasonable run-down of non-scientific
controversy and has this to say:

> In 1972, Emiliani warned "Man's activity may either precipitate this new ice
age or lead to substantial or even total melting of the ice caps..."

Very different — No!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 08 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> and shut this down long ago

Trouble is, shutting down science denialists' comments doesn't make science
denialists cease to exist. They keep spreading their disinformation wherever
they get the opportunity and keep influencing how people vote. Shutting down
comments here will not stop that.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

denialist claptrap should not be removed imo (apart from blatant threats etc)

it should be left as a monument of stupidity and self delusion

and it is sometimes informative to refer back to old threads - where the same
tired old arguments are put forward - promoted with the certainty only the
truly deluded can manage

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By tadaaa (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@411. tadaaa : I agree - its good to have evidence given the number of times
the same PRATT's come up and then get shot down in flames of logic and
evidence. I wouldn't want them removed or history rewritten. Leaving a record
for future generations to judge - I'm definitely in favour of that.

I would ju-ust love a, say, fifteen minute or so editing window to fix typos
and italics fails etc.. or even just a preview ability please but that's
another story and yeah, mea culpa I do suck at typing, sorry.

* * *

Hey, AGF, no response from you to the points I raised in my #398 then? No
answer to the question :

> Are you a believer in that mythical “pause” or are you sticking to chanting
your “Just LIA natural recovery” crock because these two false claims are
mutually incompatible and contradictory?

Or / & :

> You,AGF, are saying the scientific consensus there like the one on Global
Overheating is wrong because **___??? And that we should believe you over all
those real climate scientists because ** __??? (Fill in the blanks if you
can!)

In addition to :

> Today during this current Overheating hothouse trending planetary
environment, there’s nothing special far as I’m aware with volcanic activity
levels and solar irradiance is lower than usual and these have been studied,
observed and calculated and found NOT to be causative factors in the current
observed planetary heating. What part of that do you fail to understand or
reject on what factual basis and what evidence to have to support your claims?

Please answer these questions rather than dodging them AGF.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1520.9May16GMT

Acronyms for today:  
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Karl ran NOAA's NCDC, now NCEI, "the world’s largest provider of weather and
climate data," to which NASA defers:

"July 19, 2015: The data and results put on the public site on July 15 were
affected by a bug in the ERSST v4 part of the automated incremental update
procedure. The analysis was redone after recreating the full version of
SBBX.ERSSTv4 separately. We would like to acknowledge and thank Nick Stokes
for noticing that there might be a problem with these data.

"July 15, 2015: Starting with today's update, the standard GISS analysis is no
longer based on ERSST v3b but on the newer ERSST v4. Dr. Makiko Sato created
some graphs and maps showing the effect of that change. More information may
be obtained from NOAA's website."  
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/updates_v3/

It only took a few weeks for GISS to adopt Karl et al, and I repeat, Fyfe,
Mann et al reject NOAA's and NASA's "pause buster" adjustment. So back at
334,5 where Marco and CO'N man said, "Amazing how Karl apparently is so all-
powerful that he even influences how NASA does its analysis," they were of
course clueless as always. NASA copied NOAA and Karl runs NOAA's NCEI. The
Nick Stokes mentioned in the NASA quote agrees with Bob Tisdale's analysis
which I could have linked to if Laden hadn't banned it. Much like teaching
calculus to savages.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1540.9May16GMT

StevoR, who hasn't been right about anything yet, asks about the "mythical
pause," claiming it's incompatible with LIA recovery. (Could it get any more
ridiculous?) As I said a month ago, I could link you to lists of over 60
excuses for the pause but the knowledgeable websites are banned. Here's from
the abstract of the first on the list:

"However, the most recent climate data [2], show global temperature
development levelling off or even turning negative since 2001 in contrast to
the anticipated course related to the steady increases in the concentration in
the atmosphere of green-house gasses, primarily carbon dioxide and methane."  
http://file.scirp.org/pdf/ACS_2014010909502804.pdf

And guess what? He never uses the word "pause"! He just mentions a "negative"
trend. How can one who never had an intelligent thought in his life ever ask a
relevant question?  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"It only took a few weeks for GISS to adopt Karl et al,"

ERSST v4 is not from Karl et al. Karl et al actually USE ERSST v4. ERSST v4
does come from NOAA, but so did the prior versions used.

And guess what else it says here:  
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/updates_v3/  
Please note that neither the land data nor the ocean data used in this
analysis are the ones used in the NCEI paper "Possible artifacts of data
biases in the recent global surface warming hiatus" that appeared on June 4,
2015. For the ocean data, GISS still uses ERSST v3b rather than the newer
ERSST v4, but will switch to that file next month, when we add the June 2015
data; the collection of land station data used in that paper includes many
more sources than GHCN v3.3.0 and will probably be incorporated into a future
GHCN v4.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

A G Foster: "It only took a few weeks for GISS to adopt Karl et al"

In the same sense that all of the world's geophysicists adopted Al Gore.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Marco (not verified)

* * *

2100.9May16GMT  
Timeline:  
Sept 2014: Oreskes goes on a rampage to abolish the word 'pause'
https://twitter.com/NaomiOreskes/status/514794891348815872

May/June 2015: NOAA releases paper explaining temperature adjustments which
eliminate the pause; changes the name from NCDC to NCEI

June 2015: GISS makes adjustments that serve to keep GISSTEMP up with NCEI,
ostensibly by way of independent reconstructive lineage

Summer 2015: NCAR publication devoted to pause controversy:
https://usclivar.org/sites/default/files/documents/2015/Variations2015S…

Sept 2015: RSS adopts Karl et al (through whatever means)

# Feb 2016: Fyfe et al challenge Karl et al

The effects are:  
1) To distance GISS and NOAA from HadCRUT and UAH;  
2) To alienate a good share of climate scientists;  
3) To warm sea surface temperature relative to night marine air temperature,
hence:  
4) To call into question the laws of thermodynamics, since evaporation tends
to cool SST relative to air temperature:  
https://bobtisdale.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/figure-12.png

Quite the string of coincidences, unless (upward) adjustments were so frequent
that the stars are always aligned. But many of the faithful are dissenting,
and it just doesn't work to call Mann and Santer deniers. Have at it, Tedesco.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"Sept 2015: RSS adopts Karl et al (through whatever means)"

This is even more amazing conspiracy nuttery. Then again, this _is_ AGF, so
expect more to come.

I _could_ for example point out that HADCRUT adopted a new ocean temperature
reconstruction well before NOAA and GISS did. I _could_ point out that this
increased the trend for HADCRUT to make it larger than that of NOAA, and that
the latest GISS and NOAA trend are only a little bit larger than that of
HADCRUT4 (not significant difference), but all of this will just make AGF dig
deeper into conspiracy ideation, because _any_ evidence, contrary or not, is
evidence for a conspiracy!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Marco (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Notice the difference: Tollefsen is making shit up about Karl contradicting
the IPCC. Agf is making shit up that Tollefson said Karl did something to
GISTEMP. Hell, Tollefsen doesn’t even mention GISTEMP.

>

> Two different things. But the utterly stupid agf is too brain-dead to
realise there is a difference.

Even with (the false) conspiracy theories about Karl and GISTEMP, the above
two pieces of made-up shit (one by Tollefson and one by agf) are still
different pieces of shit. The utterly stupid agf is still too brain-dead to
realise they are not mutually exclusive.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 09 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1545.5May2016  
Tedesco, we only have to go as far as yesterday's Washington Times to find
some level of conspiracy, right at the top:  
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/may/9/obama-wh-shows-bad-faith…  
And we could point out that the Washington Post would never report such a
story, nor would any other liberal paper in the country. But not all climate
fanatics are liars--some are just idiots, and it's hard to tell a crooked
referee from an incompetent one.

Which are you and your colleagues? I don't know for sure, but it's interesting
that an outsider named Nick Stokes saw the need to correct your numbers
somehow. Are the before and after figures available to us, from either GISS or
Stokes? Let's see what else. Here's a graph from BEST comparing HadCRUT and
GISS and NCDC and BEST (4th chart):  
http://berkeleyearth.org/berkeley-earth-temperature-update/  
It shows GISS and NCDC well above HadCRUT and BEST just a few months before
the Karl adjustment in apparent disagreement with the essence of your claim.
Whatever adjustment HadCRUT may have made "well before NOAA and GISS did," the
Karl adjustment to NOAA and the nearly simultaneous non-Karl adjustment to
GISS certainly widened the distance between them, like I said. (Is a tenth of
a degree significant?) So it seems you are not to be trusted. And I haven't
mentioned ARGOS (directly) or the radiosonde data, which jive with UAH and
used to jive with RSS before their big adjustment. And you've ignored
Tisdale's graph. So whether it's a conspiracy of incompetence or of intent,
you seem to be part of it.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 10 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1700GMT  
Possibly Tollefson did not distinguish between the working group drafts and
the final, sanitized version of the 2013 IPCC report. What the Working Group I
originally stated was this:

"In summary, the observed recent warming hiatus, defined as the reduction in
GMST trend during 1998–2012 as compared to the trend during 1951–2012, is
attributable in roughly equal measure to a cooling contribution from internal
variability and a reduced trend in external forcing (expert judgment, medium
confidence)."

Pachauri and his ideologue henchmen had no use for such "expert judgement."
(We'll make the report say what we want it to say.) So we could possibly allow
that CO'N man is technically correct as far as the finished product goes, but
only at the expense of a doomsday world devoid of conspiracy, since any
rational person would deem the censoring of "expert judgement" to conform to
purposes of propaganda, to be conspiratorial.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 10 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Oh for fucks sake AGF! Open conspiracy theories against the climatologists and
the IPCC - thousands of climate scientists around the world who have spent
years learning the intricacies and doing the maths and who would actually have
a vested interest in disproving Global Overheating i.e. winning Nobel prizes
and creating a revolution in basic physics & climatology - now? Seriously
dude. I didn't think I could think much less of you but turns out I can.

As for having "no use for such expert judgement" - are you trying to set a
world record in projection and break everyone's toughest tungsten strength
irony meters or something?

@AGF #414 :

> StevoR, ... ( Blatant AGF lie snipped) .. asks about the “mythical pause,”
claiming it’s incompatible with LIA recovery.

I asked whether you believed in the mythical ""pause" BS and pointed out that
if we're recovering from the LIA then the supposed and actually non-existent
"pause" in this warming is not compatible with that either. Hardly a straight
answer but I'll take that as a 'yes' and that you hold mutually incompatible
positions and are too willfully ignorant or disingenuous to accept that fact.
I don't think you are arguing in good faith here AGF.

> As I said a month ago, I could link you to lists of over 60 excuses for the
pause but the knowledgeable websites are banned.

No. Denialist anti-science propaganda sites are banned.

Knowledgeable websites are fine here for instances all the one's I've linked
for you throughout this thread and you've deliberately ignored.

> Here’s from the abstract of the first on the list:  
>  “However, the most recent climate data [2], show global temperature
development levelling off or even turning negative since 2001 in contrast to
the anticipated course related to the steady increases in the concentration in
the atmosphere of green-house gasses, primarily carbon dioxide and methane.”

Turns out AGF's linked paper :

http://file.scirp.org/pdf/ACS_2014010909502804.pdf

is titled Reduced Solar Activity Disguises Global Temperature Rise LOL! I kid
you not folks! ;-)

It includes the following, immediately after AGFs typically cherry-picked and
misleadingly out of context quote :

> The purpose of this communication is to demonstrate that the reduced rate in
the global temperature rise complies with expectations related to the decaying  
>  level of solar activity according to the relation published in an earlier
analysis [3]. Without the reduction in the  
>  solar activity-related contributions the global temperatures would have
increased steadily from 1980 to present.

Wow. Your own source completely and utterly refutes the case you're actually
claiming it supports! Thanks I guess.  
Did you think people wouldn't actually check your links AGF?

> And guess what? He never uses the word “pause”! He just mentions a
“negative” trend.

Gee I wonder why especially given the papers title eh?! Indeed, this papers
author goes much further and quite literally concludes with :

> "The decaying solar activity makes the recently recorded global temperatures
flatten out and thus disguises the real climate development. With a steady
level of cycle-average solar activity the global temperatures would have shown
a steady rise from 1980 to present (2013) in agreement with the increasing
atmospheric concentrations of green-house gasses, primarily carbon dioxide and
methane [16], and not the levelling-off actually observed since 2001.

>

> The solar activity is now at the lowest level seen in the  
>  past 100 years and could not go much lower. Thus, the  
>  observed global temperatures may soon resume the steady rise observed from
around 1980 to 2001. If solar activity starts increasing then the global
temperatures may rise even steeper than that seen over the past three decades.

(Bold added in the forlorn hope that AGF might actually get it!)

So the whole point of that paper was saying the "pause" was  
actually never there and that solar activity misled some people - like AGF -
into wrongly concluding that it was real.

Again, thanks for the informative link and source that demolishes your own
PRATTs and delusions!

Oh & it shall be noted here that you've failed to answer the other questions I
asked in #412 & before.

Since you've been so kind already ;-) , please do so :

1) You,AGF, are saying the scientific consensus there like the one on Global
Overheating is wrong because _____???

2) And that we should believe you over all those real climate scientists
because ____??? (Fill in the blanks if you can!)

&

          1. Volcanic activity levels and solar irradiance have been studied, observed and calculated and found NOT to be causative factors in the current observed planetary heating. What part of that do you fail to understand or reject on what factual basis and what evidence to have to support your claims?
                    
                                          * Log in to post comments
                    

_By StevoR (not verified) on 10 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Pachauri and his ideologue henchmen had no use for such “expert judgement.

And with that outrageously inappropriate and libellous statement AGF further
delves into the murk of gutter denial and reveals that he, like many of his
ilk, are clueless about the nature of the IPCC and its work, probably because
he is regurgitating something that has previously been regurgitated umpteen
times.

Whatever, it has been explained over and over that any use of the term pause
in this context was to describe a slow down in rate of surface temperature
increase, and not that of the climate system, which includes the oceans, as a
whole.

The way the term has been used by deniers is a mischaracterisation, often
based upon the trend of one temperature data set (RSS) with cherry picked
start and end dates. Thus it is cherry picking from picked cherries.

That later is made clear if one studies the three part report issued by the UK
Met' Office . Do download and read closely using included external references
to clarify if you don't understand something or wish to try to not understand
it.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 10 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> Possibly Tollefson did not distinguish between..

Possibly? Possibly? What a pathetic excuse for not realising that Tollefson's
statement must be mistaken in at least some way.

> “In summary, the observed recent warming hiatus, defined as the reduction in
GMST trend during 1998–2012 as compared to the trend during 1951–2012, is
attributable in roughly equal measure to a cooling contribution from internal
variability and a reduced trend in external forcing (expert judgment, medium
confidence).”

So fucking what? That is still not contradicted by what Karl said about the
1998-2012 trend not being statistically significant.

> So we could possibly allow that CO’N man is technically correct

Absolutely pathetic.

> a doomsday world devoid of conspiracy

It always comes back to a conspiracy theory.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

More correctly, the 'pause'/'hiatus'/"negative trend" is part of the reason
97% of climate models run hot. That they run hot indicates the modelers don't
have an adequate understanding of how climate responds to human interference,
that climate sensitivity is lower than assumed, and that undesired
consequences of GHGs have been exaggerated.

But I haven't been able to get a single response to my first post here: who is
right--Oreskes or Hansen? Oreskes called Hansen a 'denier' for advocating a
realistic energy approach to reducing CO2 emissions: nuclear energy. This in
itself proves Oreskes doesn't care at all about global warming, let alone
solutions to the supposed problem. She is only interested in advancing her
Marxist agenda.

So as I have said several times before, it makes no difference whether we
confess our sins of emission and recite the credo if we all go on our merry
way sinning as before. Expenditure translates roughly into energy consumption.
The wealthy cannot spend their money except on energy consumption. Hansen is
at least smart enough to know that solar and wind power cannot replace fossil
fuels, but nuclear energy can to a large extent. Oreskes doesn't really want a
solution--only a victimized planet.

And you all, who can't understand these simple facts that undermine your
belief system, can just keep on calling the agnostics deniers. We don't care,
but we don't think any of you are very bright.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

"More correctly, the ‘pause’/’hiatus’/”negative trend” is part of the reason
97% of climate models run hot. That they run hot indicates the modelers don’t
have an adequate understanding of how climate responds to human interference,
that climate sensitivity is lower than assumed, and that undesired
consequences of GHGs have been exaggerated."

Where has AGF been for the last three years? My pre-breakfast farts contain
more logic than this dimwit has expended throughout these comments.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> ...the reason 97% of climate models run hot.

Which statement demonstrates that you know very little about climate models.
How many different types there are, how many research teams from diverse
countries are involved and that models are often run many times starting with
different boundary conditions and/or time frames.

Go look up stuff about climate models, most good text books on the sciences
behind climate change have sections on this as do reliable websites such as
Real Climate, and Skeptical Science. Don't knock them until you have studied
them.

There was also commentary on climate models in the Met' Office report I
pointed you at above, which will give you clues.

> We don’t care, but we don’t think any of you are very bright....

Said the Hatter looking into the mirror.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> ...and that undesired consequences of GHGs have been exaggerated.

And yet month by month this year we see reports like this: Average global
temperature was 1.07C hotter - beating last month’s previous record increase
and April was little better.

As for climate sensitivity, have you no idea about ECS or TCS and how there is
inertia built into responses to GHG forcings. Go look this stuff up.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1800GMT

Lionel A, you don't seem to know the difference between climate and weather.
Look them up. If the pause is not significant, your record hot months
certainly aren't. There is only one reason 97% of models run hot: they don't
reflect reality. And to deny that is to deny reality, which is all you
alarmists know how to do.

And speaking of consensus, let's hear your guess for ECS. This picture is
worth a million words: http://skepticalscience.com//pics/ProjvsObs.png  
And none of SS's BS can explain it away.

So Lionel A, what have you done to save the world today? Switched from jets to
bikes? Campaigned for nuclear power? You're all just quacks. And hypocrites.
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF

And speaking of consensus, let’s hear your guess for ECS. This picture is
worth a million words: http://skepticalscience.com//pics/ProjvsObs.png  
And none of SS’s BS can explain it away.

Explain what away?

It is well understood that:

          * natural variability overprints the forced signal over short timescales

          * therefore nothing much about sensitivity can be inferred from a short period of observations

          * and comparing single-instance observations with the multi-model mean is uninformative and potentially misleading

          * and the forced signal dominates on multi-decadal / centennial timescales and that is the AGW problem
                    
                                          * Log in to post comments
                    

_By BBD (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1930GMT  
Getting back on track, here's a two year old obituary:

"Maynard Malcolm Miller, explorer, committed educator and noted scientist
whose glaciological research was among the first to identify hard evidence of
global climate change as a result of human industrial activity, died on
January 26 at his home in Moscow, Idaho. He was 93."

That eulogy, "noted scientist whose glaciological research was among the first
to identify hard evidence of global climate change as a result of human
industrial activity," requires context. Here's what he was saying back in 79:

“…we are in the middle of or long overdue for some kind of Ice Age.” “…we are
apparently dropping into a cooling phase.”

So here they are, claiming priority for climate change alarm, when the
original alarm was in fact about cooling danger.  
Here Miller is pushing warming while Motyka and Hartmann are a bit skeptical:
http://juneauempire.com/stories/072703/loc_glaciers.shtml#.VzOE7ITyvcs  
And who was concerned with CO2 warming in 1968? Fred Singer --see the
introduction to Part I of "Global Effects of Environmental Pollution."  
https://books.google.com/books?id=hWa0LcQNZhcC&printsec=frontcover&sour…  
Some scientists are influenced by recent climate cycles and some aren't.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AG Foster

Oreskes called Hansen a ‘denier’ for advocating a realistic energy approach to
reducing CO2 emissions: nuclear energy. This in itself proves Oreskes doesn’t
care at all about global warming, let alone solutions to the supposed problem.
She is only interested in advancing her Marxist agenda.

Nonsense. It 'proves' nothing of the sort. At most, it shows that Oreskes
probably doesn't understand the technical challenge of switching to 100%
renewables very clearly. As for this rubbish about 'Marxist agendas', well
that's just unhinged. Favouring a renewables-heavy future energy mix doesn't
make anyone a Marxist.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

So here they are, claiming priority for climate change alarm, when the
original alarm was in fact about cooling danger.

Except that it wasn't. The majority scientific view has always been that CO2
will cause more warming.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2200GMT

BBD:

"So here they are..." refers to Miller's obituary writers. But your
misinterpretation of the sentence is probably wrong too--we just don't have
any polls from the 70s.

Oreskes attacked Frederick Seitz for his strident anticommunism in Merchants.
She's anticapitalist. She's socialist. Those who know her consider her a
Marxist, e.g.,  
http://motls.blogspot.com/2014/10/who-is-bigger-hater-of-fundamental.ht…  
And she's not opposed to unworkable renewables--like wind and solar--just
workable ones like nuclear.

Thou hast misconstrued everything. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

“So here they are…” refers to Miller’s obituary writers. But your
misinterpretation of the sentence is probably wrong too–we just don’t have any
polls from the 70s.

What misrepresentation?

Look at the contemporary evidence as reviewed in “The Myth of the 1970s Global
Cooling Scientific Consensus,” Peterson, Thomas C., William M. Connolley, John
Fleck, 2008: Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 89, 1325–1337. Which was referenced in
the headpost.

Majority scientific opinion was that CO2 would cause warming.

Oreskes attacked Frederick Seitz for his strident anticommunism in Merchants.
She’s anticapitalist. She’s socialist.

Seitz is old school Cold War nuts, AGF. Oresekes having a go at Fred's
reactionary politics doesn't make her a Marxist. As for the view from rather
right of centre provided by Lubos, well, he's not exactly a balanced
commentator.

Thou hast misconstrued everything. –AGF

Um, no.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 11 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> claiming priority for climate change alarm, when the original alarm was in
fact about cooling danger

The original warnings, Schneider e.g., were conditional warnings - cooling
conditional on aerosols - warming conditional on GHGs.

The warnings haven't changed, only the conditions.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Has Lubos called for Naomi's "liquidation" yet? (With him, it's less a threat
than a bon Motl.)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> If the pause is not significant

From your favourite citation:

"Recent studies have assessed whether or not trends during the slowdown are
statistically different from trends over some earlier period. These
investigations have led to statements such as “further evidence against the
notion of a recent warming hiatus”4 or “claims of a hiatus in global warming
lack sound scientific basis”9. While **these analyses are statistically
sound** "

i.e. the slowdown was not statistically significant. I know how important
statistical significance is to global warming denialists so I know they will
want statistical significance before even considering the significance of a
slowdown - unless they're shameless hypocrites of course.

Also from the brain-dead's favourite citation:

"The legacy of this new understanding will certainly outlive the recent
warming slowdown."

Poor recent warming slowdown, outlived by the legacy this new understanding.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> that climate sensitivity is lower than assumed

According to your favourite citation, it means nothing of the sort:

"A different perspective on the role of internal variability is obtained
through the analysis of the individual models  
and realizations comprising the MME. In 10 out of 262 ensemble members, the
simulations and observations had the same negative phase of the IPO during the
slowdown period — that is, there was a fortuitous ‘lining up’ of internal
decadal variability in the observed climate system and the 10
simulations15,16. These 10 ensemble members captured the muted early-twenty-
first-century warming, thus illustrating the role of internal variability in
the slowdown."

Thus the short-term slowdown was due to short term factors that are not
incorporated into the climate models, except by chance, such as the IPO. This
makes absolutely no difference to long term average outcomes which include
climate sensitivity.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF

> Lionel A, you don’t seem to know the difference between climate and weather.

So, clever clogs, what is the difference between climate and weather? This
would be easy for you to answer if you had studied 'Atmosphere, Weather &
Climate' by Roger G. Barry and Richard Chorley as I have. I still have the
1982 edition I used way back here.

And I note that, by your repetition of this '97%' BS that you still lack
knowledge of the nature of models and on what they are constructed, think
palaeoclimatology for one.

Now dropping in a chart from anywhere, shorn of context and even if from SkS
is not the action of an honest broker.

However that is the nature of the particular climate models run to develop
those particular scenarios. You will find that from which it is a crop, on
page 131 of WGAR1AR5 final. If you think that is the product of '97% of
climate models' then your are misinformed.

As for ESC and TSR (or TCS), what is the difference and why does it matter?
Come on, stop avoiding and provide some substance.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

As for ESC and TSR (or TCS)

Acronym alert:

TCR -> ECS -> ESS

And don't let's get started on 'effective climate sensitivity'...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Yep! I got my acronyms really muddled there whilst watching a computer out of
the corner of my eye which had got a dose of uninvited Windows 10 updates
which I was sorting. Grrr!

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1750GMT  
We have two sorts here, droolers and foamers. The simplest things go over
everyone's head. Miller's obituary brags about him being one of the first to
identify anthropogenic climate change, when the record shows the climate
change he in fact promoted was global cooling. Too hard for everyone here.

The main point is this: global warming is a good thing, whatever is causing
it. It has allowed agriculture in temperate zones where formerly there was
none. Increased precipitation together with CO2 fertilization has greened the
Sahel. It might possibly open the Arctic to navigation for part of the year.
It might save us from another LIA or the next major glaciation. But it has not
been sufficient to prevent the southern migration of the US citrus belt.

What are the dangers of warming? Nearly zilch. Far less at any rate than those
of cooling. The coolers were right in every aspect except the worldwide
starvation predicted by Bryson and a few others. Cold is bad. Warm is good.

BBD refers us to PCF like we hadn't discussed the hell out of it here. He has
a lot of catching up to do. Lionel A thinks ECS and TCS aren't important or
something. If it ain't quantified it ain't science. If we don't know how
strong CO2 is we don't know squat. If it's weak, the citrus groves will
continue to freeze--partly due to swamp draining in Florida--but not in Texas
or California.

So what about sea level rise? Is that a problem? This is a threat on a par
with the interstadial coming to an end: the time scale is millennial. 3mm/year
with only imagined acceleration, such as by comparing the apples and oranges
of satellite measurement against tide gauges. The gloom and doom is not based
on observation but on worst case scenarios of ECS, which ECS remains
unquantified, but necessarily lowered by the pause. An inch per decade. A foot
per century, at present rates, which rates are largely a function of LIA
recovery. It's a symptom of better days ahead. The LIA is over.

Cheer up. Bryson was wrong. So is Hansen.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

The main point is this: global warming is a good thing, whatever is causing
it. [...] What are the dangers of warming? Nearly zilch.

Argument from assertion is a logical fallacy, not least when contradicted by
pretty much the entire field of ecosystems science.

The gloom and doom is not based on observation but on worst case scenarios of
ECS, which ECS remains unquantified, but necessarily lowered by the pause.

Wrong and debunked just a few comments above. Repeating tripe does not
constitute an argument.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Lionel A thinks ECS and TCS aren’t important or something.

Foster (far from like your namesake) your comprehension is appalling if that
is what you think.

So tell us do, what are are the differences between equilibrium climate
sensitivity and transient climate response? Stop ducking questions.

Other part of the question was for you to explain why it matters. Which was
not an indicator of importance or other from myself.

As for warming being good — do your lying eyes deceive you about extreme
weather event occurrences. As BBD writes the evidence from ecological systems
is one of distress, think phenological disruption alone.

Now it is too late in the day here to go into further detail but that should
be homework for you to do.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Lionel A (not verified) on 12 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> global warming is a good thing

A.k.a. the third stage of climate science denial (1st stage: there is no
global warming, 2nd stage: humans aren't causing it).

But we've come to expect science denial from someone who makes shit up and
cites made-up shit and thinks the two pieces of shit are mutually exclusive.
Pieces of shit aren't mutually exclusive, they're just pieces of shit.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1540GMT  
All the believers have to be educated from scratch--deprogrammed, degaussed,
rehabilitated, weaned from junk science and decades of brainwashing. In a sane
world the burden of proof is left to the doomsayers, not the skeptics. The
ubiquitous junk science such as that which Lionel A links us to makes Bryson's
predictions of a starving freezing world look reasonable by comparison. LA's
link begins:

"Anthropogenic climate change is widely expected to drive species extinct by
hampering individual survival and reproduction, by reducing the amount and
accessibility of suitable habitat, or by eliminating other organisms that are
essential to the species in question."

What better example of BBD's argument from assertion! Grand scale extinction
from a return to Eemian conditions or worse: Pliocene even. Yeah, it was so
cold around my place after a warm March that I thought my cherries and apricot
blossoms wouldn't get fertilized, but they managed.

But this climate nonsense is throwing us back into the dark ages. Only junk
science is funded. Only lying and incompetent scientists get grants. We're in
big trouble. Polar bears starving and drowning (while their numbers increase).
Armadillos heading back south (after moving north in the 70s). Birds changing
routes and nests and crossing borders without documentation. It's total havoc,
all because you refuse to buy a hybrid! What's going on?

Here's what, to name a few:  
1) Worms are being introduced by gardeners and foresters to northern parts
where they haven't been for tens of thousands of years.  
2) Bird feeders are everywhere.  
3) Growing cities provide unprecedented habitat for pigeons and swallows.  
4) European starlings largely replaced extinct passenger pigeons in North
America.  
5) Forests continue to be cleared for agriculture and wood pellet burning.  
6) Forest fires have been prevented, radically altering the natural ecosystem.  
7) Roads in forests facilitate predation.

And so on. And in the midst of this global environmental disruption these
biologists claim to detect problems created by a one degree temperature
change, and try to tell us climate change is the main problem threatening
species, not whaling, fishing, logging, deforestation, exotic species
introduction, etc. We are dealing with nothing but junk science and you
rabidupes are the perpetrators. And you try to teach us?

Now about that TCS. Short term GHG forcing plus feedbacks, with the primary
feedback expected to be water vapor. Generally, more H2O in the troposphere
amplifies; more in the stratosphere attenuates. What's happening?  
Total column over the ocean increasing a little:  
https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/figure-3-20.html  
Precipitable H2O holding fairly steady:  
http://clivebest.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/fig4c_tpw.jpg  
Global relative humidity decreasing significantly:  
http://clivebest.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/GlobalRelativeHumi…  
Specific humidity at 400mb decreasing markedly:  
http://clivebest.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/SH400mb.jpg  
So H2O feedback may well be negative, possibly sufficiently negative to
counteract CO2 altogether.

Makes a hot spot hard to find. In fact it was not identified till May 2015
when innovative statistical analysis made it show up where none had seen it
before. 2015 was a good year. And in September RSS, which formerly showed the
best (negative) pause, was adjusted enough to replace the pause with a hot
spot. It was a very good year. Whereas previously RSS and UAH and radiosondes
were closing the gap with surface measurements--against theory--novel
interpretation brought all the old sensors in line with the dogma. Marvelous
these mathematical advances. And the rabidupes eat it all up.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> GISS and NCDC well above HadCRUT and BEST

BTW, regarding the "adjustment" period 1998-2012 inclusive, GISS now shows
0.103±0.142℃/decade while BEST now shows 0.096±0.136℃/decade. Saying the
former is "well above" the latter is just making shit up. Obviously BEST are
part of the Great Global Warming Conspiracy.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> What better example of BBD’s argument from assertion!

The quote isn't an argument from assertion. It is backed by pretty much the
whole field of ecosystems science. The only person arguing from assertion
counter to the mainstream scientific position is you, AGF. Please try to keep
this in mind - it's the second time I've had to remind you.

* * *

> So H2O feedback may well be negative, possibly sufficiently negative to
counteract CO2 altogether.

Then how do you explain past climate variability? Let's take the example of
deglaciation under orbital forcing (Milankovitch forcing). Total solar
irradience during deglaciation is virtually unchanged. All that happens is
that orbital dynamics reorganise seasonal and spatial insolation without
increasing the total amount. Yet this is sufficient to trigger an increase in
global average temperature of >4C. That is absolely robust evidence for the
dominance of postitive feedbacks in the climate system. You need to think more
carefully about what you are claiming. I would also recommend a good textbook
on physical climatology as your topic knowledge is extremely weak.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> And the rabidupes eat it all up.

If you want to be dismissed as a nutter, keep up with the conspiracy theory
nonsense. If you want to be taken seriously - even a little bit - put the
tinfoil away.

Only and final warning.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1930GMT  
BBD, if you look here
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milankovitch_cycles#/media/File:Vostok_42…  
you'll see that 60ppm CO2 correspond to 10C, which is one hell of a forcing to
blame on CO2. The most that has been attributed to CO2 and the ice ages is a
little amplification. If you look lower on the chart you'll see that
insolation varies over 100W at 65N in June, two orders of magnitude greater
than CO2 forcing, and which is clearly what triggers the show. Not a tiny bit
of CO2. So we see as always, you don't know the first thing about climatology,
yet here you are parading you ignorance for all to see, and resorting to
arguments of consensus and authority. Next you'll insist a peregrine falcon
can stoop at 240mph.

Was Lysenkoism a conspiracy? --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> The most that has been attributed to CO2 and the ice ages is a little
amplification.

First, I'm not arguing that deglaciation is forced by CO2 alone. CO2 and CH4
are _feedbacks_ - positive feedbacks - to changing seasonal and spatial
insolation, itself modulated by orbital dynamics. Just so we are clear.

> If you look lower on the chart you’ll see that insolation varies over 100W
at 65N in June, two orders of magnitude greater than CO2 forcing, and which is
clearly what triggers the show.

See above.

> Not a tiny bit of CO2. So we see as always, you don’t know the first thing
about climatology, yet here you are parading you ignorance for all to see, and
resorting to arguments of consensus and authority.

See above.

The point we were discussing was whether or not there is evidence for a strong
_negative_ feedback - you brought up water vapour - which could counteract the
effects of radiative perturbation. Deglaciation under orbital forcing
illustrates that the climate system must be dominated by _positive_ feedbacks
because total energy input (global TSI) changes very little during
deglaciation but the climate system warms up by  >4C. This is only possible if
the net of all feedbacks is positive. If a strong negative feedback existed,
it would have prevented deglaciation. The Pleistocene ice age would not be
punctuated by interglacials.

* * *

> So we see as always, you don’t know the first thing about climatology, yet
here you are parading you ignorance for all to see

:-)

You need a good textbook. Try Ruddiman Earth's Climate: Past and Future (2nd
Edition). Don't buy the 3rd Ed because you don't need to spend the
considerable extra money. The 2nd Ed is fine and by no means obsolete. $10 -
$30 USD is a bargain if you are more interested in the science of physical
climatology than pushing a political peanut.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 13 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2045GMT

You have obviously never read a good text book. "See above" and "see above"
doesn't add much. Anyone who tries to dismiss orbital forcing by way of
globally averaged insolation and thinks a fraction of a watt of CO2
amplification constitutes significant feedback, aint up to par on the subject.

First thing, asymmetric albedo. The 100W cycle has little effect on the S
hemisphere, huge effect on the N. Land ice area is relatively constant in the
S; highly variable in the N. The albedo feedback alone swamps CO2 feedback.
And methane is pretty much a farce as feedbacks go.

So insolation varies over a max of 100W through orbital forcing. Southern
albedo is fairly constant long term; only sea ice varies much. As long as the
northern ice melts faster than it snows, the ice diminishes, and vise versa.
And you think M cycles can't do that? The global average doesn't trigger
squat. The 100W cycle, together with albedo and cloud feed back, make your
GHG's and H2O feedback look like peanuts.

What does it take to melt a km of ice in 10ky? 3W/m^2.  
You're just talking junk science.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 14 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> You have obviously never read a good text book. “See above” and “see above”
doesn’t add much. Anyone who tries to dismiss orbital forcing by way of
globally averaged insolation and thinks a fraction of a watt of CO2
amplification constitutes significant feedback, aint up to par on the subject.

Are you being deliberately stupid?

Here's what I wrote:

> First, I’m not arguing that deglaciation is forced by CO2 alone. CO2 and CH4
are _feedbacks_ – positive feedbacks – to changing seasonal and spatial
insolation, itself modulated by orbital dynamics. Just so we are clear.

See above. Idiot. And stop strawmanning me to avoid engaging on the actual
issue, which is your being wrong about negative feedbacks. See above.

> First thing, asymmetric albedo.

Not in dispute. Strawman.

> The albedo feedback alone swamps CO2 feedback. And methane is pretty much a
farce as feedbacks go.

Albedo is _larger_ but you are grossly over-stating the case. The combined
forcing increase from CO2 and CH4 (~18ka - 11.5ka interval) was ~2W/m^2 which
is most definitely climatologically significant (eg. IPCC AR4 WG1 Ch 6).

> So insolation varies over a max of 100W through orbital forcing.

It's about 40W/m^2 and only at high north latitude in summer. You are over-
stating again.

> The global average doesn’t trigger squat.

More straw. I never said that it did.

> The 100W cycle, together with albedo and cloud feed back, make your GHG’s
and H2O feedback look like peanuts.

The key problem is that you don't really know what you are talking about.

Here's how deglaciation actually works:

          * NH summer insolation increases from ~21.5ka especially at high latitudes

          * By ~19ka, mid/high latitude NH temperature increase causes sufficient melt from NH ice sheets for freshwater flux to inhibit NADW formation and halt AMOC  
[THC fact sheet: see fig. 2]

          * NH now _cools_ as equatorial  >>> poleward heat transport stops

          * With the NH ‘heat sink’ turned off, the SH _warms_ , as it must

          * Deep water warming in SH ocean causes release of carbon to atmosphere. This positive feedback globalises and amplifies the warming

          * NH melt resumes, fully engaging strongly positive ice albedo feedback

          * Deglaciation accelerates until largely complete by ~11.5ka. Holocene interglacial begins

See eg. Shakun et al. (2012).

> You’re just talking junk science.

Please stop the aggressive bullshitting. It should be obvious by now that I
know you are bluffing. You aren't fooling me. You couldn't.

Now, you were wrong about negative feedback. You are wrong about CO2 not being
a necessary part of the system of positive feedbacks to orbital forcing. What
next?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

What next?

Desperation bullshit. Piled higher & deeper.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1350GMT  
BBD, in comparing modern short term climate variability and feed backs to ice
ages you jumped the ship. They are not comparable.

First off, why don't you explain to us what causes the variability in CO2 and
CH4?

Here's what you said at 449: " Total solar irradience during deglaciation is
virtually unchanged. All that happens is that orbital dynamics reorganise
seasonal and spatial insolation without increasing the total amount. Yet this
is sufficient to trigger an increase in global average temperature of >4C.
That is absolely robust evidence for the dominance of postitive feedbacks in
the climate system."

They are not analogous.

Concerning insolation cycles you state: "It’s about 40W/m^2 and only at high
north latitude in summer. You are over-stating again."

Where do you get that? I already referred you to a chart indicating 100W peak
to peak. Did the Vostok group lie? And here's http://www.clim-
past.net/12/1119/2016/  
asserting :  
"The transient experiments indicate a highly inhomogeneous early Holocene
temperature warming over different regions. The climate in Alaska was
constantly cooling over the whole Holocene, whereas there was an overall fast
early Holocene warming in northern Canada by more than 1 °C kyr−1 as a
consequence of progressive LIS decay."

And what could be more absurd than "its... only at high north latitude in
summer"? Where do you think it matters? It matters where the ice is, you
idiot. Where the ice melts when it gets an extra 40 or 50W over the average
(80 or 100 over the minimum).

So again, what makes CO2 and CH4 oscillate? Temperature, and nothing more.
Only the slightest circular feedback. What drives T? Insolation, the presence
or lack of ice, clouds, etc. Do you have benthic evidence for your NADW and
AMOC modeling? Or is it just...modeling?

At minus 50W the ice doesn't melt. At plus 50 it does. Where T = 0C, that is,
not at the South Pole. And the ice doesn't give a hoot about 1W global CO2
feed back.

Time to start over. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> BBD, in comparing modern short term climate variability and feed backs to
ice ages you jumped the ship. They are not comparable.

Why? Physics hasn't changed. If feedbacks net positive, then the climate
system is going to respond to _any_ radiative perturbation. Including
increased anthropogenic CO2 forcing.

> First off, why don’t you explain to us what causes the variability in CO2
and CH4?

Assuming you are referring to glacial/interglacial cycles then, as explained,
they are feedbacks to orbital forcing. My point is simply that they are
_positive_ feedbacks. They amplify the warming because they are efficacious
climate forcings.

> They are not analogous.

A positive feedback is a positive feedback. And you can't get from a 0.2%
global insolation boost at TOA to >4C surface temperature change without
positive feedbacks.

The point about positive feedbacks is that they offset lukewarm rhetoric.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Where do you get that? I already referred you to a chart indicating 100W
peak to peak.

I think you've misunderstood the graph you linked earlier. This shows data
from the Vostock ice core extending back ~420ka. Insolation at 65 degrees
north latitude is presented at the bottom of the graph (bottom curve: orange).
Magnitude is plotted on the vertical axis and the units are joules not W/m^2.

The increase from the LGM to peak values ~12ka is about 60J.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I think you’ve misunderstood the graph you linked earlier. This shows data
from the Vostock ice core extending back ~420ka. Insolation at 65 degrees
north latitude is presented at the bottom of the graph (bottom curve: orange).
Magnitude is plotted on the vertical axis and the units are joules not W/m^2.

Nope, that's me confused, and hands up.

The increase from the LGM to peak values ~12ka is about 60 Wm^2.
Conservatively.

Nothing else I have said changes.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0115GMT16May16  
To my question:  
"First off, why don’t you explain to us what causes the variability in CO2 and
CH4?"  
BBD replies:  
"Assuming you are referring to glacial/interglacial cycles then, as explained,
they are feedbacks to orbital forcing. My point is simply that they are
_positive_ feedbacks. They amplify the warming because they are efficacious
climate forcings."

I don't understand--the answer seems too vague. Let me ask further, why are
the three responses (T, CO2, CH4) so closely correlated?  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 15 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> I don’t understand–the answer seems too vague. Let me ask further, why are
the three responses (T, CO2, CH4) so closely correlated?

Why don't you just read the references?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

God Bless BBD. Red-headed Foster children, like dead horses, can be
exhausting.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

They say you "can't fix stupid", but OMG, stupid coupled with raging political
agenda is just insufferable... (I think it's because the one reinforces the
other.)

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

They say you “can’t fix stupid”, but OMG, stupid coupled with raging political
agenda is just insufferable… (I think it’s because the one reinforces the
other.)

One can, however, ignore Stupid.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Desertphile (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

In reply to by Brainstorms (not verified)

* * *

"I don’t understand–the answer seems too vague. Let me ask further, why are
the three responses (T, CO2, CH4) so closely correlated?"

(This suggests a sincere attempt at understanding, and I don't want to
belittle that in any way.")

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Antarctic sea ice extent in the Southern Ocean modulating the ventilation of
bottom waters. See eg. Ferrari et al. (2014).

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1905GMT  
Over at WUWT Shakun et al was appropriately deconstructed four years ago. To
quote myself from a comment made I made (4/6/12, 1156AM) :

"As most know, the great advantage of the ice cores is that multiple data are
contained in close proximity in the ice. CO2 is locked in within a century or
two of snowing, and the lag can be estimated and accounted for. So mixing in
other proxies can only obfuscate."

The Vostok core compares CO2 and CH4 with δ18O with great precision, and it's
marvelous how well the first two correspond to reconstructed T. A primary task
for the climatologist is to account at least for correlation between CO2 and
CH4. The best, general explanation for the correlation is that the three
mainly reflect ice sheet extension. With above average TOA insolation the ice
melts rapidly, eventually (after several thousand years) uncovering organic
debris, releasing CO2 and CH4 nearly in tandem with T rise, and providing no
evidence per se of GHG warming, let alone TCS. If you have a better
explanation for CO2/CH4 correlation, I'm all ears.

Cf. this with the Vostok graph and you get an idea how useless is Shakun et al
compared to a good ice core: https:// +  
wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/nature_shakun_proxies_plus_co2.jpg  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I think Ferrari helps a little. Mearns states my case as well as I could:
http://euanmearns.com/the-vostok-ice-core-temperature-co2-and-ch4/  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

http://blog.hotwhopper.com/2014/12/duet-on-ice-more-denier-silliness-at…

You broke my heart, Foster.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By wheelism (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Over at WUWT Shakun et al was appropriately deconstructed four years ago.

No it wasn't. If you think the confusion at WUWT constitutes a scientific
critique of S12 then you are mistaken. Please don't reference this
misinformation blog again. If there was a valid problem with S12 then it would
be detailed in a reply in the literature. Where is that reply?

If you want to discuss science, then deal in science. Same goes for Mearns'
stuff. He's just wrong and badly out of date. If he knew what he was talking
about, he would be aware that the 'CO2 lags temperature' meme is a debunked
contrarian talking point, not a valid scientific perspective.

> releasing CO2 and CH4 nearly in tandem with T rise, and providing no
evidence per se of GHG warming, let alone TCS

(TCS -> TCR )

This is physics denial. You are claiming that there is no climate forcing from
GHGs, which isn't something I am going to waste time arguing about. It's Sky
Dragon lunacy that is supposed to be banned even at WUWT.

Read Shakun 12 instead of WUWT. In the real world, ice albedo alone is not
sufficient to account for the temperature difference between the LGM and the
pre-industrial Holocene. You need another radiative term. We've already
established that _globally_ TSI barely changes during deglaciation so we need
something else and that something is GHG forcing. See eg. Hansen  & Sato
(2012):

> The altered boundary conditions that maintained the climate change between
these two periods had to be changes on Earth's surface and changes of long-
lived atmospheric constituents, because the incoming solar energy does not
change much in 20,000 years. Changes of long-lived GHGs are known accurately
for the past 800,000 years from Antarctic ice core data (Luthi et al., 2008;
Loulergue et al., 2008). Climate forcings due to GHG and surface albedo
changes between the LGM and Holocene were approximately 3 and 3.5 W/m2,
respectively, with largest uncertainty (±1 W/m2) in the surface change (ice
sheet area, vegetation distribution, shoreline movement) due to uncertainty in
ice sheet sizes (Hansen et al., 1984; Hewitt and Mitchell, 1997).

Almost _half_ the RF necessary to drive the LGM - Holocene transition is from
GHGs.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> So mixing in other proxies can only obfuscate

>

> [...]

>

> Cf. this with the Vostok graph and you get an idea how useless is Shakun et
al compared to a good ice core

No, this is incorrect. You are still ignoring the process of deglaciation
which I outlined above. It isn't globally simultaneous; there is hemispheric
antiphase on millennial timescales. Pointing to an Antarctic core and saying
that the rest of a global analysis is wrong because it is out of phase with
the Antarctic shows that you have failed to understand this at the most basic
level:

– NH summer insolation increases from ~21.5ka especially at high latitudes

– By ~19ka, mid/high latitude NH temperature increase causes sufficient melt
from NH ice sheets for freshwater flux to inhibit NADW formation and halt AMOC

– NH now _cools_ as equatorial  >>> poleward heat transport stops

– With the NH ‘heat sink’ turned off, the SH _warms_ , as it must

– Deep water warming in SH ocean causes release of carbon to atmosphere. This
positive feedback globalises and amplifies the warming

– NH melt resumes, fully engaging strongly positive ice albedo feedback

– Deglaciation accelerates until largely complete by ~11.5ka. Holocene
interglacial begins

It's all in Shakun et al. If you read the actual science and not contrarian
misinformation blogs you have at least a hope of sorting out the mess. I can't
do it for you.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 16 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1335GMT  
BBD sounds like Pravda dissing Radio Free Europe. Next he'll be denouncing
Climate Audit as science denial. SS is the propaganda site; WUWT draws on
scientists everywhere to expose the junk science. Y'all need to get
politically educated, and as your first lesson I suggest:
http://michaelkelly.artofeurope.com/cru.htm

Where you will read tidbits like this: """

Focus. Wait, it is juicy, it is devastating, it is priceless stuff. Tom Wigley
to Jones:

Phil,

I have just read the M&M stuff critcizing MBH. A lot of it seems valid to me.  
At the very least MBH [the hockey stick] is a very sloppy piece of work -- an
opinion I have held for some time. [Although not in public.]  
Presumably what you have done with Keith is better? -- or is it?  
I get asked about this a lot. Can you give me a brief heads up? Mike is too  
deep into this to be helpful.  
Tom.  
Phil's reply:

you cannot trust anything that M&M write. MBH is as good a way of putting all
the data together as others. ...  
Bottom line - their is no way the MWP (whenever it was) was as warm globally
as the last 20 years. There is also no way a whole decade in the LIA period
was more than 1 deg C on a global basis cooler than the 1961-90 mean. This is
all gut feeling, no science, but years of experience of dealing with global
scales and varaibility.  
Must go to Florence now. """  
========================================  
No, I never said there is no GHG forcing; I said we don't know what the
feedbacks are. We can't quantify ECS or TCS and until we do we don't even know
for sure they're not negative (however unlikely that might be). And after
making silly claims about strawmen you really do it with:  
"Pointing to an Antarctic core and saying that the rest of a global analysis
is wrong because it is out of phase with the Antarctic shows that you have
failed to understand this at the most basic level.." You're just making this
crap up.

Insolation is measured in watts. A watt is a joule per second. It only takes
three watts to melt a km of ice in 10ky, and for a few months of the year when
conditions are right the ice gets a whole lot more than that, plus feedback.
Ergo, the primary response to insolation is ice sheet extension, of which CO2
and CH4 are merely symptoms with unknown and possibly insignificant
amplification. Ice ages don't tell us squat about their ECS and it's quackery
to claim otherwise.

--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> BBD sounds like Pravda dissing Radio Free Europe.

Don't be ridiculous. It has exactly the opposite effect you intend: it
telegraphs that you have lost the argument and are desperately trying to
deflect attention from the fact.

As for the rest of the misdirection - in all the years since MBH99, nobody has
ever shown it to be substantially flawed. Instead, every subsequent millennial
temperature reconstruction has _confirmed_ that the study - the first of its
kind, let's not forget - was essentially correct. And that's the end of the
matter. I'm not going to revisit the hockey stick wars in 2016.

> No, I never said there is no GHG forcing; I said we don’t know what the
feedbacks are. We can’t quantify ECS or TCS and until we do we don’t even know
for sure they’re not negative (however unlikely that might be).

We _do_ know they are not negative and events like deglaciation prove it. I
have explained all this in some detail now and I'm not going to do it again.
If you cannot follow the discussion, you should leave it, or at the very
least, go back and read the thread until you understand the topic better.

> And after making silly claims about strawmen you really do it with:  
>  “Pointing to an Antarctic core and saying that the rest of a global
analysis is wrong because it is out of phase with the Antarctic shows that you
have failed to understand this at the most basic level..” You’re just making
this crap up.

No, you are. Go back and read what I wrote carefully. Either this is going
over your head or you aren't paying sufficient attention.

> Ice ages don’t tell us squat about their ECS and it’s quackery to claim
otherwise.

Redundant proof that you haven't got the faintest idea what you are talking
about. If you only read the references you would realise just how daft some of
the things you say really are:

> The empirical fast-feedback climate sensitivity that we infer from the LGM-
Holocene comparison is thus 5°C/6.5 W/m2 ~ ¾ ± ¼ °C per W/m2 or 3 ± 1°C for
doubled CO2. The fact that ice sheet and GHG boundary conditions are actually
slow climate feedbacks is irrelevant for the purpose of evaluating the fast-
feedback climate sensitivity.

>

> This empirical climate sensitivity incorporates all fast response feedbacks
in the real-world climate system, including changes of water vapor, clouds,
aerosols, aerosol effects on clouds, and sea ice. In contrast to climate
models, which can only approximate the physical processes and may exclude
important processes, the empirical result includes all processes that exist in
the real world – and the physics is exact.

You need to read a decent textbook and stop trying to bluff your way through
discussions like these. You cannot do it. Surely this is obvious to you by
now?

Do you _want_ me to start openly mocking you?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Since ancient citations of Tom Wigley are in fashion, here is what he says:

> The human-induced changes that are expected over the next 100 years are
much, much greater than any changes that societies experienced in the past.
Much greater.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1710GMT

BBD: "Do you _want_ me to start openly mocking you?"

This from a guy who thinks you can get different numbers by switching from
watts to joules. We can't even predict water vapor and cloud feedback in the
present climate regime, and BBD thinks that can be done with tolerable
precision over ice ages, sufficienty, anyway, to estimate ECS. We don't know
the ancient extent of sea ice or shallow land ice. We can only guess what
ocean currents were doing, and whether the Volga was flowing into the Caspian
or the Arctic, or how much of the melting is due to rain brought up from the
tropics (dependent on equatorial insolation).

After the Eemian peaked CO2 stayed high for 15ky while T plummeted, apparently
in response to falling insolation. CO2 couldn't save our ancestors from the
last ice age and we'll be lucky if it saves us from the next, Callendar's
optimism notwithstanding.

BBD: "As for the rest of the misdirection – in all the years since MBH99,
nobody has ever shown it to be substantially flawed."  
======================  
What a load of BS. Wigley thought it was garbage; Edward Cook called it a
"mess." And this is from CRU insiders. Groves and Switzur swiftly trashed it,
as have the glaciologists ever since, universally, indirectly. And Mann has
not attracted a single amicus brief in his spat with Steyn. Steyn's book says
it all ("In Their Own Words...").

What you don't seem to understand is that there is no LIA in the hockey stick.
If you do understand that then what you don't understand is that glaciologists
have never doubted a global LIA--not in 1998, not now. Never read a glacier
paper? Try to find one that doesn't accept a global LIA. Good luck.

--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

You are spouting nonsense again.

> This from a guy who thinks you can get different numbers by switching from
watts to joules.

No, I misread the units on the Y axis. You, on the other hand misrepresented
the graph itself and increased ~60W/m^2 to 100W/m^2 while simultaneously
omitting to mention that this was for June at 65N latitude. And you have yet
to acknowledge your errors. Or any of the dozens of others now pointed out to
you on this thread.

Spare me the climate agnosia and read the references. I'm not interested in
your rhetoric. Produce a referenced argument or concede that you have lost
this one.

> What you don’t seem to understand is that there is no LIA in the hockey
stick. If you do understand that then what you don’t understand is that
glaciologists have never doubted a global LIA–not in 1998, not now. Never read
a glacier paper? Try to find one that doesn’t accept a global LIA. Good luck.

PAGES 2k Consortium (2013) Continental-scale temperature variability during
the past two millennia

> Past global climate changes had strong regional expression. To elucidate
their spatio-temporal pattern, we reconstructed past temperatures for seven
continental-scale regions during the past one to two millennia. The most
coherent feature in nearly all of the regional temperature reconstructions is
a long-term cooling trend, which ended late in the nineteenth century. At
multi-decadal to centennial scales, temperature variability shows distinctly
different regional patterns, with more similarity within each hemisphere than
between them. There were no globally synchronous multi-decadal warm or cold
intervals that define a worldwide Medieval Warm Period or Little Ice Age, but
all reconstructions show generally cold conditions between ad 1580 and 1880,
punctuated in some regions by warm decades during the eighteenth century. The
transition to these colder conditions occurred earlier in the Arctic, Europe
and Asia than in North America or the Southern Hemisphere regions. Recent
warming reversed the long-term cooling; during the period ad 1971–2000, the
area-weighted average reconstructed temperature was higher than any other time
in nearly 1,400 years.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> After the Eemian peaked CO2 stayed high for 15ky while T plummeted,
apparently in response to falling insolation.

Climate responds to the net of forcings. Not just CO2 or just insolation or
just aerosols. So at a period when NH summer insolation has reduced to the
point where NH ice sheets are growing it's no surprise to see GAT falling
faster than CO2 ppmv. Only a contrarian could possible think this constitutes
an argument.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2030GMT  
Back at #451, I said: "insolation varies over 100W at 65N in June," which BBD
now denies. But we know he ignored it, or he would not have mistaken J for
joules rather than June, nor would he have accused me of having misled him by
leaving it out. And any scientist (which BBD obviously isn't) would not need
to be informed that insolation is measured in watts, that watts and joules
measure different energies: kinetic and potential, hence are not
interchangeable as units of measurement, but if by some sort of sloppy
shorthand they were used interchangeably, there would be a one to one
correspondence and no room for different values. Nor would he need to be
taught the difference between zero to peak, and peak to peak amplitudes of
waves. But I did point that out, and now BBD is trying to save face by lying.

And he hopes to save face by spouting alarmist rhetoric purporting to back
MBH98. BBD would learn more simply by reading my comments than by all his
scriptures of doom. He doesn't know about MWP logs turning up at lots of
glaciers on various continents in both hemispheres. He needs to be educated
from scratch.

There is no such thing as a scientific argument between a priest of climate
doom and a free thinker. (Hey, BBD, should we invest in nuclear power like
Hansen says?)  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

More desperate misdirection and no admission of errors.

From #430 onwards:

1/ Wrongly claims that the non-existent pause imlies lower climate sensitivity

2/ Wrongly claims that the dangers from warming are 'nearly zilch' (a lunatic
statement, if there ever was)

3/ Wrongly claims that ECS 'remains unquantified' although a best estimate of
~3C has been accepted for decades

4/ Wrongly claims (again, despite correction) that the non-pause lowers ECS

5/ Wrongly claims that 'only junk science is funded [and] only lying
scientists get grants' (more lunacy)

6/ Wrongly claims that WV is flat or decreasing

7/ Wrongly claims that WV feedback may be negative

8/ Wrongly claims that RSS data were falsified

9/ Wrongly claims that CO2 plays no part in deglacial climate change

10/ Wrongly claims that albedo 'swamps' CO2 feeedback during deglaciation

11/ Wrongly claims that modern and palaeoclimate variability are not
comparible, thus implying that the laws of physics are mutable over time

12/ Wrongly claims that insolation at 65N latitude increases by 100W/m^2
despite linking a chart clearly showing 60W/m^2

13/ Wrongly claims that a crank denier blog has found errors in Shakun 12

14/ Wrongly claims that CO2 has no climatological effect during deglaciation
(again)

15/ Wrongly claims that Shakun 12 invalidated by Vostock core data, showing
total failure to understand deglacial process

16/ Wrongly claims significant errors in MBH99

17/ Wrongly claims feedbacks may be negative (again, despite repeated
correction)

18/ Wrongly claims it is impossible to extract ECS estimate from LGM Holocene
transition (again)

19/ Wrongly claims Late MIS5e CO2 vs T shows that CO2 is not an efficacious
forcing

20/ Wrongly claims that there was a defined, global and sychronous LIA event

21/ Wrongly claims that There is no such thing as a scientific argument
between a priest of climate doom and a free thinker. (Hey, BBD, should we
invest in nuclear power like Hansen says?)

Yes, of course we should expand nuclear. And you aren't a 'free thinker' - you
are a dogmatist pushing a political peanut. I have never claimed to be a
scientist but I do understand the basics at a level considerable higher than
you do. Look up: QED.

Stop bluffing and admit your errors.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 17 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF is indeed a free thinker, free to think what he likes. His mistake is in
thinking that that automatically equates to being a good thinker -- in itself
an indication that he is in over his head. In fact he is, among other things,
completely free of some basic tools required for quality, original thought.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Obstreperous A… (not verified) on 18 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0115.19MAY2016GMT  
BBD's #1 is all we need to see he is an irrational dupe and ideological tool
of climate quackery--a dogmatist of doom. The CRU emails show the conspirators
were worried about the pause clear back in 2009 (with 5 years to go):  
http://www.di2.nu/foia/1255523796.txt  
And the lying fools like BBD now deny there ever was a "pause." Hacked emails?
No, leaked by an insider with an intellectual conscience.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 18 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Kevin Trenberth:

> If it (buried heat) is sequestered at depth then **it comes back to haunt us
later**

Funny about that. Now that global temperature has skyrocketed, talk about a
“pause” of global warming only embarrasses the deniers who so craved it.
Unless they're utterly shameless and brain-dead, that is.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 18 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> BBD’s #1 is all we need to see he is an irrational dupe and ideological tool
of climate quackery–a dogmatist of doom. [...]

>

> And the lying fools like BBD now deny there ever was a “pause.”

How can I be both an irrational dupe and a lying fool? Dupes believe what they
say and so by definition cannot be lying :-)

Anyway, leaving aside the mess that you mistake for coherent argument, let's
get back to the science.

Like so many confused contrarians, you are conflating the troposphere with the
climate system as a whole - a basic but serious error. The climate system as a
whole is predominantly ocean. So a modest and brief slowdown in the rate of
surface warming cannot by any means be described as a 'pause' in 'global
warming'. First, it is a slowdown, not a 'pause'. Second, since OHC for the 0
- 2000m layer continues to shoot up, global warming continues unabated.

This is exactly the kind of muddle that contrarians fill each others' minds
with and which could be readily dispelled if they simply stuck to the science.

Who is the dogmatic dupe? Who is the fool? Who is irrational?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 18 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

...stick to the science...

Well, in most cases that's just not going to happen. In terms of argument, the
situation is simple to describe. Conspiracy theory is the organizing
principle, motivated reasoning is the method. That's it. And it's an idee
fixe.

The psychology is a bit more complicated to describe, but suffice it to say, I
doubt that even one in a thousand is capable of mustering the resources and
sorting themselves out to the point where they can stick to the science.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Obstreperous A… (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Stick to the science? But, but, but... that's a terrible distraction to
staying on script with the idee fixe.

Every sentence must contain a word from { alarmist, doom, quackery,
ideological tool, dogmatist, conspirators, fools, lying, mistaken, flawed,
crap, cannot trust, propaganda, junk science, squat, farce, obviously,
ignorance, dupes, nonsense, dark ages, incompetent, doomsayers, brainwashing,
hypocrites, Marxist, exaggerated, rampage, savages, clueless, doom prophet,
ignoramuses, liars, misrepresented, trolls, demonize, mistake, irrelevant,
alarm machine, full of crap, con man, unsupported, feeble, mindless, morons,
contempt, dubious, blabberbox, crooked, broken, gibberish, refuted, fanatics,
priests of climate doom, wayward, depraved, heretical, poison, self
justification, parrots the propaganda, radical, cherry picker, abandoned,
dishonest, disparagement, know-nothing, knee jerk response, intentionally
confuse, doomsday, cheating, contradicts, non sequitur, corruption, claims,
total inability, pinhead, reject, drooler, fishy, insignificant, fiddled with,
fiasco, waste of time, alarm bells, hysteria, obfuscate, absolutely hopeless,
gullible, fails, brainwash, radical, sucker, stupid, jackass, idiot, babble,
retarded, perpetual liars, arrogance, silly notion, sacred, unrealistic,
deluded, moron, imbecilic, congenital liar, load of BS, warm mongering,
ideological goal, scare, alchemists, voodoo science, nincompoops, horrendous,
zealous, babbling, inane, thick-skulled, band wagon, crackpots, delusion,
setup, climate credo, naysayers, censorship, bankrupt, disaster, pathological
}

All of the above list was culled from a quick survey of AGF's blather. He
seems to be cycling through the dictionary of disparaging terms. Perhaps he's
actually a bot...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

That's a fine collation, Brainstorms. We should do a word cloud :-)

http://www.wordle.net/create

* * *

OA

> Well, in most cases that’s just not going to happen.

I know, I know. But one has to try. At least once.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1555GMT  
BBD and the CO'N man have just learned about "where the heck is global
warming," proving the pause that both have been denying. How does the CO'N man
respond? The recent spike is what matters, not a decade and a half of no
warming. The coolers had much longer weather to worry about than two years of
warming.

BBD responds to having just learned about the pause by blaming the oceans. OK:  
1) The oceans were there before the pause and the models.  
2) A mechanism for switching warming from the air to the water ought to be
identified. No such thing was predicted and no such thing has been identified,
except as natural cycles apply.  
3) The pause is older than ARGO; ARGO has measured a twentieth of a degree of
warming to a depth of 2km over its decade of existence.  
4) Without an identified mechanism for current ocean warming it is safe to
blame it on LIA recovery.  
5) The thermal inertia it supplies is a good thing, tempering atmospheric
cycles and potentially retarding a new LIA.  
6) When oceans are heating ice is not melting and the sea is not rising:
steric SLR requires far more energy than eustatic rise.

So yesterday BBD was a dupe, eating up the no pause propaganda. Today he is
explaining away the pause with sea inertia propaganda. Does he believe it?
Maybe. Does he still believe in the pause? I guess not. Can he be a fool and a
dupe and a liar at the same time? No problem.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I agree it's probably worth doing-- for the sake of the peanut gallery if
nothing else.

Short term, I'm inclined to marginalize. But that's just me.

IMO however, there is a huge pothole on the road to sensible discussion when
it comes to metaliteracy. Just my 2 cents here, but in general I think it
needs a lot more attention and development than it's getting.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Obstreperous A… (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF would immediately vomit forth accusations of dogmatic liberal-Marxist word
cloud quackery and alarmism, then point to Michael Mann colluding to falsify
the cloud to form a imaginary hockey stick that hides a MWP (Medieval
Wordsmithing Period), and argue that the LIA (Linguistic Idiom Analytics) has
given way to a warming word pause that's being obfuscated by pinhead naysayers
peddling voodoo language science in an attempt to dupe gullible people into
becoming brainwashed to believe retarded babble coming from congenital liars
who are full of crap, all in the name of following an exaggerated ideological
world climate credo blabbered by thick-skulled, drooling prophets of doom...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2040GMT  
To what should I compare this bloggersville diversion? It would seem I have
staged a simultaneous chess exhibition in a sanitarium. They call the pieces
horses and castles and they move every which way, but the players call me a
cheat and claim they won. No use trying to teach them how to play.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> 1) The oceans were there before the pause and the models.

So?

> 2) A mechanism for switching warming from the air to the water ought to be
identified. No such thing was predicted and no such thing has been identified,
except as natural cycles apply.

Increase in wind-driven ocean circulation: England et al. (2014).

> 3) The pause is older than ARGO; ARGO has measured a twentieth of a degree
of warming to a depth of 2km over its decade of existence.

That required a _hell_ of a lot of energy! And the point is that energy
accumulation was rapid and unabated during the misnomered 'pause'. So there
has been no 'pause' or even slowdown in the rate of global warming when
correctly defined as the accumulation of energy in the climate system as a
whole.

> 4) Without an identified mechanism for current ocean warming it is safe to
blame it on LIA recovery.

Oceans warm as the troposphere warms. If you want a detailed explanation, I
will provide it.

> 5) The thermal inertia it supplies is a good thing, tempering atmospheric
cycles and potentially retarding a new LIA.

Why would there be a new LIA when the current radiative imbalance will only
equilibriate when ocean thermal intertia has yielded up about another 0.6C
warming (assuming atmospheric CO2 was somehow stabilised tomorrow at 400ppm)?

> 6) When oceans are heating ice is not melting and the sea is not rising:
steric SLR requires far more energy than eustatic rise.

Um? The ocean is already warm enough to melt ice. As forcing increases and the
ocean warms further, ice melt will continue.

> So yesterday BBD was a dupe, eating up the no pause propaganda. Today he is
explaining away the pause with sea inertia propaganda.

Not propaganda. Published science. Variability in the rate at which energy
accumulates in the ocean modulates the rate of surface warming in the short
term. There are other factors as well, but this is probably a significant
contributor to the slowdown in the rate of surface warming from 2004 - 2014.
In the long term - multidecadal to centennial - the forced trend dominates.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 19 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> “where the heck is global warming,” proving the pause that both have been
denying

Actually, if it was somewhere then it wasn't paused. To be paused it can't be
anywhere at all.

As I said before from the brain-dead moron’s <a
href="http://www.meteo.psu.edu/holocene/public_html/Mann/articles/articles/Fy…
citation:

“The legacy of this new understanding will certainly outlive the recent
warming slowdown.”

Poor recent warming slowdown, dead as a doornail like agf's brain.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By The technicall… (not verified) on 20 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

agf:

> “where the heck is global warming,” proving the pause that both have been
denying

Actually, if it was somewhere then it wasn’t paused. To be paused it can’t be
anywhere at all.

As I said before from the brain-dead moron’s favourite citation:

“The legacy of this new understanding will certainly outlive the recent
warming slowdown.”

Poor recent warming slowdown, dead as a doornail like agf’s brain.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 20 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

By convention the "pause" was defined as a zero trend in global surface T,
i.e., bottom atmosphere, not potential energy content of hydrosphere,
cryosphere, or lithosphere. The propagandists preferred the word "hiatus" to
describe a "slowdown" in the T trend, as they loathed the counter-propaganda
value of the word "pause." An honest approach to the semantics would not
accept a change of definition midstream. There is a big difference between
surface T and ocean T; e.g., "your children won't know what snow is," is a
prediction that takes no account of possible ocean uptake of energy.

Me:  
"6) When oceans are heating ice is not melting and the sea is not rising:
steric SLR requires far more energy than eustatic rise."  
You:  
"Um? The ocean is already warm enough to melt ice. As forcing increases and
the ocean warms further, ice melt will continue."

According to Balmaseda, Trenberth, Kallen, 2013, "Over the past 50 years, the
oceans have absorbed about 90% of the total heat added to the climate system
[Bindoff et al., 2007], while the rest goes to melting sea and land ice, and
warming the land surface and atmosphere."
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/grl.50382/full

Accordingly I find it necessary to explain to you that if the figure were say,
70% rather than 90%, that would mean more ice would be melting and eustatic
SLR would triple.

As for your mechanism for ocean warming, it's better than nothing, but I would
point out:  
1) An opposite effect was described in 2006:
http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2006/walker.shtml  
2) It is rather counter intuitive. Get out of the shower and stand in front of
a fan and you will soon be shivering. Hurricanes lower ocean T by about 10C to
depths of tens of meters. It would be a good trick for the trade winds to sink
warm water before cooling it, though as always, observation trumps theory.  
3) But the trade winds strengthened before the pause.  
4) Few seemed to have jumped on the band wagon. I might point out where Prof.
Barry Bickmore confidently asserts what others in this thread have insisted:  
By: Barry Bickmore on January 14, 2016  
at 5:13 pm  
"It’s been known for quite a while that the warming “pause” or “speed bump” or
whatever you want to call it is simply a function of a shift toward more La
Niña years, lately."  
https://bbickmore.wordpress.com/2016/01/13/ted-cruz-pwned-by-satellite-…  
5) It flies in the face of recent trend adjustments adopted by NASA, NOAA, and
RSS. These adjustments not only bust the pause, but much of the "slowdown" as
well, to the consternation of Fyfe, Mann, et al.  
6) It remains one of some 60 explanations for the pause, all of which are
likewise rendered superfluous to a large extent by Karl et al.

But thanks for pointing it out. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 20 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Accordingly I find it necessary to explain to you that if the figure were
say, 70% rather than 90%, that would mean more ice would be melting and
eustatic SLR would triple.

This is yet more diversionary waffling. The variability in ocean heat uptake
is tiny - fractions of a percent.

> 1) An opposite effect was described in 2006:
http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2006/walker.shtml

In which you confuse a long-term decrease in the Walker Circulation of ~3.5%
since 1800 with decadal variability as described in England et al. Stop trying
to be a smarty-pants. It fools nobody.

> “It’s been known for quite a while that the warming “pause” or “speed bump”
or whatever you want to call it is simply a function of a shift toward more La
Niña years, lately.”

As I understand it: IPO negative -> ENSO - LN predominant -> slowdown in the
rate of surface warming.

> 5) It flies in the face of recent trend adjustments adopted by NASA, NOAA,
and RSS. These adjustments not only bust the pause, but much of the “slowdown”
as well, to the consternation of Fyfe, Mann, et al.

Only contrarians made a really big deal out of the very slight slowdown in the
rate of surface warming. For example, only contrarians argued that it was
evidence that climate sensitivity had been grossly overestimated by alarmist
scientists.

Your commentary is becoming increasingly incoherent and contradictory.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 21 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Your commentary is becoming increasingly incoherent and contradictory.

Symptom of cognitive dissonance.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 21 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0310.22May2016GMT

BBD: " The variability in ocean heat uptake is tiny – fractions of a percent."  
Total BS:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/enhanced/figures/doi/10.1002/grl.50382/#…

BBD: "Only contrarians made a really big deal out of the very slight slowdown
in the rate of surface warming. For example, only contrarians argued that it
was evidence that climate sensitivity had been grossly overestimated by
alarmist scientists."

Cf. Balmaseda et al: "The elusive nature of the post-2004 upper ocean warming
has exposed uncertainties in the ocean's role in the Earth's energy budget and
transient climate sensitivity."  
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/grl.50382/full

The high variability in ocean heat uptake which BBD knows nothing about or
chooses to deny, and which was not taken very seriously before the pause or
measured more than sparsely before ARGO, is precisely what throws the very
definition of TCS into a quandary. But BBD can get away with his blather as
long as his audience doesn't know the difference between a straight and a wavy
line, or between a joule and a watt.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 21 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Still no answers to my earlier questions (#412, 422) AGF?

* * *

Fill in the blanks if you can! :

1) You,AGF, are saying the scientific consensus there like the one on Global
Overheating is wrong because _____???

2) And that we should believe you over all those real climate scientists
because ____???

&

          1. Volcanic activity levels and solar irradiance have been studied, observed and calculated and found NOT to be causative factors in the current observed planetary heating. What part of that do you fail to understand or reject on what factual basis and what evidence to have to support your claims?
                    
                                          * Log in to post comments
                    

_By StevoR (not verified) on 21 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Correction : I'm going to simplify and make that first question just :

11) You, AGF, are saying the scientific consensus on Global Overheating is
wrong because _____???

Who knows, just maybe that'll help get a simple, direct answer?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 21 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Ocean heat _content_ is rising because of increasing GHG forcing. That's not
the same as variability in the rate of ocean heat uptake. The last major
example of that was the response to Pinatubo.

Transient climate sensitivity is formally defined as the temperature at the
time of CO2 doubling (reaching 560ppm). Short-term variability in the rate of
ocean heat uptake will have no significant effect on TCR and non at all on
ECS.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

And enough of the misleadingly selective quotation.

> The elusive nature of the post-2004 upper ocean warming has exposed
uncertainties in the ocean's role in the Earth's energy budget and transient
climate sensitivity. Here we present the time evolution of the global ocean
heat content for 1958 through 2009 from a new observation-based reanalysis of
the ocean. Volcanic eruptions and El Niño events are identified as sharp
cooling events punctuating a long-term ocean warming trend, while heating
continues during the recent upper-ocean-warming hiatus, but the heat is
absorbed in the deeper ocean. In the last decade, about 30% of the warming has
occurred below 700 m, contributing significantly to an acceleration of the
warming trend. The warming below 700 m remains even when the Argo observing
system is withdrawn although the trends are reduced. Sensitivity experiments
illustrate that surface wind variability is largely responsible for the
changing ocean heat vertical distribution.

Since you are easily confused, let me remind you that the 30% figure does not
refer to total ocean heat uptake but rather to the change in vertical ocean
heat distribution.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> or between a joule and a watt.

Since you persist in being an arsehole about this, let's return to your own
never-acknowledged error. You repeatedly claimed that the graph showed
insolation increase of 100W/m^2 during the last deglaciation. It did not. It
showed 60W/m^2. Your incorrect claim is inflated by 67%.

And you have not acknowledged this massive error despite my pointing it out to
you. I, on the other hand, spotted my own mistake immediately and posted a
follow-on comment acknowledging it.

If I were you, I would let the matter drop, or we are going to have to keep
revisiting your dishonesty and dual standards when it comes to errors. There
are a considerable number more we can revisit. I listed them in a previous
comment.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1450GMT

# BBD, you're just full of lying BS. Here's what I said:

A G Foster

May 13, 2016  
1930GMT  
BBD, if you look here
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milankovitch_cycles#/media/File:Vostok_42…  
you’ll see that 60ppm CO2 correspond to 10C, which is one hell of a forcing to
blame on CO2. The most that has been attributed to CO2 and the ice ages is a
little amplification. If you look lower on the chart you’ll see that
insolation varies over 100W at 65N in June, two orders of magnitude greater
than CO2 forcing, and which is clearly what triggers the show.  
===================================  
You are the clown who mistook that to refer specifically to the LGM and
accused me of getting it wrong ever after. And I repeat, orbital forcing is
two orders of magnitude greater than CO2 where it counts, at the edge of the
ice. And that would still be true at the LGM: 70W extra (over the minimum),
two orders of magnitude greater forcing.

So what do you do when I try to teach you the basics? You get the details
wrong, accuse me of getting them wrong, and throw out endless BS. Lastly you
say:  
"The variability in ocean heat uptake is tiny – fractions of a percent.”  
Which of course would yield a straight line graph of ocean heat uptake. And
you attempt to justify yourself with this:

"Ocean heat _content_ is rising because of increasing GHG forcing. That’s not
the same as variability in the rate of ocean heat uptake."

And you accuse me of confusion? If you hadn't been such a consistent asshole
I'd be happy to forget your J/W confusion, but you have to admit that tipped
your hand--you haven't looked at very many ice core records, if any. But just
as you missed the big point about insolation trumping CO2 forcing, so you miss
the big picture problem of ocean heat uptake taking the world of climate doom
by surprise. The heat is going into the ocean, average maybe roughly 90%, ice
not melting (you were wrong there too), heat going into insignificant steric
SLR, problem delayed a century or more, plenty of time to raise the dykes.

The impending doom is BS and it's time you admitted it.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Here we go again.

> you’ll see that 60ppm CO2 correspond to 10C, which is one hell of a forcing
to blame on CO2.

I didn't say that deglaciation was mainly forced by CO2. You inserted a
strawman and have now revisited it.

> And I repeat, orbital forcing is two orders of magnitude greater than CO2
where it counts, at the edge of the ice.

And I repeat that CO2 is a positive feedback to orbitally-forced regional and
seasonal insolation change. And I repeat that full deglaciation requires the
inclusion of RF from CO2 - albedo alone is not sufficient. This was all
detailed above.

> And you accuse me of confusion?

I'm trying to be charitable.

> But just as you missed the big point about insolation trumping CO2 forcing,

That is confused.

> so you miss the big picture problem of ocean heat uptake taking the world of
climate doom by surprise.

The trendless and transient variability in ocean heat uptake is being
overplayed by contrarians. To wit:"[it] throws the very definition of TCS into
a quandary". Rubbish. Trendless natural variablity cancels out on multidecadal
timescales leaving the forced trend dominant. This is why it is incorrect to
insist that a short term slowdown in the rate of surface warming has any
significant implications for TCR, let alone ECS.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0210.23May2016GMT  
Abstracts only here, but tell me if this jives with England et al:
http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v8/n6/full/ngeo2438.html?WT.ec_id=NG…  
It helps to have water that's actually warming.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Yes, that is consistent with England et al.

> It helps to have water that’s actually warming.

Even the abstract is explicit that the water is warming, AGF:

> We find that the enhanced heat uptake by the Pacific Ocean has been
compensated by an increased heat transport from the Pacific Ocean to the
Indian Ocean, carried by the Indonesian throughflow. As a result, Indian Ocean
heat content has increased abruptly, which accounts for more than 70% of the
global ocean heat gain in the upper 700 m during the past decade.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 22 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> the “pause”

By the moron's favorite citation, there was no "pause":

> Recent claims .. were made in the context of an examiniation of whether
warming has ceased, stopped or paused. We do not believe that warming has
ceased, but we consider the slowdown

>

> “pause” was defined as a zero trend in global surface T

But the data does not say there was zero trend in global surface T from 1998
to 2012 inclusive. No zero trend, ergo, no pause.

But agf can argue semantics all he likes. It won't change the fact that the
recently deceased slowdown, pause, whatever you want to call it is dead like
his brain.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

0620GMT  
Well they agree that it starts with tropical east Pacific warming, but Lee et
al claim the Pacific is cooling in its entirety--I guess they put more stock
in ARGOS than in the pinniped studies. Accordingly they differ in where the
heat is going, England et al claiming the warm water is sinking in the
Pacific, Lee et al claiming it's flowing into the Indian Ocean. Explanations
61 A and B for the pause--evidently based on a paucity of observation. They
can't both be completely right.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

England et al. shows that strengthened Walker circulation is pushing warm
waters west. Lee et al. shows how this process engages the THC which
circulates the warm waters into the Indian ocean. The two studies are
compatible.

Neither they, nor the non-pause have any significant impact on TCR or ECS.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF

Getting very tired of your attempts to insinuate that there is something wrong
with the science. There really isn't. The problem is with you, and your
indefensible position, adequately summarised in your own words:

> The impending doom is BS and it’s time you admitted it.

You need an unphysically low TCR / ECS for that, and physics isn't going to
give it to you. Time you admitted it.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2145GMT  
BBD: "Getting very tired of your attempts to insinuate that there is something
wrong with the science. There really isn’t."

BBD is transparently no scientist. Climate science is probably the most
complex physical science we have. The models are inadequate to the science and
the computers are inadequate to the models. And if it ain't quantified it
ain't science. And believe me, it ain't quantified.

Here's the state of the art:
https://niclewis.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/lewiscurry_ar5-energy-budg…  
Here's a history of the art:  
http://euanmearns.com/zeroing-in-on-the-true-value-of-climate-sensitivi…  
The estimates are steadily dropping.

Nothing wrong with the science, says he. BBD could not even define the
science. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

I happen to have been an avid student of Geology 1971- 76, at the University
of Arizona, even though I was not a Geology major. I believe I took every
undergraduate course they offered in Geology. We were mostly talking about
Global Warming using data collected since temperatures were recorded in the
19th Century. An Ice age was only discussed as an outside chance...a slim
chance, because it had been calculated from historical data like ice cores
that we were about halfway through the arc of the last event from colder to
warmer. No one seriously believed we could have another global Ice Age.  
Some computers models we used for Global Warming way back then have proved
remarkably accurate in the short term; the Oglala aquifer being pumped dry
would change the climate of the plains, for one. The rapid rise in
temperatures relative to geologic time is already in the process of building a
feedback loop that is changing life as we know it while I type this comment.  
Global Warming deniers just amaze me. The data is readily available in
layman's terms. I recently was looking for records of volcanic activity that I
could juxtapose to European climate history and found a treasure trove of
information in a few searches; records of famines, caused by excessive snow,
burning heat and torrential rains, and the accompanying diseases...I have not
finished attempting to correlate those weather events to volcanic eruptions,
but it is promising: a two year Winter!  
You folks who deny a warming planet might read a bit more history related to
weather events. We are not immune.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Faye Wells (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

But L&C is not the state of the art. It is a methodologically compromised
under-estimate.

Lewis cannot get his results to fit palaeoclimate behaviour, which rather
suggests that there are serious problems. Whenever I have asked him about
this, he has not been able to respond.

Contrary to contrarians, estimates of ECS remain stuck firmly around 3C per
doubling.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Mearns writes:

> My guess is that they will eventually settle somewhere below 1.5C – maybe
even as low as 1C, which is generally agreed to be the climate sensitivity to
a doubling of CO2 in the absence of feedbacks.

Which means we can discount everything else he says because he's denying the
GHE - which _already_ includes a substantial RF term from WV. Anybody who
thinks that a warmer troposphere and increase SSTs _won't_ result in more WV
doesn't have a clue and can safely be ignored.

Why do you listen to these amateurs instead of actual scientists. Speaking of
amateurs, Lewis is one - he's a retired banker, not a scientist. He has no
career professional expertise whatsoever.

> BBD is transparently no scientist.

And for the second time, I have never claimed to be one. You are transparently
not a scientist either, so why are you wittering about this irrelevance again?

The fact is, you are stuck. You cannot defend your position because it is
confounded by multiple lines of scientific evidence and you know it, hence all
the 'BBD is this' and 'BBD is that' crap. It just underlines how hopeless your
position is.

I'd advise you to stick to the science, but you haven't actually got any that
supports your position, so...

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 23 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> maybe even as low as 1C

Obviously ludicrous because we are already at 1C with barely more than half
CO2 doubling. Other forcings don't come anywhere near making up the
difference.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 24 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Why do you listen to these amateurs instead of actual scientists.

Because scientists will not co-operate and tell him only what he wants to
hear. Reality be damned for its insolence, he'll just find someone --anyone--
who will say things that he finds reassuringly self-serving.

And then use it to relentlessly beat everyone else over the head who has the
temerity to point out his falsehoods and faulty "reasoning".

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Brainstorms (not verified) on 24 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

Chris O'Neill

> Obviously ludicrous because we are already at 1C with barely more than half
CO2 doubling.

Absolutely. And this also drives a truck through Lewis & Curry, which gives a
best estimate (median) TCR (formally defined as temperature response at the
point of doubling) of 1.33C. 'State of the art' is about the last thing we can
say about L&C.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 24 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

2015GMT  
The debate settles around two basic questions: how much trouble are we in (if
any), and what should we do about it (if anything)? On the solution side of
the problem BBD has thrown in his hat with Hansen et al (letter to COP21), and
whether he is aware or no, he is now a "denier" according to Naomi Oreskes
(whom he has defended here against charges of Marxism). Whether or not Oreskes
is a card carrying commie (like so many of her colleagues), she is a career
prevaricator, slandering right and left both the living and the dead, but
especially the dead. She leaves it to Neirenberg's heirs to defend the
scientist's good name from her wild accusations:
http://www.nicolasnierenberg.com/

BBD doesn't give a damn that Oreskes serves as minister of propaganda or that
he's a denier by her terms. Is BBD an oblivious idiot or a fellow
propagandist? At least he's making a little sense with the nuclear option.

Mearns and Lewis &Curry mostly report the IPCC history of revision, and a
Russian model that actually works. Input a high sensitivity estimate and your
model will run hot, as 97% of them do.

But there's nothing wrong with the science. --AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 24 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@511. AGF ;

> BBD is transparently no scientist. .. (snip) ..  
>  The models are inadequate to the science and the computers are inadequate
to the models. And if it ain’t quantified it ain’t science. And believe me, it
ain’t quantified. ... (snip).. Nothing wrong with the science, says he. BBD
could not even define the science. –AGF

Why the hell would any of us believe you here or accept anything you say when
almost everything you have spewed out has turned out to be wrong, misleading,
cherry-picked or actually saying the opposite of what you claim it does?

I don't see anything to remotely suggest you area scientist or could find the
scientific method with a map, directions and a teleporter. I'd asked you about
why we should believe you and you haven't answered that or my other simple
questions :

1) You, AGF, are saying the scientific consensus on Global Overheating is
wrong because _____??? (Fill in the blank.)

2) And that we should believe you over all those real climate scientists
because ____??? (Fill in the blank.)

&

          1. Volcanic activity levels and solar irradiance have been studied, observed and calculated and found NOT to be causative factors in the current observed planetary heating. What part of that do you fail to understand or reject on what factual basis and what evidence to have to support your claims? 

I think Brainstorms #516 here is spot on.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 24 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

1350GMT  
StevoR, I don't usually respond to you because you've never had an intelligent
thought in your life, which of course means you are not capable of framing a
meaningful question. What the hell is "the scientific consensus on Global
Overheating"?  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF #518 = yet more evasive verbiage :-)

L&C is an obvious underestimate, AGF. Even non-scientists like you and I can
see that - assuming that we are objective and actually understand the topic,
of course.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

AGF:

> What the hell is “the scientific consensus on Global Overheating”?

That you have to ask is a stunning indication that your view of the subject
(AGW) is poorly informed, naive, and ridiculously lopsided (as if we didn't
already know).

> StevoR, I don’t usually respond to you because you’ve never had an
intelligent thought in your life, which of course means you are not capable of
framing a meaningful question.

Even your insults are boring.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Obstreperous A… (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Input a high sensitivity estimate and your model will run hot, as 97% of
them do.

Compared to what, AGF? Observations?

We've already been through this. A single instance of the real Earth climate
cannot be compared to the multi-model mean. It's misleading.

The actual Earth climate is heavily influenced over the short term by the
predominant ENSO state (itself a reflection of the IPO phase), by volcanism
and by variability in solar output. All are transient and do not affect the
multi- _model_ mean. So divergence on the scale of 1 - 2 decades is to be
expected. Sometimes the MMM will correspond quite well to observations.
Sometimes it will exceed them. Sometimes it will be lower than observed
temperatures. Over the short term, the comparison is uninformative.

The best you can do is update the CMIP5 forcings used for AR5 and compare the
results with observations. And when CMIP5 forcing estimates used for AR5 are
updated to bring them into line with real-world forcing history, then modelled
global average temperature comes into much closer agreement with observations
(Schmidt et al. 2014). This would suggest that model physics and so emergent
behaviours - like model sensitivity - are reasonably accurate.

So the oft-repeated claim that the models are 'running hot' is yet another
contrarian confusion, not actual evidence that climate sensitivity is lower
than expected.

And once again, let's remind ourselves that short-term variability in
temperature has no significant impact on TCR and none on ECS. That's another
contrarian confusion that tends to get muddled in with the previous one.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> Input a high sensitivity estimate and your model will run hot, as 97% of
them do.

I suppose I should have also said that you don't appear to understand how
AOGCMs actually work. Sensitivity is not parameterised. It is not an input
value. It is an emergent property of the model physics. The model exhibits a
sensitivity - it is not given one.

Unless this is clear you will not grasp what I wrote above, eg.:

This would suggest that model physics and so emergent behaviours – like model
sensitivity – are reasonably accurate.

There's already far too much confusion around as it is.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

@520. A G Foster : And you still haven't answered the questions!

Insulting me with your own projection is not an answer.

Asking a disingenous question that I simply don't believe you don't already
know the answer to - and if you genuinely didn't know reveals you to be
completely ignorant on this issue - is not an answer either.

For the record since you asked :

> "Observations throughout the world make it clear that climate change is
occurring, and rigorous scientific research demonstrates that the greenhouse
gases emitted by human activities are the primary driver." (2009)

Source : http://climate.nasa.gov/scientific-consensus/

One of many statements listed along with the facts on the NASA website.

Oh & if you think things might have changed since - they haven't. The
overwhelming scientific evidence has only gotten ever stronger and more
convincing :

> In a paper published in Environmental Research Letters on April 13 (2016 -
ed), I collaborated with the authors of seven of the leading consensus studies
to perform a meta-study of meta-studies synthesising the research into
scientific consensus on climate change. (A meta-study combines the findings
from multiple studies.) Among climate scientists, the estimates of consensus
varied from 90 to 100 percent, with a number of studies converging on 97
percent, the very figure derided by Cruz, Santorum, and others opposed to
action on global warming.

>

> A key finding from our meta-study was that scientific agreement was highest
among scientists with the most expertise in climate science.

Source : http://thebulletin.org/yes-there-really-scientific-consensus-climate-
ch…

Of course, you could have just googled this :

https://www.google.com.au/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie…

(Or used Wikipedia, their summary of this is pretty good too.)

But clearly that basic level of intelligence is beyond you.

So the climatological consensus is that Global Overheating is real, we're
causing it and its a serious problem that will have massive negative impacts
on our lives into the future.

Attempts to deny this reality have long been exposed as a Point Refuted
Already Thousand Times by those with vested economic and ideological interests
or those who have been duped by those.

So, now you know - not that you didn't already - could you just answer the
flippin' questions?

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By StevoR (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

BBD: "The model exhibits a sensitivity – it is not given one."

You're right there. I should have said, overestimate the feedbacks and your
model will run hot, as 97% of them do.

BBD: "So divergence on the scale of 1 – 2 decades is to be expected."

Quite possibly. But it's impressive how a dogma can bloom. Back in 1996 the
anthropogenic signal was hypothetical: "the balance of evidence suggests a
discernible human influence on global climate" (
http://www.di2.nu/foia/0845217169.txt ), and there has been little warming
since, yet the signal grew more incontrovertible even while it got weaker.
Just goes to show the fanatics shouldn't make predictions like, in 20 years
your kids won't know what snow is. Too much natural variability.

The CRU pulled off a miracle, creating the anthro signal ex nihilo with the
help of a magic hockey stick and their considerable PR skills. Somehow I
remain unconvinced.  
--AGF

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By A G Foster (not verified) on 25 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> and your model will run hot, as 97% of them do.

I've just explained why this is not an accurate statement.

The CRU pulled off a miracle, creating the anthro signal ex nihilo with the
help of a magic hockey stick

First, this is conspiracy theory nonsense and just wrong - CRU had nothing to
to with the hockey stick. Get your tinfoil hat on straight. Second, the C20th
warming is visible in a large range of metrics, none of which have anything to
do with CRU or MBH99/ 99. More confused and diversionary waffle.

* * *

I've noticed that you just move from one contrarian muddle to the next as each
is debunked. You might think this is an argument, but it isn't.

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By BBD (not verified) on 26 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

* * *

> there has been little warming since

In denial of reality.

http://www.woodfortrees.org/plot/gistemp/from:1996/to/trend/plot/gistem…

                
                                      * Log in to post comments
                

_By Chris O'Neill (not verified) on 27 May 2016 #permalink_

![User Image](/files/styles/thumbnail/public/default_images/icon-

user.png?itok=yQw_eG_q)

#### Pagination

                
                                      * Current page 1
                      * Page 2
                      * Next page next
                      * Last page last
                

Advertisment

### Donate

ScienceBlogs is where scientists communicate directly with the public. We are
part of Science 2.0, a science education nonprofit operating under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Please make a tax-deductible donation
if you value independent science communication, collaboration, participation,
and open access.

![](https://www.paypal.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif)

You can also shop using Amazon Smile and though you pay nothing more we get a
tiny something.

![](https://scienceblogs.com/wp-

content/blogs.dir/15/files/2018/09/amazonsmilegraphic.jpg)

### Science 2.0

                
                                      * For Consideration: Use Opioid Overdoses For Organ Transplants
                
                      * Even In Science A Leap Of Faith Can Help
                
                      * Echo Chamber Of Disinformation Keeps Anti-Science Beliefs Persistent
                
                      * Climate Change Will NOT End Civilization By 2050 Or Make Humans Extinct - Australian Report Had NO Scientific Peer Review
                
                      * US Journalism Is A Lot Less Objective, Finds RAND Analysis
                

### Science Codex

                
                                      * I, you, or we: Pronouns provide hints to romantic attachment styles
                
                      * Translation of genes more complex than expected
                
                      * How artificial intelligence detects rare diseases
                
                      * Researchers develop fast, efficient way to build amino acid chains
                
                      * Nuclear architecture: What organizes the genome in the nucleus?
                

### More by this author

##### Last Post

October 30, 2017

This is my last post at Scienceblogs.com. In the future I will be blogging at
Greg Laden's blog, located at its original home at gregladen.com. I have a
feeling that Scienceblogs will not last long without me. What do you think? :)
But seriously, I'll be talking about the story of the current…

##### Hacking Voting Machines

October 10, 2017

In every area of life, but especially in the overlapping realms of technology,
science, and health, misunderstanding how things work can be widespread, and
that misunderstanding can lead to problems. In the area of voting, the main
problem seems to be the expenditure of great amounts of outrage and…

##### On that chilling law suit against the environmental groups

October 5, 2017

... which I've posted on before ... there are new developments, summarized at
Inside Climate News: Invoking the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act, or RICO, a federal conspiracy law devised to ensnare
mobsters, the suit accuses the organizations, as well as several green
campaigners…

##### One response to the Las Vegas Shooting

October 5, 2017

from a major non profit, click through the the X Blog to read the press
release.

##### Watch Jeff Merkley Wipe Floor With Trump's William Wehrum

October 5, 2017

William Wehrum is a lawyer and once, apparently, worked for the EPA. Trump is
trying to appoint him to be assistant administrator for air and radiation.
This is a reasonably important job that concerns many aspects of the
environment. Watch: https://twitter.com/SenJeffMerkley/status/…

### More reads

##### ScienceOnline'09 - Friday Morning Coffee Cupping

![](/files/styles/thumbnail_small/public/clock/files/2012/04/941-Counter%20Culture%201.jpg?itok=xNN2wlWL)

Friday morning was really, really cold (for North Carolina), so what better
way to start off ScienceOnline09 than at Counter Culture Coffee where about 25
or so participants (and several other people - this is an open event) showed
up bright and early to learn about the science (and business) of coffee.
Coffee is one of those things that you just drink, unthinkingly, at the time
of the…

##### Weekend Diversion: Not for Kids Only

![](/files/styles/thumbnail_small/public/startswithabang/files/2011/07/5ChineseBrothers.jpeg?itok=BJebxhfw)

"In the United States today, there is a pervasive tendency to treat children
as adults, and adults as children. The options of children are thus steadily
expanded, while those of adults are progressively constricted. The result is
unruly children and childish adults." -Thomas Szasz Some of the email I get,
periodically, asks me if there are any science books or TV shows that I
recommend. (When a…

##### Weekend Diversion: Art imitating Space!

![](/files/styles/thumbnail_small/public/startswithabang/files/2010/06/hst2.jpg?itok=rG_LXpqc)

"All that I desire to point out is the general principle that life imitates
art far more than art imitates life." -Oscar Wilde It isn't only the wonders
of the Universe themselves that impress me. Oftentimes, just as spectacular
are the technological achievements that have brought those wonders to us. (Or,
in the case of space exploration, brought us to them!) So for you today, I've
got a…

© 2006-2019 Science 2.0. All rights reserved. Privacy statement. ScienceBlogs
is a registered trademark of Science 2.0, a science media nonprofit operating
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Contributions are fully
tax-deductible.

![Web

Analytics](//c.statcounter.com/11747191/0/a7b7cbe7/1/)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

