

# Wrongful execution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

**Wrongful execution** is a miscarriage of justice occurring when an innocent
person is put to death by capital punishment. Cases of wrongful execution are
cited as an argument by opponents of capital punishment, while proponents
suggest that the argument of innocence concerns the credibility of the justice
system as a whole and does not solely undermine the use of death
penalty.[1][2]

A number of people are claimed to have been innocent victims of the death
penalty.[3][4] Newly available DNA evidence has allowed the exoneration and
release of more than 20 death row inmates since 1992 in the United States,[5]
but DNA evidence is available in only a fraction of capital cases. Others have
been released on the basis of weak cases against them, sometimes involving
prosecutorial misconduct; resulting in acquittal at retrial, charges dropped,
or innocence-based pardons. The Death Penalty Information Center (U.S.) has
published a list of 10 inmates "executed but possibly innocent".[6] Of all
executions in the United States, 144 prisoners have been exonerated while on
death row. [7]

In the UK, reviews prompted by the Criminal Cases Review Commission have
resulted in one pardon and three exonerations for people executed between 1950
and 1953 (when the execution rate in England and Wales averaged 17 per year),
with compensation being paid.

## Contents

  * 1 Specific examples
    * 1.1 Australia
    * 1.2 People's Republic of China
    * 1.3 Ireland
    * 1.4 Taiwan
    * 1.5 United Kingdom
    * 1.6 United States
    * 1.7 Russia
  * 2 Exonerations and pardons
  * 3 U.S. mental health controversy
  * 4 Judicial murder
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## Specific examples[edit]

### Australia[edit]

Colin Campbell Ross was hanged in Melbourne in 1922 for the murder of 12-year-
old Alma Tirtschke the previous year in what became known as the Gun Alley
Murder. The case was re-examined in the 1990s using modern techniques and Ross
was eventually pardoned in 2008, by which time capital punishment in Australia
had been abolished in all jurisdictions—the last execution taking place in
1967.

### People's Republic of China[edit]

Wei Qing'an (Chinese: 魏清安, 1961–1984, 23 years old) was a Chinese citizen who
was executed for the rape of Kun Liu, a woman who had disappeared. The
execution was carried out on 3 May 1984 by the Intermediate People's Court. In
the next month, Tian Yuxiu (田玉修) was arrested and admitted that he had
committed the rape. Three years later, Wei was officially declared
innocent.[8]

Teng Xingshan (Chinese: 滕兴善, ?–1989) was a Chinese citizen who was executed
for supposedly having raped, robbed and murdered Shi Xiaorong (石小荣), a woman
who had disappeared. An old man found a dismembered body, and incompetent
police forensics claimed to have matched the body to the photo of the missing
Shi Xiaorong. The execution was carried out on 28 January 1989 by the Huaihua
Intermediate People's Court. In 1993, the previously missing woman returned to
the village, saying she had been kidnapped and taken to Shandong. The absolute
innocence of the wrongfully executed Teng was not admitted until 2005.[9]

Nie Shubin (Chinese: 聂树斌, 1974–1995) was a Chinese citizen who was executed
for the rape and murder of Kang Juhua (康菊花), a woman in her thirties. The
execution was carried out on April 27, 1995 by the Shijiazhuang Intermediate
People's Court. In 2005, ten years after the execution, Wang Shujin (Chinese:
王书金) admitted to the police that he had committed the murder.[10][11]

Qoγsiletu or Huugjilt (Mongolian:qoγsiletu, Chinese:呼格吉勒图, 1977-1996) was an
Inner Mongolian who was executed for the rape and murder of a young girl on
June 10, 1996. On December 5, 2006, ten years after the execution, Zhao
Zhihong (Chinese: 赵志红) wrote the _Petition of my Death Penalty_ admitting he
had committed the crime. Huugjilt was posthumously exonerated and Zhao Zhihong
was sentenced to death in 2015.[12]

### Ireland[edit]

Harry Gleeson was executed in Ireland in April 1941 for the murder of Moll
McCarthy in County Tipperary in November 1940. The Gardai withheld crucial
evidence and fabricated other evidence against Gleeson. In 2015 he was
posthumously pardoned.[13][14]

### Taiwan[edit]

Chiang Kuo-ching (Chiang is the family name, Chinese: 江國慶, 1975–1997) was a
Taiwan Air Force private who was executed by a military tribunal on August 13,
1997 for the rape and murder of a five-year-old girl. On January 28, 2011,
over 13 years after the execution, Hsu Jung-chou (Chinese: 許榮洲), who had a
history of sexual abuse, admitted to the prosecutor that he had been
responsible for the crime. In September 2011 Chiang was posthumously acquitted
by a military court who found Chiang's original confession had been obtained
by torture. Ma Ying-jeou, the Republic of China's president, apologised to
Chiang's family.[15]

### United Kingdom[edit]

  * In 1660, in a series of events known as the Campden Wonder, an Englishman named William Harrison disappeared after going on a walk, near the village of Charingworth, in Gloucestershire. Some of his clothing was found slashed and bloody on the side of a local road. Investigators interrogated Harrison’s servant, John Perry, who eventually confessed that his mother and his brother had killed Harrison for money. Perry, his mother, and his brother were hanged. Two years later, Harrison reappeared, telling the incredibly unlikely tale that he had been abducted by three horsemen and sold into slavery in the Ottoman Empire. Though his tale was implausible, he indubitably had not been murdered by the Perry family.
  * Timothy Evans was tried and executed in March 1950 for the murder of his wife and infant daughter. An official inquiry conducted 16 years later determined that it was Evans's fellow tenant, serial killer John Reginald Halliday Christie, who was responsible for the murder. Christie also admitted to the murder of Evans's wife, as well as five other women and his own wife. Christie may have murdered other women, judging by evidence found in his possession at the time of his arrest, but it was never pursued by the police. Evans was posthumously pardoned in 1966. The case had prompted the abolition of capital punishment in the UK in 1965.
  * George Kelly was executed in March 1950 for the 1949 murder of the manager of the Cameo Cinema in Liverpool, UK and his assistant during a robbery that went wrong. This case became known as the Cameo Murder. Kelly's conviction was overturned in 2003. Another man, Donald Johnson, had confessed to the crime but the police bungled Johnson's case and had not divulged his confession at Kelly's trial.[16]
  * Mahmood Hussein Mattan was executed in 1952 for the murder of Lily Volpert. In 1998 the Court of Appeal decided that the original case was, in the words of Lord Justice Rose, "demonstrably flawed". The family were awarded £725,000 compensation, to be shared equally among Mattan's wife and three children. The compensation was the first award to a family for a person wrongfully hanged.
  * Derek Bentley was a mentally handicapped young man who was executed in 1953. He was convicted of the murder of a police officer during an attempted robbery, despite the facts that it was his accomplice who fired the gun and that Bentley was already under arrest at the time of the shooting. The accomplice who actually fired the fatal shot could not be executed due to his young age, and served only ten years in prison before he was released.[17]

### United States[edit]

See also: List of wrongful convictions in the United States

University of Michigan law professor Samuel Gross led a team of experts in the
law and in statistics that estimated the likely number of unjust convictions.
The study, published in _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_
determined that at least 4% of people on death row were and are likely
innocent. Gross has no doubt that some innocent people have been
executed.[18][19]

Statistics likely understate the actual problem of wrongful convictions
because once an execution has occurred there is often insufficient motivation
and finance to keep a case open, and it becomes unlikely at that point that
the miscarriage of justice will ever be exposed. For example, in the case of
Joseph Roger O'Dell III, executed in Virginia in 1997 for a rape and murder, a
prosecuting attorney argued in court in 1998 that if posthumous DNA results
exonerated O'Dell, "it would be shouted from the rooftops that ... Virginia
executed an innocent man." The state prevailed, and the evidence was
destroyed.[20]

Chipita Rodriguez was hanged in San Patricio County, Texas in 1863 for
murdering a horse trader, and 122 years later, the Texas Legislature passed a
resolution exonerating her.

Thomas and Meeks Griffin were executed in South Carolina in 1915 for the
murder of a man involved in an interracial affair two years previously but
were pardoned 94 years after execution. It is thought that they were arrested
and charged because they were viewed as wealthy enough to hire competent legal
counsel and get an acquittal.[21]

Joe Arridy (April 15, 1915 – January 6, 1939) was a mentally disabled American
man executed for rape and murder and posthumously granted a pardon. Arridy was
sentenced to death for the murder and rape of a 15-year-old schoolgirl from
Pueblo, Colorado. He confessed to murdering the girl and assaulting her
sister. Due to the sensational nature of the crime precautions were taken to
keep him from being hanged by vigilante justice. His sentence was executed
after multiple stays on January 6, 1939, in the Colorado gas chamber in the
state penitentiary in Canon City, Colorado. Arridy was the first Colorado
prisoner posthumously pardoned in January 2011 by Colorado Governor Bill
Ritter, a former district attorney, after research had shown that Arridy was
very likely not in Pueblo when the crime happened and had been coerced into
confessing. Among other things, Arridy had an IQ of 46, which was equal to the
mental age of a 6-year-old. He did not even understand that he was going to be
executed, and played with a toy train that the warden, Roy Best, had given to
him as a present. A man named Frank Aguilar had been executed in 1937 in the
Colorado gas chamber for the same crime for which Arridy ended up also being
executed. Arridy's posthumous pardon in 2011 was the first such pardon in
Colorado history. A press release from the governor's office stated, "[A]n
overwhelming body of evidence indicates the 23-year-old Arridy was innocent,
including false and coerced confessions, the likelihood that Arridy was not in
Pueblo at the time of the killing, and an admission of guilt by someone else."
The governor also pointed to Arridy's intellectual disabilities. The governor
said, “Granting a posthumous pardon is an extraordinary remedy. But the tragic
conviction of Mr. Arridy and his subsequent execution on Jan. 6, 1939, merit
such relief based on the great likelihood that Mr. Arridy was, in fact,
innocent of the crime for which he was executed, and his severe mental
disability at the time of his trial and execution."

George Stinney, a 14-year old black boy, was electrocuted in South Carolina in
1944 for the murder of Betty June Binnicker, age 11, as well as Mary Emma
Thames, age 8. The arrest occurred on March 23, 1944 in Alcolu, inside of
Clarendon County, South Carolina. Apparently, the two girls rode their bikes
past Stinney’s house where they asked him and his sister about a certain type
of flower; after this encounter, the girls went missing and were found dead in
a ditch the following morning. After an hour of interrogation by the officers,
a deputy stated that Stinney confessed to the murder. The confession explained
that Stinney wanted to have intercourse with Betty, so he wanted to kill Mary
to get Betty alone; however, both girls fought back and that is when he killed
both of them. This case still remains a very controversial one due to the fact
that the judicial process showed severe shortcomings. An example can be made
out of this case by showing how the judicial system does not always properly
orchestrate.[22] He was the youngest person executed in the United States.
More than 70 years later, a judge threw out the conviction, calling it a
"great injustice."[23]

Carlos DeLuna was executed in Texas in December 1989 for stabbing a gas
station clerk to death. Subsequent investigations cast strong doubt upon
DeLuna's guilt for the murder of which he had been convicted.[24][25] His
execution came about six years after the crime was committed. The trial ended
up attracting local attention, but it was never suggested that an innocent man
was about to be punished while the actual killer went free. DeLuna was found
blocks away from the crime scene with $149 in his pocket. From that point on,
it went downhill for the young Carlos DeLuna. A wrongful eyewitness testimony
is what formed the case against him. Unfortunately, DeLuna’s previous criminal
record was very much used against him.[26] The real killer, Carlos Hernandez,
was a repeat violent offender who actually had a history of slashing women
with his unique buck knife, not to mention he looked very similar to Carlos
DeLuna. Hernandez did not keep quiet about his murder; apparently he went
around bragging about the killing of Lopez. In 1999, Hernandez was imprisoned
for attacking his neighbor with a knife.[27]

Jesse Tafero was convicted of murder and executed via electric chair in May
1990 in the state of Florida for the murders of two Florida Highway Patrol
officers. The conviction of a co-defendant was overturned in 1992 after a
recreation of the crime scene indicated a third person had committed the
murders.[28] Not only was Tafero wrongly accused, his electric chair
malfunctioned as well – three times. As a result, Tafero’s head caught on
fire. After this encounter, a debate was focused around humane methods of
execution. Lethal injections became more common in the states rather than the
electric chair.[29]

Johnny Garrett of Texas was executed in February 1992 for allegedly raping and
murdering a nun. In March 2004 cold-case DNA testing identified Leoncio Rueda
as the rapist and murderer of another elderly victim killed four months
earlier.[30] Immediately following the nun's murder, prosecutors and police
were certain the two cases were committed by the same assailant.[31] The
flawed case is explored in a 2008 documentary entitled _The Last Word_.

In 2015, the Justice Department and the FBI formally acknowledged that nearly
every examiner in an FBI forensic squad overstated forensic hair matches for
two decades before the year 2000.[32][33] Of the 28 forensic examiners
testifying to hair matches in a total of 268 trials reviewed, 26 overstated
the evidence of forensic hair matches and 95% of the overstatements favored
the prosecution. Defendants were sentenced to death in 32 of those 268 cases.

### Russia[edit]

Aleksandr Kravchenko was executed in 1983 for the 1978 murder of nine year old
Yelena Zakotnova in Shakhty, a coal mining town near Rostov-on-Don. Kravchenko
as a teenager, had served a prison sentence for the rape and murder of a
teenage girl but witnesses said he was not at the scene of Zakotnova's murder
at the time. Under police pressure the witnesses altered their statements and
Kravchenko was executed. Later it was found that the girl had been murdered by
Andrei Chikatilo, a serial killer nicknamed "the Red Ripper" and "the Butcher
of Rostov", who was executed in 1994.[34]

## Exonerations and pardons[edit]

Main article: List of exonerated death row inmates

Kirk Bloodsworth was the first American to be freed from death row as a result
of exoneration by DNA evidence. Kirk Bloodsworth was a Marine before he became
a waterman on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. At the age of 22, he was wrongly
convicted of the murder of a nine-year-old girl; she had been sexually
assaulted, strangled, and beaten with a rock. An anonymous call to the police
claiming that the witness had seen Bloodsworth with the girl that day, and he
matched up with the description from the police sketch. Five witnesses
claiming that they saw Bloodsworth with the victim, as well a statement in his
testimony where he claimed that he “had done something terrible that day that
would affect his relationship with his wife”, did not help his case. No
physical evidence connected Bloodsworth to the crime, but he was still
convicted of rape and murder which led to him receiving a death sentence.[35]

Ray Krone is the 100th American to have been sentenced to death and then later
exonerated. Ray Krone was convicted of the murder of Kim Ancona, thirty-six
year old victim in Phoenix, Arizona. Ancona had been found nude, fatally
stabbed. The physical evidence that the police had to rely on was bite marks
on Ancona’s breasts and neck. After Ancona had told a friend that Ray Krone, a
regular customer, was going to help her close the bar the previous night, the
police brought him in to make a Styrofoam impression of his teeth. After
comparing the teeth marks, Krone was arrested for the murder, kidnapping, and
sexual assault of Kim Ancona on December 31, 1991. At the trial in 1992, Krone
pled innocence, but the teeth mark comparison caused the jury to found him
guilty and he was sentenced to death as well as a consecutive twenty-one year
term of imprisonment.[36] Krone’s family also believed that he was innocent,
which led them to spend over $300,000 in order to fight for his freedom.[37]

In the UK, reviews prompted by the Criminal Cases Review Commission have
resulted in one pardon and three exonerations for people that were executed
between 1950 and 1953 (when the execution rate in England and Wales averaged
17 per year), with compensation being paid. Timothy Evans was granted a
posthumous free pardon in 1966. Mahmood Hussein Mattan was convicted in 1952
and was the last person to be hanged in Cardiff, Wales, but had his conviction
quashed in 1998. George Kelly was hanged at Liverpool in 1950, but had his
conviction quashed by the Court of Appeal in June 2003.[38] Derek Bentley had
his conviction quashed in 1998 with the appeal trial judge, Lord Bingham,
noting that the original trial judge, Lord Goddard, had denied the defendant
"the fair trial which is the birthright of every British citizen."

Colin Campbell Ross (1892–1922) was an Australian wine-bar owner executed for
the murder of a child which became known as The Gun Alley Murder, despite
there being evidence that he was innocent. Following his execution, efforts
were made to clear his name, and in the 1990s old evidence was re-examined
with modern forensic techniques which supported the view that Ross was
innocent. In 2006 an appeal for mercy was made to Victoria's Chief Justice and
on 27 May 2008 the Victorian government pardoned Ross in what is believed to
be an Australian legal first.[39]

## U.S. mental health controversy[edit]

There has been much debate about the justification of imposing capital
punishment on individuals who have been diagnosed with mental retardation.
Some have argued that the execution of people with mental retardation
constitutes cruel and unusual punishment as it pertains to the Eighth
Amendment to the United States Constitution.[40] While the U.S. Supreme Court
interpreted cruel and unusual punishment to include those that fail to take
into account the defendant's degree of criminal culpability,[ _clarification
needed_ ] it did not determine that executing the mentally retarded
constitutes cruel and unusual punishment until 2002.

In 1986, a US Supreme Court decision ruled that it is unconstitutional to
execute someone who does not understand the reason for or the reality of his
or her punishment, this decision was upheld in a 2002 decision. Despite the
supreme court decision, Texas did not implement legislation for this until
1999\. There have been at least 25 individuals with documented diagnoses of
paranoid schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and other severe persistent mental
illnesses executed in the state of Texas, despite them seeking treatment
before the commission of their crimes, but were denied care. The US Fifth
Circuit Court of Appeals has never found a death row inmate incompetent for
execution, however, in 2007, the US Supreme court decision Panetti vs
Quarterman, the justices ruled that “the Fifth Circuit’s incompetency standard
is too restrictive to afford a prisoner eighth amendment protection.[41]

This issue was first addressed in the case of _Penry v. Lynaugh_ , in which
Johnny Paul Penry had filed a _habeas corpus_ petition in federal district
court that claimed his death sentence should be vacated because it violated
his Eighth Amendment rights. His reasoning was that he suffered from mental
retardation, and numerous psychologists had confirmed this to be factual,
indicating that his IQ ranged from 50 to 63 and that he possessed the mental
abilities of a six-and-a-half-year-old.[40] Penry's petition was denied by the
district court, whose decision was subsequently affirmed by the Fifth Circuit
Court of Appeals. Penry would later appeal to the Supreme Court, who
ultimately ruled in a five-to-four decision that the Eighth Amendment to the
United States Constitution did not categorically prohibit the execution of
persons with mental retardation. Following the 1989 _Penry_ ruling, sixteen
states as well as the federal government passed legislation that banned the
execution of offenders with mental retardation.[40]

_Penry_ was overruled in 2002 by _Atkins v. Virginia_ , which held that the
Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment precluded the execution
of the mentally handicapped, but the Supreme Court left the definition of
mentally handicapped as something to be determined by the states.[42]

In 2014, the Supreme Court ruled in _Hall v. Florida_ that states cannot rely
solely on an IQ test in determining whether a borderline mentally handicapped
person can be executed.[43]

## Judicial murder[edit]

**Judicial murder** is the unjustified use of capital punishment. The Oxford
English Dictionary describes it as "death inflicted by process of law, capital
punishment, esp. considered to be unjust or cruel".[44]

An early case in which charges of judicial murder were raised was the Amboyna
massacre in 1623, which caused a legal dispute between the English and Dutch
governments over the conduct of a court in the Dutch East Indies that had
ordered the execution of ten English men accused of treason. The dispute
centered around differing interpretations of the legal jurisdiction of the
court in question. The English believed that this court had not been competent
to try and execute these EIC members, and so believed the executions to have
been fundamentally illegal, thus constituting "judicial murder". The Dutch, on
the other hand, believed the court to have been fundamentally competent, and
wished to focus instead on misconduct of the particular judges in the court.

Another early use of the term occurs in Northleigh's _Natural Allegiance_ of
1688; "He would willingly make this Proceeding against the Knight but a sort
of Judicial Murder".[45]

In 1777 Voltaire used the comparable term of _assassins juridiques_ ("judicial
murderers").

The term was used in German ( _Justizmord_ ) in 1782 by August Ludwig von
Schlözer in reference to the execution of Anna Göldi. In a footnote, he
explains the term as

    
    
    "the murder of an innocent, deliberately, and with all the pomp of holy Justice, perpetrated by people installed to prevent murder, or, if a murder has occurred, to see to it that it is punished appropriately."[46]
    

In 1932, the term is also used by Justice Sutherland in _Powell v. Alabama_
when establishing the right to a court-appointed attorney in all capital
cases:

> Let us suppose the extreme case of a prisoner charged with a capital offense
who is deaf and dumb, illiterate and feeble minded, unable to employ counsel,
with the whole power of the state arrayed against him, prosecuted by counsel
for the state without assignment of counsel for his defense, tried, convicted
and sentenced to death. Such a result … if carried into execution, would be
little short of judicial murder.

Hermann Mostar (1956) defends the extension of the term to un-premeditated
miscarriages of justice where an innocent suffers the death penalty.[47]

## See also[edit]

  * Cold case
  * Capital punishment debate
  * Miscarriage of justice
  * Charles Hudspeth
  * Cameron Todd Willingham
  * List of exonerated death row inmates
  * List of wrongful convictions in the United States
  * List of United States death row inmates

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Innocence and the Death Penalty" at _Death Penalty Information Center_ (U.S.).
  2. **^** Answers to the argument against the Death Penalty
  3. **^** William Kreuter, "The Innocent Executed" at _Justice Denied, the Magazine for the Wrongly Convicted_.
  4. **^** Karl Keys, "Thirty Years of Executions with Reasonable Doubts: A Brief Analysis of Some Modern Executions", Capital Defense Weekly, 2001.
  5. **^** "DNA Exoneree Case Profiles". _www.innocenceproject.org_. Archived from the original on 2013-12-18. Retrieved 2014-08-07.
  6. **^** "Executed But Possibly Innocent" at Death Penalty Information Center.
  7. **^** "One in 25 Executed are Innocent” Newsweek.
  8. **^** "魏清安案：法院枪口下还有多少冤案待昭雪？-法治新闻-中顾法律网". News.9ask.cn. 21 July 2010. Retrieved 2013-06-29.
  9. **^** "滕兴善 一个比佘祥林更加悲惨的人-搜狐新闻". News.sohu.com. 2007-04-02. Retrieved 2013-06-29.
  10. **^** "聂树斌案材料——《刑事申诉书》 - 包头律师专家服务网". Zwjkey.com. 2007-07-08. Retrieved 2013-06-29.
  11. **^** "南方周末 - 聂树斌案，拖痛两个不幸家庭（2012年2月9日）". Infzm.com. 2012-02-10. Retrieved 2013-06-29.
  12. **^** Zhuang, Pinghui (9 February 2015). "China's 'smiling killer' sentenced to death for 1996 murder that saw innocent teenager executed". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 19 August 2015.
  13. **^** McGuier, Erin (6 April 2015). "How Harry Gleeson was wrongly hanged for murder in 1941". The Irish Times. Retrieved 19 August 2015.
  14. **^** Driscoll, Anne (17 August 2015). "Special Report (Wrongful Convictions): Time to shine a light on the innocent". Irish Examiner. Retrieved 19 August 2015.
  15. **^** Sui, Cindy (27 October 2015). "Taiwan pays compensation for wrongful execution". BBC Asia-Pacific. Retrieved 19 August 2015.
  16. **^** Bowccott, Owen (11 June 2003). "Man hanged 53 years ago was innocent". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 September 2015.
  17. **^** Yallop, David (1991). _To Encourage The Others_. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-552-13451-4
  18. **^** US death row study: 4% of defendants sentenced to die are innocent
  19. **^** Many Prisoners on Death Row are Wrongfully Convicted
  20. **^** Lois Romano, "When DNA Meets Death Row, It's the System That's Tested", Washington Post, December 12, 2003.
  21. **^** "Tom Joyner gets justice for electrocuted kin, 94 years later". _CNN_. October 15, 2009.
  22. **^** Blanco, Juan Ignacio. "George Stinney | Murderpedia, the encyclopedia of murderers". _murderpedia.org_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  23. **^** Jeffrey Collins, "70 years later, judge rules 14-year-old boy was wrongly executed", "The Christian Science Monitor", December 17, 2014.
  24. **^** Andrew Cohen, "Yes, America, We Have Executed an Innocent Man", _The Atlantic Monthly_ , May 14, 2012.
  25. **^** Pilkington, Ed (15 May 2012) The wrong Carlos: how Texas sent an innocent man to his death _The Guardian_ , Retrieved 15 May 2012
  26. **^** McLaughlin, Michael (2012-05-15). "Carlos DeLuna Execution: Texas Put To Death An Innocent Man, Columbia University Team Says". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  27. **^** "The Carlos DeLuna case: Definitive proof that Texas executed an innocent man?". 2012-05-16. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  28. **^** "Center on Wrongful Convictions: Jesse J. Tafero". _Northwestern University School of Law_. Archived from the original on 2012-02-18. Retrieved 2012-06-21.
  29. **^** "An inhumane execution - May 04, 1990 - HISTORY.com". _HISTORY.com_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  30. **^** Photo Gallery, FBI Documents Gallery, Police Reports Gallery, Crime Scene and Evidence Gallery, Correspondence Gallery, Videotape Interviews, and Full Case Documentation, by Bloodshed Books Corporation, http://www.bloodshedbooks.com/tour.php
  31. **^** The Skeptical Juror, "Actual Innocence: Johnny Frank Garrett and Bubbles the Clairvoyant", http://www.skepticaljuror.com/2010/04/fine-folks-of-amarillo-wanted-justice.html
  32. **^** "FBI overstated forensic hair matches in nearly all trials before 2000". _Washington Post_. 18 Apr 2015.
  33. **^** "Report: DOJ, FBI acknowledge flawed testimony from unit". Associated Press. 18 Apr 2015.
  34. **^** Conradi, Peter (1991). _The Red Ripper: Inside the Mind of Russia's Most Brutal Serial Killer_. True Crime. pp. 43–44. ISBN 978-0863696183.
  35. **^** "Innocence Project: The Cases — Kirk Bloodsworth". _Innocence Project_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  36. **^** "Ray Krone - Innocence Project". _Innocence Project_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  37. **^** "Twice Wrongly Convicted of Murder - Ray Krone Is Set Free After 10 Years". _forejustice.org_. Retrieved 2017-12-07.
  38. **^** George Kelly exonerated 53 years after being executed
  39. **^** _The Age_ : Ross cleared of murder nearly 90 years ago. Retrieved 27 May 2008.
  40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Scott, Charles (1 Jan 2003). "Atkins v. Virginia: Execution of Mentally Retarded Defendants Revisited". _The Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law_. **31** (1): 101–104.
  41. **^** "TCADP – Texas Coalition to Abolish the Death Penalty". _tcadp.org_. Retrieved 2019-04-27.
  42. **^** Cohen, Andrew (22 October 2013). "At Last, the Supreme Court Turns to Mental Disability and the Death Penalty". _The Atlantic_.
  43. **^** Liptak, Adam (27 May 2014). "Court Extends Curbs on the Death Penalty in a Florida Ruling". _The New York Times_.
  44. **^** _Judicial murder_ at OED; retrieved 18 July 2018
  45. **^** J Northleigh, _Natural allegiance, and a national protection, truly stated, being a full answer to Dr. G. Burnett's vindication of himself._ vi. p37 (1688); quoted in OED
  46. **^** _„Ermordung eines Unschuldigen, vorsätzlich, und so gar mit allem Pompe der heil. Justiz, verübt von Leuten, die gesetzt sind, daß sie verhüten sollen, daß ein Mord geschehe, oder falls er geschehen, doch gehörig gestraft werde.“_ (von Schlözer, p. 273)
  47. **^** Hermann Mostar. _Unschuldig verurteilt! Aus der Chronik der Justizmorde_. Herbig-Verlag, Munich (1956)

  48. August Ludwig von Schlözer: _Abermaliger JustizMord in der Schweiz_ In: _Stats-Anzeigen_. Band 2. Göttingen, 1782. S. 273–277.

  49. Julius Mühlfeld. _Justizmorde. Nach amtlichen Quellen bearbeitete Auswahl_ 2\. Auflage, Berlin (1880) OCLC 70475784
  50. Bernt Ture von zur Mühlen. _Napoleons Justizmord am deutschen Buchhändler Johann Philipp Palm._ Frankfurt am Main: Braman Verlag (2003) ISBN 9783934054165

## External links[edit]

  * Death Penalty Information Center – anti-death penalty organisation
  * _Justice Denied_ magazine includes stories of supposedly innocent people who have been executed.
  * Database of convicted people said to be innocent includes 150 allegedly wrongfully executed.
  * Letter by Voltaire to Frederick II, April 1777[ _dead link_ ]

  * v

  * t
  * e

Capital punishment

* * *

Retentionist countries|

  * Afghanistan
  * Bahamas
  * Bangladesh
  * Belarus
  * Botswana
  * China
  * Cuba
  * Egypt
  * India
  * Indonesia
  * Iran
  * Iraq
  * Jamaica
  * Japan
  * Jordan
  * Lebanon
  * Malaysia
  * Nigeria
  * North Korea
  * Pakistan
  * Saint Kitts and Nevis
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Singapore
  * Somalia
  * Sudan
  * Syria
  * Taiwan
  * Thailand
  * United Arab Emirates
  * United States
  * Vietnam
  * Yemen

Abolitionist in practice  
countries|

  * Brunei
  * Kenya
  * Laos
  * Maldives
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Russia
  * South Korea
  * Sri Lanka
  * Tajikistan
  * Tonga

Abolitionist for  
ordinary crimes only|

  * Kazakhstan
  * Brazil
  * Guatemala
  * Israel
  * Peru

Abolitionist countries|

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Armenia
  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Azerbaijan
  * Belgium
  * Bhutan
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Cambodia
  * Canada
  * Cape Verde
  * Costa Rica
  * Croatia
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Georgia
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hong Kong
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kyrgyzstan
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Macau
  * Malta
  * Mexico
  * Moldova
  * Monaco
  * Mongolia
  * Montenegro
  * Nauru
  * Nepal
  * Netherlands
  * New Zealand
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Philippines
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * South Africa
  * Spain
  * Suriname
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Turkey
  * Turkmenistan
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom
  * Uzbekistan
  * Vatican City
  * Venezuela

Current methods|

  * Hanging
  * Shooting/firing squad
  * Lethal injection
  * Electrocution
  * Gas inhalation
  * Beheading
  * Stoning
  * Crucifixion

Ancient methods|

  * _Bestiarii_
    * _Damnatio ad bestias_
  * Blood eagle
  * Blowing from a gun
  * Brazen bull
  * Boiling
  * Breaking wheel
  * Burial
  * Burning
  * Crushing
  * Disembowelment
  * Dismemberment
  * Drowning
    * Republican marriage
  * Elephant
  * Falling
  * Flaying
  * Garrote
  * Hanged, drawn and quartered
  * Immurement
  * Impalement
  * Ishikozume
  * _Mazzatello_
  * Sawing
  * Scaphism
  * Slow slicing
  * Stoning
  * Suffocation in ash
  * Upright jerker
  * Waist chop

Related topics|

  * Use by country
  * Most recent executions by country
  * Crime
  * Death row
  * Final statement
  * Last meal
  * Penology
  * Religion and capital punishment
  * Wrongful execution
  * Capital punishment for drug trafficking

  * v

  * t
  * e

Miscarriage of justice

* * *

Types of misconduct|

  * Prosecutorial misconduct
  * Police misconduct
  * Selective prosecution
  * Malicious prosecution
  * Selective enforcement
  * Abuse of process
  * Attorney misconduct
  * Abuse of discretion
  * Entrapment
  * False arrest
  * Gaming the system
  * Legal malpractice
  * Kangaroo court
  * Sharp practice
  * Jury tampering
  * Witness tampering
  * Brady disclosure
  * Spoliation of evidence

False evidence|

  * Forced confession
  * False accusation of rape
  * False allegation of child sexual abuse
  * Police perjury
  * False accusation
  * Mistaken identity
  * Eyewitness memory
  * Misinformation effect
  * Tampering with evidence

Wrongful convictions|

  * List of wrongful convictions in the United States
  * List of exonerated death row inmates
  * Miscarriage of justice
  * List of miscarriage of justice cases
  * Overturned convictions in the United States
  * Wrongful execution

Advocacy|

  * Innocence Project
  * National Registry of Exonerations
  * Investigating Innocence

Related concepts|

  * Legal ethics
  * Exculpatory evidence
  * Right to a fair trial
  * Race in the United States criminal justice system
  * Capital punishment in the United States
  * Innocent prisoner's dilemma
  * Racial profiling
  * Loophole
  * Ineffective assistance of counsel
  * Show trial
  * Actual innocence
  * Cross-race effect
  * Eyewitness memory
  * Eyewitness identification
  * Equal Protection Clause
  * _Batson v. Kentucky_
  * List of United States death row inmates
  * Prosecutor's fallacy
  * Innocence Protection Act

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wrongful_execution&oldid=899149144"

Categories:

  * Capital punishment
  * Overturned convictions
  * Wrongful executions
  * Wrongful convictions

Hidden categories:

  * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from December 2009

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * മലയാളം

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 28 May 2019, at 05:06 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

