

X

## Notice

Your privacy is important to us. We have updated our privacy policy to better
explain how we use data on this site. Read it here

Stay Connected:

            
                            * Editions 
                  * National
                  * PunditFact
                  * Health Check
                  * Facebook Hoaxes
                  * States 
                    * California
                    * Florida
                    * Illinois
                    * Missouri
                    * New Hampshire
                    * New York
                    * North Carolina
                    * Pennsylvania
                    * Texas
                    * Virginia
                    * West Virginia
                    * Vermont
                    * Wisconsin
                * Truth-O-MeterTM
                  * All
                  * By subject
                  * True
                  * Mostly True
                  * Half True
                  * Mostly False
                  * False
                  * Pants on Fire!
                  * No Flip
                  * Half Flip
                  * Full Flop
                * People 
                  * Donald Trump
                  * Mike Pence
                  * Barack Obama
                  * Chain E-mails
                  * Other people and groups
                * Promises 
                  * Trump-O-Meter 
                    * All
                    * Top 25 Promises
                    * By subject
                    * Not yet rated
                    * In the Works
                    * Stalled
                    * Promise Kept
                    * Compromise
                    * Promise Broken
                  * Obameter 
                    * All
                    * Top 25 Promises
                    * By subject
                    * Promise Kept
                    * Compromise
                    * Promise Broken
                * Pants On Fire
                * About Us 
                  * Our Process
                  * Our Staff
                  * Who Pays for Politifact
                  * Suggest a Fact Check
                * Donate
            

![Mostly False](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-mostlyfalse.png)

![Trump](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/mugs/NYT_TRUMP_CAMPAIGN_5.jpg)

"I want clean air. I want crystal clean water. And we've got it. We've got the
cleanest country in the planet right now."

-- Donald Trump on Tuesday, August 21st, 2018 in

# No, the United States isn't the cleanest country

By Manuela Tobias on Thursday, August 23rd, 2018 at 10:12 a.m.

President Donald Trump touted the United States' environmental health during a
speech in coal country.

"I want clean air. I want crystal clean water. And we've got it. We've got the
cleanest country in the planet right now," Trump said in an Aug. 21 rally in
Charleston, W.Va. "There's nobody cleaner than us, and it's getting better and
better."

Does the United States dominate when it comes to water and air quality? Let's
take a look.

The Environmental Performance Index is the go-to source for questions on
environmental quality. Yale and Columbia University researchers teamed up with
the World Economic Forum in 2018 to compile the data.

Using 10 categories, they ranked the United States 27th. On air it ranks 10th
and on water, 29th. Among wealthy democracies, the United States ranks toward
the bottom, according to Zachary Wendling, principal investigator at the
Environmental Performance Index.

Switzerland ranked first on the overall index, Barbados ranked first on air
quality, and eight European countries tied for first on water. European
countries, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan and Japan tend to top the
United States in environmental performance.

**Clean air**

The air quality ranking is broken up into three parts. On indoor air quality,
the United States ranks first. We don't cook by burning biomass, so that isn't
surprising, Jeffrey Geddes, a Boston University professor who studies air
quality, told us.

The United States ranks 88th on exposure to particulate matter, which Geddes
called "a really good indicator for health effects from air pollution."

The scientists used satellites and ground-based measurements to collect the
data for 228 countries and territories dating from 2008 to 2015. That predates
Trump. In general, however, changes between 2018 scores and the baseline
(roughly 10 years earlier) are mixed and small, Wendling said.

The Environmental Protection Agency's own research shows a continued decline
in air pollutants from 1990. But experts said Trump's deregulatory practices
may have the opposite effect.

"Deregulation of automobile emissions standards will increase air pollution,
particularly in dense urban areas," said Elizabeth Albright, an environmental
science professor at Duke University.

Crystal clean water

The United States ranks 29th overall in water quality. In drinking water, it
ranks first (alongside nine other countries) and in sanitation, 31st.

"For both drinking water and sanitation, the United States is performing okay
in absolute terms, with about 3.3 disability-adjusted life-years lost per
100,000 people from risks due to unsafe drinking water, as compared to 6.4 for
unsafe sanitation," Wendling said.

Wendling said the lower sanitation ranking might be explained by rural
populations that rely on septic tanks, but there is enough uncertainty in the
data that estimates for high-income countries should be treated with caution.

Experts said the United States still had a long ways to go before being ranked
cleanest.

"Any idea we have the freshest water is entirely laughable," said Ashok
Gadgil, an environmental engineering professor at Berkeley University.

"The U.S. does a very good job of producing relatively clean drinking water at
very low cost, but we fall far short on our investments in water
infrastructure investments--that was the case in Flint, and it also is the
case in thousands of other water systems around the country," said Marc
Edwards, a Virginia Tech environmental and water resources engineer. "Some
people could argue it is clean enough for the price, but we are not the
cleanest."

In 2016, 5,363 water systems serving 17.6 million people violated EPA's lead
and copper rule, according to the Natural Resources Defense Council, an
environmentalist non-profit group.

The White House did not respond our request for comment.

Our ruling

Trump said, "I want clean air. I want crystal clean water. And we've got it.
We've got the cleanest country in the planet right now."

No ranking places the United States at the top of their list for cleanliness.

The United States has ample room to improve on air quality when it comes to
other developed democracies. While some cities' water systems violate domestic
environmental standards, the United States overall ties for best when it comes
to drinking water.

We rate this statement Mostly False.

Share the Facts

2018-08-23 14:33:02 UTC

PolitiFact

![PolitiFact](https://dhpikd1t89arn.cloudfront.net/logos/politifact_logo.png)

3

1

7

![PolitiFact rating

logo](https://dhpikd1t89arn.cloudfront.net/rating_images/politifact/tom-

mostlyfalse.jpg) PolitiFact Rating:

Mostly False

"I want clean air. I want crystal clean water. And we’ve got it. We’ve got the
cleanest country in the planet right now."

Donald Trump

President of the United States

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ZTqhTzEtz8

![](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/mugs/NYT_TRUMP_CAMPAIGN_5.jpg)

In a campaign rally

Tuesday, August 21, 2018

2018-08-21

Read More

info

Advertisement

### About this statement:

Published: Thursday, August 23rd, 2018 at 10:12 a.m.

Researched by: Manuela Tobias

Edited by: Angie Drobnic Holan

Subjects: Environment, Water

### Sources:

Environmental Performance Index, United States of America, 2018

Environmental Protection Agency, Annual air trends, 2018

NRDC, What's in your water? Flint and beyond, 2016

Phone interview with Ashok Gadgil, environmental engineering professor at
Berkeley University, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Mark Drajem, spokesman for NRDC, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Daniel Esty, director of the Yale Center for
Environmental Law and Policy, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Zachary Wendling, principal investigator at the
Environmental Performance Index, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Jason west, professor of environmental sciences and
engineering at the University of North Carolina, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Marc Edwards, Virginia Tech environmental and water
resources engineer, Aug. 22, 2018

Email interview with Elizabeth Albright, an environmental science professor at
Duke University, Aug. 22, 2018

### How to contact us

Email comments and suggestions for fact-checks to _[email protected]_ or find
us on _Facebook_ ,and _Twitter_. (If you send us a comment, we'll assume you
don't mind us publishing it unless you tell us otherwise.)

### Browse The Truth-O-Meter TM

            
                            * See our fact-checks of President Donald Trump
                * See our latest Pants-On-Fire rulings
                * Search fact-checks by subject
                * Search fact-checks by person
                * View recent articles
            

### Support independent fact-checking

In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.

![](

//static.politifact.com/politifact/photos/truth_squad_logo_cmyk.jpg)

Advertisement

### Subscribe

#### Keep up to date with PolitiFact

            
                            * Sign up for our weekly email newsletter from Editor Angie Holan 
                * Sign up for our daily email newsletter and get our latest fact-checks delivered to your inbox
                * Follow us on Twitter
                * Fan us on Facebook
            

Back to top

__

![](https://static.politifact.com/images/POLITIFACT_logo_rgb141x25.png)

# Offices

            
                            * **District of Columbia**
                * 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW
                * Suite 1300B
                * Washington, DC 20036
                * **Florida**
                * 801 Third Street South
                * St. Petersburg, FL 33701
                * 727-821-9494
            

# State Editions

            
                            * Arizona
                * California
                * Colorado
                * Florida
                * Georgia
                * Iowa
                * Illinois
                * Missouri
                * Nevada
                * New Hampshire
                * New York
                * North Carolina
                * Ohio
                * Rhode Island
                * Pennsylvania
                * Texas
                * Virginia
                * Wisconsin
            

# Special Editions

            
                            * National
                * Global News Project
                * PunditFact
            

# Policy

            
                            * Privacy
                * Terms & Conditions
                * Copyright
            

# Advertise With Us

            
                            * Media Kit
                * Market info
                * Rates & Specs
            

# About Us

            
                            * As Seen On
                * Staff
                * Process
                * Funding
            

# State Editions

            
                            * Arizona
                * California
                * Colorado
                * Florida
                * Georgia
                * Iowa
                * Illinois
                * Missouri
                * Nevada
                * New Hampshire
                * New York
                * North Carolina
                * Ohio
                * Pennsylvania
                * Rhode Island
                * Texas
                * Virginia
                * Wisconsin
            

# Special Editions

            
                            * National
                * Global News Project
                * PunditFact
            

# Policy

            
                            * Privacy
                * Terms & Conditions
                * Copyright
            

# Advertise With Us

            
                            * Media Kit
                * Market info
                * Rates & Specs
            

# About Us

            
                            * As Seen On
                * Staff
                * Process
                * Funding
            

# Stay Connected

# Fact-Check Suggestions

(C)All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2019, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization

            
                            * Editions 
                  * National
                  * PunditFact
                  * Health Check
                  * Facebook Hoaxes
                  * States 
                    * California
                    * Florida
                    * Illinois
                    * Missouri
                    * New Hampshire
                    * New York
                    * North Carolina
                    * Pennsylvania
                    * Texas
                    * Virginia
                    * West Virginia
                    * Vermont
                    * Wisconsin
                * Truth-O-MeterTM
                  * All
                  * By subject
                  * True
                  * Mostly True
                  * Half True
                  * Mostly False
                  * False
                  * Pants on Fire!
                  * No Flip
                  * Half Flip
                  * Full Flop
                * People 
                  * Donald Trump
                  * Mike Pence
                  * Barack Obama
                  * Chain E-mails
                  * Other people and groups
                * Promises 
                  * Trump-O-Meter 
                    * All
                    * Top 25 Promises
                    * By subject
                    * Not yet rated
                    * In the Works
                    * Stalled
                    * Promise Kept
                    * Compromise
                    * Promise Broken
                  * Obameter 
                    * All
                    * Top 25 Promises
                    * By subject
                    * Promise Kept
                    * Compromise
                    * Promise Broken
                * Pants On Fire
                * About Us 
                  * Our Process
                  * Our Staff
                  * Who Pays for Politifact
                  * Suggest a Fact Check
                * Donate
            

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-23nLlPXNTk7P6.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

