

![Page protected with pending

changes](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b7/Pending-protection-

shackle.svg/20px-Pending-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Climatic Research Unit email controversy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

![Changes must be reviewed before being displayed on this

page.](/w/extensions/FlaggedRevs/frontend/modules/img/doc-

magnify.png)![show/hide

details](/w/extensions/FlaggedRevs/frontend/modules/img/arrow-down.png)

This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on _23 May 2019_.

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Climatic Research Unit email controversyDate| 17 November 2009  
---|---  
Location| Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia  
Also known as| "Climategate"  
Inquiries| House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (UK)[1]  
Independent Climate Change Email Review (UK)  
International Science Assessment Panel (UK)  
Pennsylvania State University (US)  
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US)  
Department of Commerce (US)  
Verdict| Exoneration or withdrawal of all major or serious charges

The **Climatic Research Unit email controversy** (also known as "
**Climategate** ")[2][3] began in November 2009 with the hacking of a server
at the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) at the University of East Anglia (UEA) by
an external attacker,[4][5] copying thousands of emails and computer files,
the Climatic Research Unit documents, to various internet locations several
weeks before the Copenhagen Summit on climate change.

The story was first broken by climate change denialists,[6] with columnist
James Delingpole popularising the term "Climategate" to describe the
controversy.[7] Several climate-change "skeptics" argued that the emails
showed that global warming was a scientific conspiracy and that scientists
manipulated climate data and attempted to suppress critics.[8][9] The CRU
rejected this, saying that the emails had been taken out of context and merely
reflected an honest exchange of ideas.[10][11]

The mainstream media picked up the story, as negotiations over climate change
mitigation began in Copenhagen on 7 December 2009.[12] Because of the timing,
scientists, policy makers and public-relations experts said that the release
of emails was a smear campaign intended to undermine the climate
conference.[13] In response to the controversy, the American Association for
the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the American Meteorological Society (AMS)
and the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) released statements supporting the
scientific consensus that the Earth's mean surface temperature had been rising
for decades, with the AAAS concluding: "based on multiple lines of scientific
evidence that global climate change caused by human activities is now
underway... it is a growing threat to society".[14]

Eight committees investigated the allegations and published reports, finding
no evidence of fraud or scientific misconduct.[15] The scientific consensus
that global warming is occurring as a result of human activity remained
unchanged throughout the investigations.[16]

## Contents

            
                            * 1 Timeline of the initial incident
                * 2 Content of the documents
                * 3 Responses
                  * 3.1 University of East Anglia
                  * 3.2 Climatologists
                  * 3.3 Scientific organisations
                  * 3.4 UK Met Office
                  * 3.5 Other responses
                * 4 Inquiries and reports
                  * 4.1 House of Commons Science and Technology Committee
                  * 4.2 Science Assessment Panel
                  * 4.3 Pennsylvania State University
                  * 4.4 Independent Climate Change Email Review
                  * 4.5 United States Environmental Protection Agency report
                  * 4.6 Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Commerce
                  * 4.7 National Science Foundation
                * 5 ICO decisions on Freedom of Information requests
                * 6 Media coverage
                * 7 Public opinion and political fallout
                * 8 Further release, 2011
                * 9 Further reading
                * 10 See also
                * 11 References
                * 12 External links
            

## Timeline of the initial incident[edit]

The incident began when a server used by the Climatic Research Unit was
breached in "a sophisticated and carefully orchestrated attack",[5] and 160 MB
of data[8] were obtained including more than 1,000 emails and 3,000 other
documents.[17] The University of East Anglia stated that the server from which
the data were taken was not one that could be accessed easily, and that the
data could not have been released inadvertently.[18] Norfolk Police later
added that the offenders used methods that are common in unlawful internet
activity, designed to obstruct later enquiries.[5] The breach was first
discovered on 17 November 2009 after the server of the RealClimate website was
also hacked and a copy of the stolen data was uploaded there.[19]
RealClimate's Gavin Schmidt said that he had information that the files had
been obtained through "a hack into [CRU's] backup mail server".[20] At about
the same time, a short comment appeared on Stephen McIntyre's Climate Audit
website saying that "A miracle has happened."[21]

On 19 November, an archive file containing the data was uploaded to a server
in Tomsk, Russia,[22] and then copied to numerous locations across the
Internet.[8] An anonymous post from a Saudi Arabian IP address[23] to the
climate-sceptic blog _The Air Vent_ [19] described the material as "a random
selection of correspondence, code, and documents", adding that climate science
is "too important to be kept under wraps".[24] That same day, Stephen McIntyre
of Climate Audit was forwarded an internal email sent to UEA staff warning
that "climate change sceptics" had obtained a "large volume of files and
emails". Charles Rotter, moderator of the climate-sceptic blog _Watts Up With
That_ , which had been the first to get a link and download the files, gave a
copy to his flatmate Steve Mosher. Mosher received a posting from the hacker
complaining that nothing was happening and replied: "A lot is happening behind
the scenes. It is not being ignored. Much is being coordinated among major
players and the media. Thank you very much. You will notice the beginnings of
activity on other sites now. Here soon to follow." Shortly afterwards, the
emails began to be widely publicised on climate-sceptic blogs.[21] On 20
November, the story emerged in mainstream media.[8]

Norfolk police subsequently confirmed that they were "investigating criminal
offences in relation to a data breach at the University of East Anglia" with
the assistance of the Metropolitan Police Central e-Crime unit,[22] the
Information Commissioner's Office (ICO), and the National Domestic Extremism
Team (NDET).[25] Commenting on the involvement of the NDET, a spokesman said:
"At present we have two police officers assisting Norfolk with their
investigation, and we have also provided computer forensic expertise. While
this is not strictly a domestic extremism matter, as a national police unit we
had the expertise and resource to assist with this investigation, as well as
good background knowledge of climate change issues in relation to criminal
investigations." However, the police cautioned that "major investigations of
this nature are of necessity very detailed and as a consequence can take time
to reach a conclusion".[26] On 18 July 2012, the Norfolk police finally
decided to close its investigation because they did not have a "realistic
prospect of identifying the offender or offenders and launching criminal
proceedings within the time constraints imposed by law". They also said that
the attack had been carried out "remotely via the internet", and that there
was "no evidence to suggest that anyone working at or associated with the
University of East Anglia was involved in the crime".[5]

## Content of the documents[edit]

Further information: Climatic Research Unit documents

The material comprised more than 1,000 emails, 2,000 documents, as well as
commented source code, pertaining to climate-change research, covering a
period from 1996 until 2009.[27] According to an analysis in _The Guardian_ ,
the vast majority of the emails related to four climatologists: Phil Jones,
the head of the CRU; Keith Briffa, a CRU climatologist specialising in tree
ring analysis; Tim Osborn, a climate modeller at CRU; and Mike Hulme, director
of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research. The four were either
recipients or senders of all but 66 of the 1,073 emails, with most of the
remainder of the emails being sent from mailing lists. A few other emails were
sent by, or to, other staff at the CRU. Jones, Briffa, Osborn and Hulme had
written high-profile scientific papers on climate change that had been cited
in reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.[20]

Most of the emails concerned technical and mundane aspects of climate
research, such as data analysis and details of scientific conferences.[28]
_The Guardian's_ analysis of the emails suggests that the hacker had filtered
them. Four scientists were targeted and a concordance plot shows that the
words "data", "climate", "paper", "research", "temperature" and "model" were
predominant.[20] The controversy has focused on a small number of emails[28]
with "climate sceptic" websites picking out particular phrases, such as one in
which Kevin Trenberth said, "The fact is that we can’t account for the lack of
warming at the moment and it is a travesty that we can’t".[19] This was
actually part of a discussion on the need for better monitoring of the energy
flows involved in short-term climate variability,[29] but was grossly
mischaracterised by critics.[30][31]

Many commentators quoted one email in which Phil Jones said that he had used
"Mike's _Nature_ trick" in a 1999 graph for the World Meteorological
Organization "to hide the decline" in proxy temperatures derived from tree-
ring analyses when measured temperatures were actually rising. This "decline"
referred to the well-discussed tree-ring divergence problem, but these two
phrases were taken out of context by global warming sceptics, including US
Senator Jim Inhofe and former Governor of Alaska Sarah Palin, as though they
referred to some decline in measured global temperatures, even though they
were written when temperatures were at a record high.[31] John Tierney,
writing in _The New York Times_ in November 2009, said that the claims by
sceptics of "hoax" or "fraud" were incorrect, but that the graph on the cover
of a report for policy makers and journalists did not show these non-experts
where proxy measurements changed to measured temperatures.[32] The final
analyses from various subsequent inquiries concluded that in this context
"trick" was normal scientific or mathematical jargon for a neat way of
handling data, in this case a statistical method used to bring two or more
different kinds of data sets together in a legitimate fashion.[33][34] The EPA
notes that in fact, the evidence shows that the research community was fully
aware of these issues and that no one was hiding or concealing them.[35]

## Responses[edit]

Former Republican House Science Committee chairman Sherwood Boehlert called
the attacks a "manufactured distraction", and the dispute was described as a
"highly orchestrated" and manufactured controversy by _Newsweek_ and _The New
York Times_. Concerns about the media's role in promoting early allegations
while also minimising later coverage exonerating the scientists were raised by
journalists and policy experts. Historian Spencer R. Weart of the American
Institute of Physics said the incident was unprecedented in the history of
science, having "never before seen a set of people accuse an entire community
of scientists of deliberate deception and other professional malfeasance".[36]
The United States National Academy of Sciences expressed concern and condemned
what they called "political assaults on scientists and climate scientists in
particular".[37]

In the United Kingdom and United States, there were calls for official
inquiries into issues raised by the documents. The British Conservative
politician Lord Lawson said: "The integrity of the scientific evidence ... has
been called into question. And the reputation of British science has been
seriously tarnished. A high-level independent inquiry must be set up without
delay." Bob Ward of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the
Environment at the London School of Economics said that there had to be a
rigorous investigation into the substance of the email messages, once
appropriate action has been taken over the hacking, to clear the impression of
impropriety given by the selective disclosure and dissemination of the
messages.[38] United States Senator Jim Inhofe, who had previously stated that
global warming was "the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American
people",[39] also planned to demand an inquiry.[40] In a debate in the United
States House of Representatives on 2 December 2009, Republicans read out
extracts from eight of the emails, and Representative Jim Sensenbrenner said:
"These e-mails show a pattern of suppression, manipulation and secrecy that
was inspired by ideology, condescension and profit". In response, the
president's science adviser John Holdren said that the science was proper, and
the emails only concerned a fraction of the research. Government scientist
Jane Lubchenco said that the emails "do nothing to undermine the very strong
scientific consensus" that the Earth is warming, largely due to human
actions.[41]

Climate change sceptics gained wide publicity in blogs and news media,[31]
making allegations that the hacked emails showed evidence that climate
scientists manipulated data.[8] A few other commentators such as Roger A.
Pielke[42] said that the evidence supported claims that dissenting scientific
papers had been suppressed.[43] _The Wall Street Journal_ reported that the
emails revealed apparent efforts to ensure that the IPCC included their own
views and excluded others, and that the scientists withheld scientific
data.[44]

An editorial in _Nature_ stated that "A fair reading of the e-mails reveals
nothing to support the denialists' conspiracy theories." It said that emails
showed harassment of researchers, with multiple Freedom of Information
requests to the Climatic Research Unit, but release of information had been
hampered by national government restrictions on releasing the meteorological
data researchers had been using. _Nature_ considered that emails had not shown
anything that undermined the scientific case on human-caused global warming or
raised any substantive reasons for concern about the researchers' own
papers.[45] The Telegraph reported that academics and climate change
researchers dismissed the allegations, saying that nothing in the emails
proved wrongdoing.[46] Independent reviews by FactCheck and the Associated
Press said that the emails did not affect evidence that man-made global
warming is a real threat, and said that emails were being misrepresented to
support unfounded claims of scientific misconduct. The AP said that the
"[e]-mails stolen from climate scientists show they stonewalled sceptics and
discussed hiding data".[47][48] In this context, John Tierney of _The New York
Times_ wrote: "these researchers, some of the most prominent climate experts
in Britain and America, seem so focused on winning the public-relations war
that they exaggerate their certitude — and ultimately undermine their own
cause".[32]

Climate scientists at the CRU and elsewhere received numerous threatening and
abusive emails in the wake of the initial incidents.[49][50] Norfolk Police
interviewed Phil Jones about death threats made against him following the
release of the emails;[51] Jones later said that the police told him that
these "didn’t fulfil the criteria for death threats".[52] Death threats
against two scientists also are under investigation by the US Federal Bureau
of Investigation.[49] Climate scientists in Australia have reported receiving
threatening emails including references to where they live and warnings to "be
careful" about how some people might react to their scientific findings.[53]
In July 2012, Michael Mann said that the episode had caused him to "endure
countless verbal attacks upon my professional reputation, my honesty, my
integrity, even my life and liberty".[54]

### University of East Anglia[edit]

The University of East Anglia was notified of the security breach on 17
November 2009, but when the story was published in the press on 20 November,
they had no statement ready.[55] On 24 November, Trevor Davies, the University
of East Anglia pro-vice-chancellor with responsibility for research, rejected
calls for Jones' resignation or firing: "We see no reason for Professor Jones
to resign and, indeed, we would not accept his resignation. He is a valued and
important scientist." The university announced that it would conduct an
independent review into issues including Freedom of Information requests to
the Climatic Research Unit: it would "address the issue of data security, an
assessment of how we responded to a deluge of Freedom of Information requests,
and any other relevant issues which the independent reviewer advises should be
addressed".[56]

The university announced on 1 December that Phil Jones was to stand aside as
director of the Unit until the completion of the review.[57][58] Two days
later, the university announced that Sir Muir Russell would chair the inquiry,
which would be known as the Independent Climate Change Email Review, and would
"examine email exchanges to determine whether there is evidence of suppression
or manipulation of data". The review would also scrutinise the CRU's policies
and practices for "acquiring, assembling, subjecting to peer review, and
disseminating data and research findings" and "their compliance or otherwise
with best scientific practice". In addition, the investigation would review
CRU's compliance with Freedom of Information Act requests and also "make
recommendations about the management, governance and security structures for
CRU and the security, integrity and release of the data it holds".[59] The
Independent Climate Change Email Review report was published on 7 July
2010.[60]

On 22 March 2010 the university announced the composition of an independent
Science Assessment Panel to reassess key CRU papers that have already been
peer-reviewed and published in journals. The panel did not seek to evaluate
the science itself, but rather whether "the conclusions [reached by the CRU]
represented an honest and scientifically justified interpretation of the
data". The university consulted with the Royal Society in establishing the
panel. It was chaired by Lord Oxburgh, and its membership consisted of Huw
Davies of ETH Zurich, Kerry Emanual of Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Lisa Graumlich of the University of Arizona, David Hand of Imperial College
London, and Herbert Huppert and Michael Kelly of the University of Cambridge.
It started its work in March 2010 and released its report on 14 April 2010.
During its inquiry, the panel examined eleven representative CRU publications,
selected with advice from the Royal Society, that spanned a period of over 20
years, as well as other CRU research materials. It also spent fifteen person-
days at the UEA carrying out interviews with scientists.[61]

### Climatologists[edit]

Among the scientists whose emails were disclosed, the CRU's researchers said
in a statement that the emails had been taken out of context and merely
reflected an honest exchange of ideas. Michael Mann, director of Pennsylvania
State University's Earth System Science Center, said that sceptics were
"taking these words totally out of context to make something trivial appear
nefarious"[17] and called the entire incident a careful, "high-level,
orchestrated smear campaign to distract the public about the nature of the
climate change problem".[62] Kevin E. Trenberth of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research said that he was appalled at the release of the emails
but thought that it might backfire against climate sceptics, as the messages
would show "the integrity of scientists".[19] He also said that climate change
sceptics had selectively quoted words and phrases out of context and that the
timing suggested an attempt to undermine talks at the December 2009 Copenhagen
global climate summit.[63] Tom Wigley, a former director of the CRU and now
head of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research, condemned the threats
that he and other colleagues had received as "truly stomach-turning", and
commented: "None of it affects the science one iota. Accusations of data
distortion or faking are baseless. I can rebut and explain all of the
apparently incriminating e-mails that I have looked at, but it is going to be
very time consuming to do so."[49] In relation to the harassment that he and
his colleagues were experiencing, he said: "This sort of thing has been going
on at a much lower level for almost 20 years and there have been other
outbursts of this sort of behaviour – criticism and abusive emails and things
like that in the past. So this is a worse manifestation but it's happened
before so it's not that surprising."[64]

Other prominent climate scientists, such as Richard Somerville, called the
incident a smear campaign.[65] David Reay of the University of Edinburgh said
that the CRU "is just one of many climate-research institutes that provide the
underlying scientific basis for climate policy at national and international
levels. The conspiracy theorists may be having a field day, but if they really
knew academia they would also know that every published paper and data set is
continually put through the wringer by other independent research groups. The
information that makes it into the IPCC reports is some of the most rigorously
tested and debated in any area of science."[49] Stephen Schneider compared the
political attacks on climate scientists to the witch-hunts of McCarthyism.[66]

James Hansen said that the controversy has "no effect on the science" and that
while some of the emails reflect poor judgment, the evidence for human-made
climate change is overwhelming.[67]

One of the IPCC's lead authors, Raymond Pierrehumbert of the University of
Chicago, expressed concern at the precedent established by this incident:
"[T]his is a criminal act of vandalism and of harassment of a group of
scientists that are only going about their business doing science. It
represents a whole new escalation in the war on climate scientists who are
only trying to get at the truth... What next? Deliberate monkeying with data
on servers? Insertion of bugs into climate models?"[68] Another IPCC lead
author, David Karoly of the University of Melbourne, reported receiving hate
emails in the wake of the incident and said that he believed that there was
"an organised campaign to discredit individual climate scientists". Andrew
Pitman of the University of New South Wales commented: "The major problem is
that scientists have to be able to communicate their science without fear or
favour and there seems to be a well-orchestrated campaign designed to
intimidate some scientists."[53]

In response to the incident, 1,700 British scientists signed a joint statement
circulated by the UK Met Office declaring their "utmost confidence in the
observational evidence for global warming and the scientific basis for
concluding that it is due primarily to human activities".[69]

Patrick J. Michaels, who was criticised in the emails and who has long faulted
evidence pointing to human-driven warming, said: "This is not a smoking gun;
this is a mushroom cloud". He said that some emails showed an effort to block
the release of data for independent review and that some messages discussed
discrediting him by stating that he knew his research was wrong in his
doctoral dissertation, "This shows these are people willing to bend rules and
go after other people's reputations in very serious ways."[19]

Judith Curry wrote that, in her opinion, "there are two broader issues raised
by these emails that are impeding the public credibility of climate research:
lack of transparency in climate data, and 'tribalism' in some segments of the
climate research community that is impeding peer review and the assessment
process". She hoped that the affair would change the approach of scientists to
providing their data to the public and their response to criticisms of their
work. She had herself learned to be careful about what to put in emails when a
"disgruntled employee" made a freedom of information request. Mann described
these comments as "somewhat naive" considering that in recent years scientists
had become much more open with their data. He said that sceptics "will always
complain about something else, want something more. Eventually, as we see,
they've found a way to get access to private communications between
scientists."[62]

Hans von Storch, who also concurs with the mainstream view on global
warming,[70] said that the University of East Anglia (UEA) had "violated a
fundamental principle of science" by refusing to share data with other
researchers. "They play science as a power game," he said.[71] On 24 November
2009 the university had stated that 95% of the raw station data was accessible
via the Global Historical Climatology Network, and had been for several years.
They were already working with the Met Office to obtain permissions to release
the remaining raw data.[72]

### Scientific organisations[edit]

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group I issued
statements that the assessment process, involving hundreds of scientists
worldwide, is designed to be transparent and to prevent any individual or
small group from manipulating the process. The statement said that the
"internal consistency from multiple lines of evidence strongly supports the
work of the scientific community, including those individuals singled out in
these email exchanges".[73][74]

The American Meteorological Society stated that the incident did not affect
the society's position on climate change. They pointed to the breadth of
evidence for human influence on climate, stating:[75]

> For climate change research, the body of research in the literature is very
large and the dependence on any one set of research results to the
comprehensive understanding of the climate system is very, very small. Even if
some of the charges of improper behavior in this particular case turn out to
be true—which is not yet clearly the case—the impact on the science of climate
change would be very limited.

The American Geophysical Union issued a statement that they found "it
offensive that these emails were obtained by illegal cyber attacks and they
are being exploited to distort the scientific debate about the urgent issue of
climate change". They reaffirmed their 2007 position statement on climate
change "based on the large body of scientific evidence that Earth's climate is
warming and that human activity is a contributing factor. Nothing in the
University of East Anglia hacked e-mails represents a significant challenge to
that body of scientific evidence."[76]

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) reaffirmed its
position on global warming and "expressed grave concerns that the illegal
release of private emails stolen from the University of East Anglia should not
cause policy-makers and the public to become confused about the scientific
basis of global climate change. Scientific integrity demands robust,
independent peer review, however, and AAAS therefore emphasised that
investigations are appropriate whenever significant questions are raised
regarding the transparency and rigour of the scientific method, the peer-
review process, or the responsibility of individual scientists. The
responsible institutions are mounting such investigations." Alan I. Leshner,
CEO of the AAAS and executive publisher of the journal _Science_ , said: "AAAS
takes issues of scientific integrity very seriously. It is fair and
appropriate to pursue answers to any allegations of impropriety. It’s
important to remember, though, that the reality of climate change is based on
a century of robust and well-validated science."[77]

### UK Met Office[edit]

On 23 November 2009, a spokesman for the Met Office, the UK's national weather
service, which works with the CRU in providing global temperature information,
said that there was no need for an inquiry. "The bottom line is that
temperatures continue to rise and humans are responsible for it. We have every
confidence in the science and the various datasets we use. The peer-review
process is as robust as it could possibly be."[38]

On 5 December 2009, however, the Met Office indicated its intention to re-
examine 160 years of temperature data in the light of concerns that public
confidence in the science had been damaged by the controversy over the
emails.[78] The Met Office would also publish online the temperature records
for over 1,000 worldwide weather stations.[79][80] It remained confident that
its analysis would be shown to be correct[78] and that the data would show a
temperature rise over the past 150 years.[79][81]

### Other responses[edit]

Rajendra Pachauri, as chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, told the BBC in December 2009 that he considered the affair to be "a
serious issue" and that they "will look into it in detail".[82] He later
clarified that the IPCC would review the incident to identify lessons to be
learned and rejected suggestions that the IPCC itself should carry out an
investigation.

In a series of emails sent through a National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
listserv, apparently forwarded outside the group by an unknown person,
scientists discussing the "Climategate" fallout considered launching
advertising campaigns, widening their public presence, pushing the NAS to take
a more active role in explaining climate science and creating a nonprofit to
serve as a voice for the scientific community.[83]

A paper by Reiner Grundmann used a limited account of the events to discuss
norms of scientific practice in relation to two science ethics approaches, the
Mertonian norms as of Robert K. Merton, and Roger Pielke Jr.'s concept of
honest brokering in science policy interactions. Sources for the paper were
chosen for accessibility, emphasising "critical accounts".[84]

## Inquiries and reports[edit]

Eight committees investigated the allegations and published reports, finding
no evidence of fraud or scientific misconduct.[15] The scientific consensus
that global warming is occurring as a result of human activity remained
unchanged by the end of the investigations.[16] However, the reports urged the
scientists to avoid any such allegations in the future, and to regain public
confidence following this media storm, with "more efforts than ever to make
available all their supporting data – right down to the computer codes they
use – to allow their findings to be properly verified". Climate scientists and
organisations pledged to improve scientific research and collaboration with
other researchers by improving data management and opening up access to data,
and to honour any freedom of information requests that relate to climate
science.[85]

### House of Commons Science and Technology Committee[edit]

On 22 January 2010, the House of Commons Science and Technology Select
Committee announced it would conduct an inquiry into the affair, examining the
implications of the disclosure for the integrity of scientific research,
reviewing the scope of the independent Muir Russell review announced by the
UEA, and reviewing the independence of international climate data sets.[86]
The committee invited written submissions from interested parties, and
published 55 submissions that it had received by 10 February. They included
submissions from the University of East Anglia, the Global Warming Policy
Foundation, the Institute of Physics, the Royal Society of Chemistry, the Met
Office, several other professional bodies, prominent scientists, some climate
change sceptics, several MEPs and other interested parties.[87] An oral
evidence session was held on 1 March 2010.[88]

The Science and Technology Select Committee inquiry reported on 31 March 2010
that it had found that "the scientific reputation of Professor Jones and CRU
remains intact". The emails and claims raised in the controversy did not
challenge the scientific consensus that "global warming is happening and that
it is induced by human activity". The MPs had seen no evidence to support
claims that Jones had tampered with data or interfered with the peer-review
process.[89]

The committee criticised a "culture of non-disclosure at CRU" and a general
lack of transparency in climate science where scientific papers had usually
not included all the data and code used in reconstructions. It said that "even
if the data that CRU used were not publicly available—which they mostly are—or
the methods not published—which they have been—its published results would
still be credible: the results from CRU agree with those drawn from other
international data sets; in other words, the analyses have been repeated and
the conclusions have been verified." The report added that "scientists could
have saved themselves a lot of trouble by aggressively publishing all their
data instead of worrying about how to stonewall their critics." The committee
criticised the university for the way that freedom of information requests
were handled, and for failing to give adequate support to the scientists to
deal with such requests.[90]

The committee chairman Phil Willis said that the "standard practice" in
climate science generally of not routinely releasing all raw data and computer
codes "needs to change and it needs to change quickly". Jones had admitted
sending "awful emails"; Willis commented that "[Jones] probably wishes that
emails were never invented," but "apart from that we do believe that Prof.
Jones has in many ways been scapegoated as a result of what really was a
frustration on his part that people were asking for information purely to
undermine his research."[33] In Willis' view this did not excuse any failure
to deal properly with FOI Act requests, but the committee accepted that Jones
had released all the data that he could.[33] It stated: "There is no reason
why Professor Jones should not resume his post. He was certainly not co-
operative with those seeking to get data, but that was true of all the climate
scientists".[91]

The committee was careful to point out that its report had been written after
a single day of oral testimony and would not be as in-depth as other
inquiries.[89]

### Science Assessment Panel[edit]

The report of the independent Science Assessment Panel was published on 14
April 2010 and concluded that the panel had seen "no evidence of any
deliberate scientific malpractice in any of the work of the Climatic Research
Unit." It found that the CRU's work had been "carried out with integrity" and
had used "fair and satisfactory" methods. The CRU was found to be "objective
and dispassionate in their view of the data and their results, and there was
no hint of tailoring results to a particular agenda." Instead, "their sole aim
was to establish as robust a record of temperatures in recent centuries as
possible."[61]

The panel commented that it was "very surprising that research in an area that
depends so heavily on statistical methods has not been carried out in close
collaboration with professional statisticians." It found that although the CRU
had not made inappropriate use of statistical methods, some of the methods
used may not have been the best for the purpose, though it said that "it is
not clear, however, that better methods would have produced significantly
different results." It suggested that the CRU could have done more to document
and archive its work, data and algorithms and stated that the scientists were
"ill prepared" for the amount of public attention generated by their work,
commenting that "as with many small research groups their internal procedures
were rather informal." The media and other scientific organisations were
criticised for having "sometimes neglected" to reflect the uncertainties,
doubts and assumptions of the work done by the CRU. The UK Government's policy
of charging for access to scientific data was described as "inconsistent with
policies of open access to data promoted elsewhere." The panel was also stated
that "Although we deplore the tone of much of the criticism that has been
directed at CRU, we believe that this questioning of the methods and data used
in dendroclimatology will ultimately have a beneficial effect and improve
working practices." It found that some of the criticism had been "selective
and uncharitable" and critics had displayed "a lack of awareness" of the
difficulties of research in this area.[61]

Speaking at a press conference to announce the report, the panel's chair, Lord
Oxburgh, stated that his team had found "absolutely no evidence of any
impropriety whatsoever" and that "whatever was said in the emails, the basic
science seems to have been done fairly and properly." He said that many of the
criticisms and allegations of scientific misconduct had been made by people
"who do not like the implications of some of the conclusions" reached by the
CRU's scientists. He said that the repeated FOI requests made by climate
change sceptic Steve McIntyre and others could have amounted to a campaign of
harassment, and the issue of how FOI laws should be applied in an academic
context remained unresolved.[92] Another panel member, Professor David Hand,
commended the CRU for being explicit about the inherent uncertainties in its
research data, commenting that "there is no evidence of anything underhand –
the opposite, if anything, they have brought out into the open the
uncertainties with what they are dealing with."[93]

At the press conference, Hand also commented on the well publicised 1998 paper
produced in the United States by scientists led by Michael E. Mann, saying
that the hockey stick graph it showed was a genuine effect, but he had an
"uneasy feeling" about the use of "inappropriate statistical tools" and said
that the 1998 study had exaggerated the effect. He commended McIntyre for
pointing out this issue. Mann subsequently told _The Guardian_ that the study
had been examined and approved in the US National Academies of Science North
Report, and described Hand's comment as a "rogue opinion" not meriting "much
attention or credence".[92]

The UEA's vice-chancellor, Edward Acton, welcomed the panel's findings.
Describing its report as "hugely positive", he stated that "it is especially
important that, despite a deluge of allegations and smears against the CRU,
this independent group of utterly reputable scientists have concluded that
there was no evidence of any scientific malpractice."[94] He criticised the
way that the emails had been misrepresented, saying that "UEA has already put
on record its deep regret and anger that the theft of emails from the
University, and the blatant misrepresentation of their contents as revealed
both in this report and the previous one by the Science and Technology Select
Committee, damaged the reputation of UK climate science."[95] The UEA issued a
statement in which it accepted that "things might have been done better." It
said that improvements had already been undertaken by the CRU and others in
the climate science community and that the University would "continue to
ensure that these imperatives are maintained."[96]

It later emerged that the Science Assessment Panel was not assessing the
quality but instead the integrity of the CRU's science. Phil Willis described
this a "sleight of hand" and was not what the Parliamentary Committee he had
chaired had been led to believe. There were also questions about the selection
of publications examined by the panel.[97] Lord Oxburgh said that Acton had
been wrong to tell the Science and Technology Select Committee in March that
his inquiry would look into the science itself. "I think that was inaccurate,"
Oxburgh said. "This had to be done rapidly. This was their concern. They
really wanted something within a month. There was no way our panel could
evaluate the science."[98]

### Pennsylvania State University[edit]

Pennsylvania State University announced in December 2009 it would review the
work of Michael E. Mann, in particular looking at anything that had not
already been addressed in the 2006 North Report review by the National
Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences which had investigated
Mann's "hockey stick graph" studies and found some faults with his 1998
methodology but agreed with the results which had been reaffirmed by later
studies using different methods.[99][100][101] In response, Mann said he would
welcome the review.[101] The inquiry committee determined on 3 February 2010
that there was no credible evidence Mann suppressed or falsified data,
destroyed emails, information and/or data related to the IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report, or misused privileged or confidential information. The
committee did not make a definitive finding on the final point of inquiry —
"whether Dr Mann seriously deviated from accepted practices within the
academic community for proposing, conducting, or reporting research or other
scholarly activities". The committee said that the earlier NAS inquiry had
found "that Dr Mann’s science did fall well within the bounds of accepted
practice", but in light of the newly available information this question of
conduct was to be investigated by a second panel of five prominent Penn State
scientists from other scientific disciplines.[34][102]

The second Investigatory Committee reported on 4 June 2010 that it had
"determined that Dr Michael E. Mann did not engage in, nor did he participate
in, directly or indirectly, any actions that seriously deviated from accepted
practices within the academic community." Regarding his sharing unpublished
manuscripts with colleagues on the assumption of implied consent, it
considered such sharing to be "careless and inappropriate" without following
the best practice of getting express consent from the authors in advance,
though expert opinion on this varied. It said that his success in proposing
research and obtaining funding for it, commenting that this "clearly places Dr
Mann among the most respected scientists in his field. Such success would not
have been possible had he not met or exceeded the highest standards of his
profession for proposing research." Mann's extensive recognitions within the
research community demonstrated that "his scientific work, especially the
conduct of his research, has from the beginning of his career been judged to
be outstanding by a broad spectrum of scientists." It agreed unanimously that
"there is no substance" to the allegations against Mann.[103][104]

Mann said he regretted not objecting to a suggestion from Jones in a 29 May
2008 message that he destroy emails. "I wish in retrospect I had told him,
'Hey, you shouldn't even be thinking about this,'" Mann said in March 2010. "I
didn't think it was an appropriate request." Mann's response to Jones at the
time was that he would pass on the request to another scientist. "The
important thing is, I didn't delete any emails. And I don't think [Jones] did
either."[105]

### Independent Climate Change Email Review[edit]

First announced in December 2009, a British investigation commissioned by the
UEA and chaired by Sir Muir Russell, published its final report in July
2010.[106] The commission cleared the scientists and dismissed allegations
that they manipulated their data. The "rigour and honesty" of the scientists
at the Climatic Research Unit were found not to be in doubt.[107] The panel
found that they did not subvert the peer review process to censor criticism as
alleged, and that the key data needed to reproduce their findings was freely
available to any "competent" researcher.[108]

The panel did rebuke the CRU for their reluctance to release computer files,
and found that a graph produced in 1999 was "misleading," though not
deliberately so as necessary caveats had been included in the accompanying
text.[109] It found evidence that emails might have been deleted in order to
make them unavailable should a subsequent request be made for them, though the
panel did not ask anyone at CRU whether they had actually done this.[110]

At the conclusion of the inquiry, Jones was reinstated with the newly created
post of Director of Research.[107][108][111]

### United States Environmental Protection Agency report[edit]

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had issued an
"endangerment finding" in 2009 in preparation for climate regulations on
excessive greenhouse gases. Petitions to reconsider this were raised by the
states of Virginia and Texas, conservative activists and business groups
including the United States Chamber of Commerce, the Competitive Enterprise
Institute and the coal company Peabody Energy, making claims that the CRU
emails undermined the science.[112]

The EPA examined every email and concluded that there was no merit to the
claims in the petitions, which "routinely misunderstood the scientific
issues", reached "faulty scientific conclusions", "resorted to hyperbole", and
"often cherry-pick language that creates the suggestion or appearance of
impropriety, without looking deeper into the issues."[113] In a statement
issued on 29 July 2010, EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson said the petitions
were based "on selectively edited, out-of-context data and a manufactured
controversy" and provided "no evidence to undermine our determination. Excess
greenhouse gases are a threat to our health and welfare."[114]

The EPA issued a detailed report on issues raised by petitioners and
responses, together with a fact sheet,[115] and a "myths versus facts" page
stating that "Petitioners say that emails disclosed from CRU provide evidence
of a conspiracy to manipulate data. The media coverage after the emails were
released was based on email statements quoted out of context and on
unsubstantiated theories of conspiracy. The CRU emails do not show either that
the science is flawed or that the scientific process has been compromised. EPA
carefully reviewed the CRU emails and found no indication of improper data
manipulation or misrepresentation of results."[116]

### Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Commerce[edit]

In May 2010 Senator Jim Inhofe requested the Inspector General of the United
States Department of Commerce to conduct an independent review of how the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had dealt with the
emails, and whether the emails showed any wrongdoing.[117] The report, issued
on 18 February 2011,[118] cleared the researchers and "did not find any
evidence that NOAA inappropriately manipulated data or failed to adhere to
appropriate peer review procedures". It noted that NOAA reviewed its climate
change data as standard procedure, not in response to the controversy. One
email included a cartoon image showing Infofe and others marooned on a melting
ice floe, NOAA had taken this up as a conduct issue. In response to questions
raised, NOAA stated that its scientists had followed legal advice on FOIA
requests for information which belonged to the IPCC and was made available by
that panel. In two instances funding had been awarded to CRU,[117] NOAA stated
that it was reviewing these cases and so far understood that the funds
supported climate forecasting workshops in 2002 and 2003 assisting the
governments of three countries.[119]

### National Science Foundation[edit]

The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) of the National Science Foundation
closed an investigation on 15 August 2011 that exonerated Michael Mann of
Pennsylvania State University of charges of scientific misconduct.[120] It
found no evidence of research misconduct, and confirmed the results of earlier
inquiries.[121] The OIG reviewed the findings of the July 2010 Penn State
panel, took further evidence from the university and Mann, and interviewed
Mann. The OIP findings confirmed the university panel's conclusions which
cleared Mann of any wrongdoing, and it stated "Lacking any evidence of
research misconduct, as defined under the NSF Research Misconduct Regulation,
we are closing the investigation with no further action."[122]

## ICO decisions on Freedom of Information requests[edit]

Main article: Freedom of Information requests to the Climatic Research Unit

In two cases, the Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) issued decisions on
appeals of Freedom of Information (FOI) requests which had been turned down by
the university.

David Holland, an electrical engineer from Northampton, made a 2008 FOI
request for all emails to and from Keith Briffa about the IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report; the university's information policy and compliance manager
refused the request. On 23 November 2009, after the start of the controversy,
he wrote to the Commissioner explaining in detail the relevance of the alleged
CRU emails to his case,[123] with specific reference to a May 2008 email in
which Phil Jones asked others to delete emails discussing AR4 with
Briffa.[124] In January 2010 news reports highlighted that FOI legislation
made it an offence to intentionally act to prevent the disclosure of requested
information, but the statute of limitations meant that any prosecution had to
be raised within 6 months of the alleged offence. This was discussed by the
House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee.[125] The ICO
decision on Holland's requests published on 7 July 2010 concluded that the
emails indicated _prima facie_ evidence of an offence, but as prosecution was
time-barred the Commissioner had been unable to investigate the alleged
offence. On the issue of the university failing to provide responses within
the correct time, no further action was needed as Holland was content not to
proceed with his complaint.[124]

The Climatic Research Unit developed its gridded CRUTEM data set of land air
temperature anomalies from instrumental temperature records held by National
Meteorological Organisations around the world, often under formal or informal
confidentiality agreements that restricted use of this raw data to academic
purposes, and prevented it from being passed onto third parties. Over 95% of
the CRU climate data set had been available to the public for several years
before July 2009,[72] when the university received numerous FOI requests for
raw data or details of the confidentiality agreements from Stephen McIntyre
and readers of his Climate Audit blog. Phil Jones of CRU announced that
requests were being made to all the National Meteorological Organisations for
their agreement to waive confidentiality,[126] with the aim of publishing all
the data jointly with the Met Office.[127] McIntyre complained that data
denied to him had been sent to Jones's colleague Peter Webster at the Georgia
Institute of Technology for work on a joint publication, and FOI requests for
this data were made by Jonathan A. Jones of the University of Oxford and Don
Keiller of Anglia Ruskin University.[128] Both requests were refused by the
UEA by 11 September 2009.[129] Though some National Meteorological
Organisations gave full or conditional agreement to waive confidentiality,
others failed to respond, and the request was explicitly refused by Trinidad
and Tobago and Poland. In discussions with the ICO, the university argued that
the data was publicly available from the Met organisations, and the lack of
agreement exempted the remaining data. In its decision released on 23 June
2011, the ICO stated that the data was not easily available, and required the
university to release the data covered by the FOIA request.[129] On 27 July
2011 CRU announced that the raw instrumental data not already in the public
domain had been released and was available for download, with the exception of
Poland which was outside the area covered by the FOIA request. The university
remained concerned "that the forced release of material from a source which
has explicitly refused to give permission for release could have some damaging
consequences for the UK in international research collaborations."[128][130]

In September 2011 the ICO issued new guidance to universities, taking into
account issues raised in relation to the CRU information requests. This
describes exceptions and exemptions to protect research, including allowance
for internal exchange of views between academics and researchers, leaving
formulation of opinions on research free from external scrutiny. It notes the
benefits of actively disclosing information when it is in the public interest,
and disclosure of personal email information related to public authority
business.[131]

## Media coverage[edit]

See also: Media coverage of climate change

The initial story about the hacking originated in the blogosphere,[6] with
columnist James Delingpole picking up the term "Climategate" from an anonymous
blogger on _Watts Up With That?_ , a blog created by climate sceptic Anthony
Watts. The site was one of three blogs that received links to the leaked
documents on 17 November 2009. Delingpole first used the word "Climategate" in
the title of his 20 November article for _The Telegraph_ : "Climategate: the
final nail in the coffin of 'Anthropogenic Global Warming'?" A week later, his
co-worker Christopher Booker gave Delingpole credit for coining the term.[7]
Following the release of documents in the blogosphere, unproven allegations
and personal attacks against scientists increased and made their way into the
traditional media. Physicist Mark Boslough of the University of New Mexico
noted that many of the attacks on scientists came from "bloggers, editorial
writers, Fox News pundits, and radio talk show hosts who have called them
liars and vilified them as frauds". According to Chris Mooney and Sheril
Kirshenbaum in their book _Unscientific America_ (2010), the accusations
originated in right-wing media and blogs, "especially on outlets like Fox
News". Journalist Suzanne Goldenberg of _The Guardian_ reported that according
to an analysis by Media Matters, "Fox had tried to delegitimise the work of
climate scientists in its coverage of the hacked emails from the University of
East Anglia" and had "displayed a pattern of trying to skew coverage in favour
of the fringe minority which doubts the existence of climate change".[12]

The intense media coverage of the documents stolen from climate researchers at
the University of East Anglia created public confusion about the scientific
consensus on climate change, leading several publications to comment on the
propagation of the controversy in the media in the wake of a series of
investigations that cleared the scientists of any wrongdoing. In an editorial,
_The New York Times_ described the coverage as a "manufactured controversy"
and expressed hope that the investigations clearing the scientists "will
receive as much circulation as the original, diversionary controversies".[132]
Writing for _Newsweek_ , journalist Sharon Begley called the controversy a
"highly orchestrated, manufactured scandal", noting that the public was
unlikely to change their mind. Regardless of the reports exonerating the
scientists, Begley noted that "one of the strongest, most-repeated findings in
the psychology of belief is that once people have been told _X_ , especially
if _X_ is shocking, if they are later told, 'No, we were wrong about _X_ ,'
most people still believe _X_."[133]

Jean-Pascal van Ypersele, vice-chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) and science historian Naomi Oreskes said that the "attacks on
climate science that were made ahead of the Copenhagen climate change summit
were 'organised' to undermine efforts to tackle global warming and mirror the
earlier tactics of the tobacco industry".[134] Noting the media circus that
occurred when the story first broke, Oreskes and Erik Conway writing about
climate change denial, said that following the investigations "the vindication
of the climate scientists has received very little coverage at all.
Vindication is not as sexy as accusation, and many people are still
suspicious. After all, some of those emails, taken out of context, sounded
damning. But what they show is that climate scientists are frustrated, because
for two decades they have been under attack."[135]

Bill Royce, head of the European practice on energy, environment and climate
change at the United States communications firm Burson-Marsteller, also
described the incident as an organised effort to discredit climate science. He
said that it was not a single scandal, but "a sustained and coordinated
campaign" aimed at undermining the credibility of the science.
Disproportionate reporting of the original story, "widely amplified by climate
deniers", meant that the reports that cleared the scientists received far less
coverage than the original allegations, he said.[136] Journalist Curtis
Brainard of the _Columbia Journalism Review_ criticised newspapers and
magazines for failing to give prominent coverage to the findings of the review
panels and said that "readers need to understand that while there is plenty of
room to improve the research and communications process, its fundamental
tenets remain as solid as ever".[137] CNN media critic Howard Kurtz expressed
similar sentiments.[138]

## Public opinion and political fallout[edit]

Jon Krosnick, professor of communication, political science and psychology at
Stanford University, said that scientists were overreacting. Referring to his
own poll results of the American public, he said: "It's another funny instance
of scientists ignoring science." Krosnick found that "Very few professions
enjoy the level of confidence from the public that scientists do, and those
numbers haven't changed much in a decade. We don't see a lot of evidence that
the general public in the United States is picking up on the (University of
East Anglia) emails. It's too inside baseball."[139]

_The Christian Science Monitor_ , in an article titled "Climate scientists
exonerated in 'climategate' but public trust damaged", stated: "While public
opinion had steadily moved away from belief in man-made global warming before
the leaked CRU emails, that trend has only accelerated."[140] Paul Krugman,
columnist for _The New York Times_ , argued that this, along with all other
incidents that called into question the scientific consensus on climate
change, was "a fraud concocted by opponents of climate action, then bought
into by many in the news media".[141] But UK journalist Fred Pearce called the
slow response of climate scientists "a case study in how not to respond to a
crisis" and "a public relations disaster".[142]

A. A. Leiserowitz, Director of the Yale University Project on Climate Change,
and colleagues found in 2010 that:[6]

> Climategate had a significant effect on public beliefs in global warming and
trust in scientists. The loss of trust in scientists, however, was primarily
among individuals with a strongly individualistic worldview or politically
conservative ideology. Nonetheless, Americans overall continue to trust
scientists more than other sources of information about global warming.

In late 2011, Steven F. Hayward wrote that "Climategate did for the global
warming controversy what the Pentagon Papers did for the Vietnam war 40 years
ago: It changed the narrative decisively."[143] An editorial in _Nature_ said
that many in the media "were led by the nose, by those with a clear agenda, to
a sizzling scandal that steadily defused as the true facts and context were
made clear".[144]

## Further release, 2011[edit]

On 22 November 2011, a second set of approximately 5,000 emails, apparently
hacked from University of East Anglia servers at the same time as those in the
2009 release, was posted on a Russian server, with links distributed to the
message boards on several climate-sceptic websites.[145] A message
accompanying the emails quoted selective passages from them, highlighting many
of the same issues raised following the original incident. Juliette Jowit and
Leo Hickman of _The Guardian_ said that the new release was "an apparent
attempt to undermine public support for international action to tackle climate
change" with the start of the 2011 United Nations Climate Change Conference
scheduled in Durban, South Africa, a week later.[145][146] _Nature_ described
the further release as a "poor sequel" and claimed that "it is hard for anyone
except the most committed conspiracy theorist to see much of interest in the
content of the released e-mails, even taken out of context".[144]

## Further reading[edit]

            
                            * James Lawrence Powell. 2011. _The Inquisition of Climate Science_. Columbia University Press.
            

## See also[edit]

            
                            * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/32px-Global_Warming_Map.jpg)Global warming portal
                * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/32px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal
            
                * Climate change in the United Kingdom
                * Global warming conspiracy theory
                * Global warming controversy
                * Hockey stick controversy
            

## References[edit]

            
                            1. **^** Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change. _Government Response to the House of Commons Science and Technology 8th Report of Session 2009–10: The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia_ (PDF). The Stationery Office. ISBN 978-0-10-179342-1.
                2. **^** Chameides, Bill. "Climategate Redux". _Scientific American_ , 30 August 2010. Retrieved 17 August 2011.
                3. **^** "Closing the Climategate". _Nature_. 18 November 2010. Retrieved 17 August 2011.
                4. **^** Pooley 2010, p. 425: "Climategate broke in November, when a cache of e-mails was hacked from a server at the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) of the University of East Anglia in Norwich, England." See: Pooley, Eric (2010). _The Climate War: True Believers, Power Brokers, and the Fight to Save the Earth_. Hyperion Books. ISBN 1-4013-2326-X; Karatzogianni 2010: "Most media representations of the Climategate hack linked the events to other incidents in the past, suggesting a consistent narrative frame which blames the attacks on Russian hackers... Although the Climategate material was uploaded on various servers in Turkey and Saudi Arabia before ending up in Tomsk in Siberia..." Extensive discussion about the media coverage of hacking and climategate in Karatzogianni, Athina. (2010). "Blame it on the Russians: Tracking the Portrayal of Russians During Cyber conflict Incidents". _Digital Icons: Studies in Russian, Eurasian and Central European New Media_. 4: 128–150. ISSN 2043-7633.
                5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Norfolk Constabulary (18 July 2012). "Police closes UEA investigation". Archived from the original on 19 July 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012.
                6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Leiserowitz et al., 2010, "Climategate, Public Opinion, and the Loss of Trust". Working Paper, Subject to Revision. Yale University.
                7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Allchen 2010, p. 591: "James Delingpole, in a blog for England's _Telegraph_ , promptly dubbed it "Climategate." See: Allchen, Douglas. (2010). "Sacred Bovines: The Nature of Science From Test Tubes to YouTube". _American Biology Teacher_. **72** (9):590–592. doi:10.1525/abt.2010.72.9.15; Booker 2009: "A week after my colleague James Delingpole , on his Telegraph blog, coined the term 'Climategate' to describe the scandal revealed by the leaked emails from the University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit, Google was showing that the word now appears across the internet more than nine million times." See: Booker, Christopher (2009) "Climate change: this is the worst scientific scandal of our generation". _The Telegraph_. 28 November; For the original article see: Delingpole, James (2009). "Climategate: the final nail in the coffin of 'Anthropogenic Global Warming'?" _The Telegraph_. 20 November; Nine days after his original article, Delingpole clarified how he came up with the name. Although he has been given credit for coining and popularizing the term (Booker 2009; Allchin 2010, etc.) he got the original idea from an anonymous blogger named "Bulldust" on the Watts Up With That blog. See: Delingpole, James (2009). "Climategate: how the 'greatest scientific scandal of our generation' got its name". _The Telegraph_. 29 November; Delingpole told Dennis Miller, "Climategate was the story that I helped to break..." See The Dennis Miller Show. (28 June 2011). "James Delingpole Interview". Event begins at 2:45.
                8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Hickman, Leo; Randerson, James (20 November 2009). "Climate sceptics claim leaked emails are evidence of collusion among scientists". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                9. **^** Somaiya, Ravi (7 July 2010). "Third Inquiry Clears 'Climategate' Scientists of Serious Wrongdoing". _Newsweek_. Retrieved 15 May 2011. "For skeptics, the 1,000 or so e-mails and documents hacked last year from the Climactic [ _sic_ ] Research Unit of the University of East Anglia (UEA), in England, establish that global warming is a scientific conspiracy...Climategate, now a firmly established "gate," will probably continue to be cited as evidence of a global-warming conspiracy";
            

Efstathiou Jr., Jim; Alex Morales (2 December 2009). "UK climate scientist
steps down after email flap". _Bloomberg_. LiveMint. Retrieved 15 May 2011.
"The emails, dating back as far as 1996, have been cited by sceptics of man’s
contribution to global warming as evidence of a conspiracy to manipulate data
to support research... They’re conspiring to keep papers out of published
journals," Marc Morano, a climate sceptic who is editor of a website on the
issue, said referring to the emails in a 24 November interview. "You see them
as nothing more than a bunch of activists manufacturing science for a
political goal."

            
                            10. **^** Eilperin, Juliet (21 November 2009). "Hackers steal electronic data from top climate research center". _The Washington Post_.
                11. **^** Webster, Ben (21 November 2009). "Sceptics publish climate e-mails 'stolen from East Anglia University'". _The Times_. London.
                12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mooney & Kirshenbaum p. xi: "In the ensuing scandal after the e-mails became public, top climate scientists were accused of withholding information, suppressing dissent, manipulating data, and worse, particularly by right wing media and blogs. The controversy garnered dramatic press attention, especially on outlets like Fox News; and because Climategate occurred just before the critical United Nations climate conference in Copenhagen, Denmark, it knocked the whole event off rhythm in the media sphere." See: Mooney, Chris; Kirshenbaum, Sheril (2010) _Unscientific America: How Scientific Illiteracy Threatens Our Future_. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-01917-X; Boslough 2010: "As evidence for human-caused climate change has mounted, global warming denialists have responded by blaming the messengers. Climate researchers have endured abuse by bloggers, editorial writers, Fox News pundits, and radio talk show hosts who have called them liars and vilified them as frauds. The attacks had become increasingly vile as the past decade, the hottest in human history, came to an end. Angry activists have called for firings and criminal investigations, and some prominent scientists have received physical threats." Boslough, Mark (2010). "Mann bites dog: why 'climategate' was newsworthy". _Skeptical Inquirer_. March–April. **34** (2): 14; Goldenberg 2010: "Journalists at Fox News were under orders to cast doubt on any on-air mention of climate change, a leaked email obtained by a media monitoring group revealed today. According to the email, obtained by Media Matters, Fox News's Washington bureau chief, Bill Sammon, imposed an order to make time for climate sceptics within 15 minutes of the airing of a story about a scientific report showing that 2000–2009 was on track to be the hottest decade on record. Media Matters said the bureau chief's response to the report exhibited a pattern of bias by Fox News in its coverage of climate change. It also noted the timing of the directive. The email went out on 8 December last year, when the leaders of nearly 200 countries met in Copenhagen to try to reach a deal on climate change...In addition to the email, it said Fox had tried to delegitimise the work of climate scientists in its coverage of the hacked emails from the University of East Anglia. The network had displayed a pattern of trying to skew coverage in favour of the fringe minority which doubts the existence of climate change, Media Matters said." See Goldenberg, Suzanne. (15 December 2010). "Fox News chief enforced climate change scepticism – leaked email". _guardian.co.uk_. Guardian News and Media Limited; In addition to the 24/7 news coverage, Fox News created a 17 minute documentary starring climate sceptic Patrick J. Michaels. See: Baier, Bret. (2010) Fox News Reporting: Global Warming...or a lot of Hot Air? Fox News.
                13. **^** Winter, Brian (25 November 2009) "Scientist: Leaked climate e-mails a distraction". _USA Today_. Retrieved 12 May 2011. "A controversy over leaked e-mails exchanged among global warming scientists is part of a 'smear campaign' to derail next month's United Nations climate summit in Copenhagen, one of the scientists, meteorologist Michael Mann, said Tuesday...Climate change skeptics 'don't have the science on their side any more, so they've resorted to a smear campaign to distract the public from the reality of the problem and the need to confront it head-on in Copenhagen' said Mann";
            

Feldman, Stacy (25 November 2009). "Hacked climate emails called a "smear
campaign". _Reuters_. Retrieved 15 May 2011. "Three leading scientists who on
Tuesday released a report documenting the accelerating pace of climate change
said the scandal that erupted last week over hacked emails from climate
scientists is nothing more than a "smear campaign" aimed at sabotaging
December climate talks in Copenhagen"; Carrington, Damian;  
Suzanne Goldenberg (4 December 2009). "Gordon Brown attacks 'flat-earth'
climate change sceptics". _guardian.co.uk_. Retrieved 15 May 2011. "On the eve
of the Copenhagen summit, Saudi Arabia and Republican members of the US
Congress have used the emails to claim the need for urgent action to cut
carbon emissions has been undermined...The concern for some of those
attempting to drive through a global deal is that the sceptics will delay
critical decisions by casting doubt over the science at a time when momentum
has been gathering towards a historic agreement...'The sceptics have clearly
seized upon this as an incident that they can use to their own ends in trying
to disrupt the Copenhagen agreements,' said Bob Watson, Defra chief scientist
and former head of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change";  
Fimrite, Peter (5 December 2009). "Hacked climate e-mail rebutted by
scientists". _San Francisco Chronicle_. Retrieved 12 May 2011. "A group of the
nation's top scientists defended research on global climate change Friday
against what they called a politically motivated smear campaign designed to
foster public doubt about irrefutable scientific facts...'They have engaged in
this 11th-hour smear campaign where they have stolen personal e-mails from
scientists, mined them for single words or phrases that can be taken out of
context to twist their words and I think this is rather telling,' Mann said";  
Carrington, Damian (28 October 2010). "IPCC vice-chair: Attacks on climate
science echo tobacco industry tactics". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 13 May 2011.
"The attacks on climate science that were made ahead of the Copenhagen climate
change summit were 'organised' to undermine efforts to tackle global warming
and mirror the earlier tactics of the tobacco industry, according to the vice-
chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)... 'It is a very
similar process to what the tobacco industry was doing 30 or 40 years ago,
when they wanted to delay legislation, and that is the result of research –
not my subjective evaluation – by Prof Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway.'
Oreskes, a science historian at the University of California San Diego, told
the Guardian she agreed with Van Ypersele's that the attacks on climate
science were organised: 'Many of us were expecting something to happen in the
run-up [to Copenhagen]. When it happened, the only thing that surprised me was
that, compared with the events we documented in our book, the attacks had
crossed the line into illegality.'"

            
                            14. **^** Henig, Jess (2009). "FactCheck: Climategate Doesn't Refute Global Warming". _Newsweek_. 11 December.
                15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ The eight major investigations covered by secondary sources include: House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (UK); Independent Climate Change Review (UK); International Science Assessment Panel Archived 9 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine (UK); Pennsylvania State University first panel Archived 25 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine and second panel Archived 30 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine (US); United States Environmental Protection Agency (US); Department of Commerce (US); National Science Foundation (US).
                16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Biello, David (Feb 2010). "Negating 'Climategate'". _Scientific American_. **(302)** :2. 16. ISSN 0036-8733. "In fact, nothing in the stolen material undermines the scientific consensus that climate change is happening and that humans are to blame";
            

See also: Lubchenco, Jane (2 December 2009) House Select Committee on Energy
Independence and Global Warming (House Select Committee). "The
Administration's View on the State of Climate Science". House Hearing, 111
Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office. "...the e-mails really do nothing
to undermine the very strong scientific consensus and the independent
scientific analyses of thousands of scientists around the world that tell us
that the Earth is warming and that the warming is largely a result of human
activities." As quoted in the report published by Office of Inspector General.

            
                            17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Eilperin, Juliet (21 November 2009). "Hackers steal electronic data from top climate research center". _The Washington Post_.
                18. **^** Lowthorpe, Shaun (1 December 2009). "Scotland Yard call in to probe climate data leak from UEA in Norwich". _Norwich Evening News_.
                19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Revkin, Andrew C. (20 November 2009). "Hacked E-Mail Is New Fodder for Climate Dispute". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Arthur, Charles (5 February 2010). "Hacking into the mind of the CRU climate change hacker". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  19 April 2011.
                21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Arthur, Charles; Evans, Rob; Leigh, David; Pearce, Evans (4 February 2010). "Climate emails: were they really hacked or just sitting in cyberspace?". _The Guardian_. London. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013.
                22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Stewart, Will; Delgado, Martin (6 December 2009). "Were Russian security services behind the leak of 'Climategate' emails?". _Daily Mail_. UK.
                23. **^** Webster, Ben (6 December 2009). "Climate e-mails were hijacked 'to sabotage summit'". _The Times_. UK. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Retrieved  26 March 2010.
                24. **^** Webster, Ben (21 November 2009). "Sceptics publish climate emails 'stolen from East Anglia University'". _The Times_. UK. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved  27 July 2010. "An anonymous statement accompanying the emails said: “We feel that climate science is too important to be kept under wraps. We hereby release a random selection of correspondence, code, and documents. Hopefully it will give some insight into the science and the people behind it.”"
                25. **^** Greaves, Tara (11 January 2010). "Extremism fears surround Norwich email theft". _Norwich Evening News_.
                26. **^** "Police extremist unit helps climate change email probe". BBC News. 11 January 2010.
                27. **^** Gardner, Timothy (23 November 2009). "Hacked climate emails awkward, not game changer". _Green Business_. Reuters. Retrieved  24 November 2009.
                28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Flam, Faye (8 December 2009). "Penn State scientist at center of a storm". _The Philadelphia Inquirer_. Archived from the original on 30 December 2009.
                29. **^** Kevin Trenberth (2010). "Brouhaha over Hacked Climate Emails. Statement: Kevin Trenberth on Hacking of Climate Files". _Climate Analysis Section, Climate & Global Dynamics Division of the National Center for Atmospheric Research Earth Systems Laboratory_. National Center for Atmospheric Research. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010. "In my case, one cherry-picked email quote has gone viral and at last check it was featured in over 107,000 items (in Google). Here is the quote: " _The fact is that we can't account for the lack of warming at the moment and it is a travesty that we can't._ " It is amazing to see this particular quote lambasted so often. It stems from a paper I published this year bemoaning our inability to effectively monitor the energy flows associated with short-term climate variability. It is quite clear from the paper that I was not questioning the link between anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and warming, or even suggesting that recent temperatures are unusual in the context of short-term natural variability. The paper on this is available here..."
                30. **^** "Denial of Petitions for Reconsideration of the Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act | Regulatory Initiatives | Climate Change". United States Environmental Protection Agency. 29 September 2010. p. 1.2.2.2 Response (1–21). Retrieved  26 October 2010. "Peabody Energy’s assertion that Trenberth was implying that the 'science is too uncertain to determine whether GHG reductions will produce a measurable climate response,' is a gross mischaracterization of the meaning and significance of both the quote and Trenberth's position. Trenberth was not implying or questioning the validity of climate models used for attribution and projections. He was identifying a gap in the Earth-observing system, which if filled, would improve our understanding of short-term variations in climate."
                31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Pearce, Fred (9 February 2010). "Part two: How the 'climategate' scandal is bogus and based on climate sceptics' lies". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  20 March 2010.
                32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Tierney, John. "E-Mail Fracas Shows Peril of Trying to Spin Science". _The New York Times_. 1 December 2009.
                33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Randerson, James (31 March 2010). "Climate researchers 'secrecy' criticised – but MPs say science remains intact". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Foley, Henry C.; Scaroni, Alan W.; Yekel, Candice A. (3 February 2010). "RA-10 Inquiry Report: Concerning the Allegations of Research Misconduct Against Dr. Michael E. Mann, Department of Meteorology, College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University" (PDF). The Pennsylvania State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
                35. **^** "Denial of Petitions for Reconsideration of the Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act | Regulatory Initiatives | Climate Change". United States Environmental Protection Agency. 29 September 2010. p. 1.1.4. Retrieved  26 October 2010.
                36. **^** Freedman, Andrew (23 November 2009). "Science historian reacts to hacked climate e-mails". _The Washington Post_. " The theft and use of the emails does reveal something interesting about the social context. It's a symptom of something entirely new in the history of science: Aside from crackpots who complain that a conspiracy is suppressing their personal discoveries, we've never before seen a set of people accuse an entire community of scientists of deliberate deception and other professional malfeasance. Even the tobacco companies never tried to slander legitimate cancer researchers. In blogs, talk radio and other new media, we are told that the warnings about future global warming issued by the national science academies, scientific societies, and governments of all the leading nations are not only mistaken, but based on a hoax, indeed a conspiracy that must involve thousands of respected researchers. Extraordinary and, frankly, weird."
                37. **^** Zabarenko, Deborah (6 May 2010). "Scientists decry "assaults" on climate research". Reuters. For the original letter, see: Gleick, P. H.; Adams, R. M. (7 May 2010). "Climate Change and the Integrity of Science". _Science_. **328** (5979): 689–90. Bibcode:2010Sci...328..689G. doi:10.1126/science.328.5979.689.
                38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hickman, Leo (23 November 2009). "Climate change champion and sceptic both call for inquiry into leaked emails". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  25 November 2009.
                39. **^** "Inhofe declares victory in speech on global warming". Tulsa World. Archived from the original on 20 November 2009. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                40. **^** Dempsey, Matt (23 November 2009). "Listen: Inhofe Says He Will Call for Investigation on "Climategate" on Washington Times Americas Morning Show". _The Inhofe EPW Press Blog_. U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works. Archived from the original on 24 November 2009. Retrieved  29 November 2009.
                41. **^** Borenstein, Seth (3 December 2009). "Business & Technology : Obama science advisers grilled over hacked e-mails". Seattle Times Newspaper. Retrieved 11 December 2012.
                42. **^** Pielke Jr., Roger (2010). _The Climate Fix: What Scientists and Politicians Won't Tell You About Global Warming_. Basic Books. p. 194. ISBN 0-465-02052-6.
                43. **^** Fahrenthold, David A.; Eilperin, Juliet (5 December 2010). "In emails, science of warming is hot debate". _The Washington Post_. Archived from the original on 9 April 2010. Retrieved  3 April 2010. "For a few, however, the stolen files were confirmation that the climate establishment was trying to keep them out of the debate. These include the familiar kind of climate sceptics, those who think that the climate isn't changing or that it isn't a crisis. But they also include a handful of researchers who think climate change is happening, but–for various reasons–are sceptical that mainstream science fully understands the phenomenon."
                44. **^** Johnson, Keith (23 November 2009). "Climate Emails Stoke Debate". _The Wall Street Journal_. Archived from the original on 9 April 2010. Retrieved  3 April 2010. "The emails include discussions of apparent efforts to make sure that reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations group that monitors climate science, include their own views and exclude others. In addition, emails show that climate scientists declined to make their data available to scientists whose views they disagreed with."
                45. **^** "Climatologists under pressure". _Nature_. **462** (7273): 545. 2009. Bibcode:2009Natur.462..545.. doi:10.1038/462545a. PMID 19956212.
                46. **^** Moore, Matthew (24 November 2009). "Climate change scientists face calls for public inquiry over data manipulation claims". _The Daily Telegraph_. UK. Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved  8 January 2010. "said Lord Lawson, Margaret Thatcher's former chancellor who has reinvented himself as a critic of climate change science. "They were talking about destroying various files in order to prevent data being revealed under the Freedom of Information Act and they were trying to prevent other dissenting scientists from having their articles published in learned journals. "It may be that there's an innocent explanation for all this... but there needs to be a fundamental independent inquiry to get at the truth.""
                47. **^** "Climategate". FactCheck.org. 10 December 2009. Retrieved  4 January 2010.
                48. **^** "Climategate: Science Not Faked, But Not Pretty". Associated Press. 3 December 2009. Retrieved  29 December 2009.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
                49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Ravillious, Kate (8 December 2009). "Hacked email climate scientists receive death threats". _The Guardian_. London.
                50. **^** Richard Girling "The leak was bad. Then came the death threats". The Sunday Times, 7 February 2010.
                51. **^** McCrae, Fiona (2 December 2009). "Professor in climate change scandal helps police with enquiries while researchers call for him to be banned". _The Daily Mail_. London.
                52. **^** "I passed [the threats] on to Norfolk police who said they didn’t fulfil the criteria for death threats." Interview published at Spalding (UK) Guardian, "Top climate professor in Spalding for talk", Thursday 3 February 2011. Archived copy available at Highbeam.com[ _dead link_ ]. Retrieved 9 May 2011, registration required.
                53. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ O'Neill, Margot (8 December 2009). "The ugly side of climate politics". _The Drum_. ABC.
                54. **^** Jackman, Tom (18 September 2012). "U.Va. wins key ruling in Prince William global warming-FOIA case involving Michael Mann". The Washington Post. Retrieved 18 September 2012.
                55. **^** Pretending the climate email leak isn't a crisis won't make it go away, by George Monbiot, The Guardian, 25 November 2009
                56. **^** Hickman, Leo; 'agencies' (24 November 2009). "Climate scientist at centre of leaked email row dismisses conspiracy claims". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                57. **^** "CRU Update 3". University of East Anglia – Communications Office. 1 December 2009. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009. Retrieved  5 December 2009.
                58. **^** Telegraph staff (1 December 2009). "Professor at centre of climate change email row stands down temporarily". _The Daily Telegraph_. UK. Archived from the original on 4 December 2009. Retrieved  1 December 2009. "Professor Phil Jones, the director of a research unit at the centre of a row over climate change data, has said he will stand down from the post while an independent review takes place."
                59. **^** "Chair for climate email review", _BBC News_ , 3 December 2009. Retrieved 5 December.
                60. **^** "The Independent Climate Change Email inquiry". Retrieved  17 October 2010.
                61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Oxburgh, Ron; Huw Davies; Kerry Emanuel; Lisa Graumlich; David Hand; Herbert Huppert; Michael Kelly (14 April 2010). "Report of the International Panel set up by the University of East Anglia to examine the research of the Climatic Research Unit" (PDF). University of East Anglia. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "Submitted to the University 12 April 2010, with Addendum to report, 19 April 2010"
                62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Morello, Lauren (24 November 2009). "Stolen E-Mails Sharpen a Brawl Between Climate Scientists and Skeptics". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  25 November 2009.
                63. **^** "Scientist: Leak of climate e-mails appalling". Associated Press. 22 November 2009.
                64. **^** Collins, Antonette (8 December 2009). "Climate scientist receives death threats". Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
                65. **^** Feldman, Stacy (25 November 2009). "Hacked climate emails called a smear campaign". Reuters. Retrieved 26 November 2009.
                66. **^** Tollefson, Jeff (9 March 2010). "Attack sparks memories of McCarthy witch-hunt". _Nature News_. Nature Publishing Group. **464** (149): 149. doi:10.1038/464149a.
                67. **^** "James Hansen: Climate Change Evidence 'Overwhelming,' Hacked E-mails 'Indicate Poor Judgement' – The Human Condition Blog". _Newsweek_. Archived from the original on 27 November 2009. Retrieved  26 November 2009.
                68. **^** Revkin, Andrew (22 November 2009). "Your Dot: On Science and 'Cyber-Terrorism'". _The New York Times_.
                69. **^** Gray, Sadie (9 December 2009). "Statement from the UK science community". _The Times_. UK. Retrieved  9 December 2009.
                70. **^** "Hans von Storch". coast.gkss.de. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009. Retrieved  28 November 2009.
                71. **^** Johnson, Keith (24 November 2009). "Lawmakers Probe Climate Emails". _The Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "CRU update 2". University of East Anglia (UEA). 24 November 2009. Retrieved  23 December 2011.
                73. **^** "Statement by Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on stolen emails from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, United Kingdom" (PDF). _IPCC_. 4 December 2009. Retrieved  8 December 2009.
                74. **^** "IPCC Chairman statement on news reports regarding hacking of the East Anglia University email communications" (PDF). _IPCC_. 4 December 2009. Retrieved  8 December 2009.
                75. **^** "Impact of CRU Hacking on the AMS Statement on Climate Change". American Meteorological Society. 25 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009.
                76. **^** "AGU News: AGU Statement Regarding the Recent Release of E-mails". American Geophysical Union. 8 December 2009. Archived from the original on 18 February 2010. Retrieved  22 May 2010.
                77. **^** "AAAS Reaffirms Statements on Climate Change and Integrity". American Association for the Advancement of Science. 4 December 2009. Retrieved  8 December 2009.
                78. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Webster, Ben (5 December 2009). "Met Office to re-examine 160 years of climate data". _The Times_. UK. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                79. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ David Batty and agencies (5 December 2009). "Met Office to publish climate change data amid fraud claims". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                80. **^** "Release of global-average temperature data, Met Office press release". metoffice.gov.uk. 5 December 2009. Archived from the original on 9 December 2009. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                81. **^** "UK Met Office to publish climate record". CNN. 6 December 2009. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                82. **^** "UN body wants probe of climate email row". BBC. 4 December 2009. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved  6 January 2010. "Dr Pachauri told BBC Radio 4's The Report programme that the claims were serious and he wants them investigated. "We will certainly go into the whole lot and then we will take a position on it," he said. "We certainly don't want to brush anything under the carpet. This is a serious issue and we will look into it in detail. [...] Saudi Arabia's lead climate negotiator has said the email row will have a "huge impact" on next week's UN climate summit in Copenhagen. [...] Mohammad Al-Sabban told BBC News that he expects it to derail the single biggest objective of the summit – to agree limitations on greenhouse gas emissions. [...] "It appears from the details of the scandal that there is no relationship whatsoever between human activities and climate change," he told BBC News.""
                83. **^** Kaplun, Alex (5 March 2010). "E-Mails Show Scientists Planning Push-Back Against 'McCarthyite' Attacks on Climate Science". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  11 May 2010.
                84. **^** Reiner Grundmann. "'Climategate' and The Scientific Ethos", published online before print 23 April 2012, doi: 10.1177/0162243911432318. _Science, Technology & Human Values_. January 2013, vol. 38, no. 1, p. 67–93, _Climategate_ and The Scientific Ethos, ResearchGate, "Downloaded from sth.sagepub.com at University of Nottingham on April 8, 2013." Footnote 3, p. 88–89, "The story presented here does not attempt to provide an in-depth account of the climategate affair. It is based on a limited number of textual sources (such as Montford 2010; Pearce 2010, blog content, commentary, reports from official inquiries, and a subset of released climate emails). These limitations in the data need to be noted. The paper raises the question of how to assess knowledge production in a highly politicized context. Sources were selected on accessibility criteria with a special emphasis on critical accounts. The aim of the paper is not to adjudicate who was right and who was wrong about the science, but to discuss norms of scientific practice in the light of two theoretical frameworks." Footnote 5 cites "Wikipedia entry on 'Climatic Research Unit E-mail Controversy'".
                85. **^** Venkatraman, Archana (September – October 2010). "Data Without the Doubts". _Information World Review_. Bizmedia Ltd.: 18–19.
                86. **^** "Science and Technology Committee Announcement: The Disclosure of Climate Data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia". 22 January 2010. Archived from the original on 25 January 2010. Retrieved  22 January 2010.. See House of Commons' Science and Technology Select Committee announcement and Report on The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, released 31 March 2010.
                87. **^** "Science and Technology – Memoranda". House of Commons. Retrieved  27 February 2010.
                88. **^** Official Shorthand Writers to the Houses of Parliament (31 March 2010). "House of Commons Science and Technology Select Committee, Session 2009–10: Uncorrected oral evidence, 1 March 2010, "The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia," HC 387-i. Uploaded on 3 March 2010" (PDF). UK Parliament website. Retrieved 6 March 2010.
                89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Satter, Raphael G. (30 March 2010). "'Climategate' inquiry largely clears scientists". _Seattle Times_. London. Associated Press. Retrieved  17 June 2010.
                90. **^** "The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia" (PDF). _House of Commons Science and Technology Committee_. Parliament of the United Kingdom. 31 March 2010. pp. 52–54. "The committee's report was not unanimous; Labour MP Graham Stringer voted against several of its recommendations including an amendment by Evan Harris declaring that Dr Jones' scientific reputation remained intact."
                91. **^** Webster, Ben (31 March 2010). "Climate-row professor Phil Jones should return to work, say MPs". _The Times_. UK. Retrieved  26 July 2010.
                92. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Adams, David (14 April 2010). "Scientists cleared of malpractice in UEA's hacked emails inquiry". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  14 April 2010.
                93. **^** Louise Gray (14 April 2010). "'Climategate' scientists criticised for not using best statistical tools". London: The Telegraph. Retrieved 27 August 2010.
                94. **^** " 'No malpractice' by climate unit". BBC News. 14 April 2010. Retrieved 14 April 2010.
                95. **^** Webster, Ben (14 April 2010). "Climate scientists at East Anglia University cleared by inquiry". _The Times_. UK. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                96. **^** "Response by the University of East Anglia to the Report by Lord Oxburgh's Science Assessment Panel". University of East Anglia. 14 April 2010. Retrieved  14 April 2010.
                97. **^** "Third 'Climategate' inquiry to report, Today programme, BBC Radio 4, 7 July 2010". BBC News. 7 July 2010. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                98. **^** Randerson, James (8 September 2010). "Oxburgh: UEA vice-chancellor was wrong to tell MPs he would investigate climate research". _The Guardian_. London.
                99. **^** Broder, John M. (1 December 2009). "Climatologist Leaves Post in Inquiry Over email Leaks". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                100. **^** "University Reviewing Recent Reports on Climate Information" (PDF). College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2009. Retrieved 6 December 2009.
                101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Genaro C. Armas, Associated Press (3 December 2009). "Penn St. prof. welcomes climate change scrutiny". Google. Archived from the original on 6 December 2009. Retrieved 6 December 2009.
                102. **^** Kintisch, Eli (3 February 2010). "Climate Scientist Mann Partially Absolved by Penn State". Science. Archived from the original on 25 September 2010. Retrieved 3 January 2012.
                103. **^** "Final Investigation Report Involving Dr. Michael E. Mann" (PDF). The Pennsylvania State University. 4 June 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2010.
                104. **^** Kintisch, Eli (1 July 2010). "Michael Mann Exonerated as Penn State Inquiry Finds 'No Substance' To Allegations". Science. Archived from the original on 30 January 2012. Retrieved 3 January 2012.
                105. **^** Warner, Frank (3 January 2010). "Penn State climate professor: 'I'm a skeptic'". _The Morning Call_. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010. Retrieved  28 March 2010.
                106. **^** The Independent Climate Change Email Review, an independent review funded by the UEA, chaired by Sir Muir Russell
                107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gillis, Justin (7 July 2010). "British Panel Clears Climate Scientists". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Adam, David (7 July 2010). "'Climategate' review clears scientists of dishonesty over data". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  7 July 2010.
                109. **^** Adam, David (7 July 2010). "'Climategate' review clears scientists of dishonesty over data". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  11 July 2010.
                110. **^** Climategate: No whitewash, but CRU scientists are far from squeaky clean, Fred Pearce, The Guardian 7 July 2010
                111. **^** "The Independent Climate Change Email Review" (PDF). 7 July 2010. Retrieved 7 July 2010.
                112. **^** Geman, Ben (29 July 2010). "EPA rejects 'Climate-gate' bid to scuttle carbon rules". The Hill. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013. Retrieved 16 September 2011.
                113. **^** "Scientists' 'Climategate' e-mails 'just discussions '". BBC News. 6 August 2010. Retrieved 16 September 2011.
                114. **^** "07/29/2010: EPA Rejects Claims of Flawed Climate Science". EPA Newsroom. 29 July 2010. Retrieved  16 September 2011.
                115. **^** "Denial of Petitions for Reconsideration of the Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act / Regulatory Initiatives / Climate Change / U.S. EPA". Environmental Protection Agency. 14 April 2011. Retrieved  16 September 2011.
                116. **^** "Myths vs. Facts: Denial of Petitions for Reconsideration of the Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act / Regulatory Initiatives / Climate Change / U.S. EPA". Environmental Protection Agency. 14 April 2011. Retrieved  16 September 2011.
                117. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "U.S. scientists cleared in 'climategate' – Technology & Science". CBC News. 24 February 2011. Retrieved  3 January 2012.
                118. **^** Zinser, Todd J. (18 February 2011). "Examination of issues related to internet posting of emails from Climatic Research Unit" (PDF). Office of the Inspector General of the United States Department of Commerce. Archived from the original (pdf) on 30 March 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2012.
                119. **^** "Inspector General's Review of Stolen Emails Confirms No Evidence of Wrong-Doing by NOAA Climate Scientists". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 24 February 2011. Retrieved  3 January 2012.
                120. **^** National Science Foundation Office of Inspector General, Case Number: A09120086
                121. **^** Efstathiou Jr., Jim (22 August 2011). "Climate-Change Scientist Cleared in Closing of U.S. Data-Altering Inquiry". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 January 2012.
                122. **^** "Climate scientist cleared of research misconduct". physicsworld.com, A website from the Institute of Physics. 30 August 2011. Retrieved  3 January 2012.
                123. **^** Press Association (25 February 2010). "University of East Anglia rejects lost climate data claims". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved  26 February 2010.
                124. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Freedom of Information Act 2000 (Section 50) / Environmental Information Regulations 2004 Decision Notice, Reference: FER0238017" (PDF). Information Commissioner's Office. 7 July 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
                125. **^** "The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia". _House of Commons Science and Technology Committee_. Parliament of the United Kingdom. 31 March 2010. pp. 28–31. "We regret that the ICO made a statement to the press that went beyond that which it could substantiate and that it took over a month for the ICO properly to put the record straight. We recommend that the ICO develop procedures to ensure that its public comments are checked and that mechanisms exist to swiftly correct any mis-statements or misinterpretations of such statements."
                126. **^** Heffernan, O. (2009). "Climate data spat intensifies". _Nature_. **460** (7257): 787. doi:10.1038/460787a. PMID 19675615.
            

Heffernan, Olive (12 August 2009). "Climate Feedback: McIntyre versus Jones:
climate data row escalates". Nature.com. Retrieved 2 August 2011.  
Pearce 2010, pp. 143–156

            
                            127. **^** "CRU Data Availability". Climatic Research Unit. Archived from the original on 16 October 2009. Retrieved  24 January 2012. "Data storage availability in the 1980s meant that we were not able to keep the multiple sources for some sites, only the station series after adjustment for homogeneity issues. We, therefore, do not hold the original raw data but only the value-added (i.e. quality controlled and homogenized) data."
                128. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Black, Richard (27 July 2011). "Climate unit releases virtually all remaining data". BBC News. Retrieved 2 August 2011.
                129. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Freedom of Information Act 2000 (Section 50) Environmental Information Regulations 2004 Decision Notice". _FER0282488_. ICO. 23 June 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2011. Retrieved 15 August 2011. FOI request made 24 July 2009, refused by UEA 14 August 2009.
            

"Freedom of Information Act 2000 (Section 50) Environmental Information
Regulations 2004 Decision Notice". _FER0280033_. ICO. 23 June 2011. Archived
from the original (PDF) on 29 August 2011. Retrieved 15 August 2011. FOI
request made 14 August 2009, refused by UEA 11 September 2009.

            
                            130. **^** "Climate data released – University of East Anglia (UEA)". Retrieved  4 August 2011.
                131. **^** "ICO issues FoI guidance for universities : Guardian Government Computing : Guardian Professional". _The Guardian_. 26 September 2011. Retrieved  26 June 2014.
                132. **^** "A Climate Change Corrective". _The New York Times_. 7 November 2010. Retrieved  11 July 2010.
                133. **^** "Newspapers retract Climategate claims but damage still done". _Newsweek_. The Gaggle blog. 25 June 2010.
                134. **^** Carrington, Damian (28 October 2010). "IPCC vice-chair: Attacks on climate science echo tobacco industry tactics". _guardian.co.uk_. Retrieved 27 July 2011.
                135. **^** Conway, Erik. Oreskes, Naomi (1 June 2010). "Climate change denial: a history". _New Statesman_. Print version published 31 May 2010. p. 34.
                136. **^** Häne, Justin; Etienne Strebel (19 July 2010). "Climate scientists still trying to restore trust". _swissinfo.ch_.
                137. **^** Brainard, Curtis (7 July 2010). "Wanted: Climate Front-Pager: Reviews vindicating scientists get strong blog coverage, but more high-profile stories are needed". Columbia Journalism Review. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
                138. **^** Brainard, Curtis (13 July 2010). "I'll Have the Climate Coverage, Please: Kurtz wants some; so does the Times, though it doesn't deliver". Columbia Journalism Review. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
                139. **^** "Some scientists misread poll data on global warming controversy", 9 March 2010, Dan Vergano, _USA Today_.
                140. **^** Jonsson, Patrik (7 July 2010). "* Climate scientists exonerated in 'climategate' but public trust damaged". _The Christian Science Monitor_. Retrieved  12 July 2010.
                141. **^** Krugman, Paul (25 July 2010). "Who Cooked the Planet?". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  27 July 2010.
                142. **^** Climategate: Anatomy of A Public Relations Disaster Archived 25 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine by Fred Pearce, _Environment 360_ at Yale University, 10 December 2009.
                143. **^** Climategate (Part II) by Steven F. Hayward, The _Weekly Standard_ , 11 December 2011.
                144. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "A poor sequel". _Nature_. **480** (7375): 6. December 2011. Bibcode:2011Natur.480....6.. doi:10.1038/480006a. PMID 22129685.
                145. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jowit, Juliette (23 November 2011). "Climate scientists defend work in wake of new leak of hacked emails". London: guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 2 December 2011.
                146. **^** Lean, Geoffrey (25 November 2011). "Climategate II: the scientists fight back". _The Daily Telegraph_. London. Retrieved  2 December 2011.
            

## External links[edit]

            
                            * Unwinding “Hide the Decline”, detailed video coverage on climatecrocks.com, 28 April 2011.
                * Climate wars: The story of the hacked emails, the full manuscript of an investigation by _The Guardian_ into the emails.
                * Audio recording of a _Guardian_ -sponsored debate on Climategate, held on 15 July 2010. The debaters were Trevor Davies, Doug Keenan, Stephen McIntyre, Fred Pearce, and Bob Watson; the debate was chaired by George Monbiot.
                * "The Great Climategate Debate". A video of a lecture held at the MIT School of Science on 10 December 2009. The moderator was Henry D. Jacoby (MIT). Speakers were Kerry Emanuel (MIT), Judith Layzer (MIT), Stephen Ansolabehere (MIT and Harvard), Ronald G. Prinn (MIT), and Richard Lindzen (MIT).
                * "The disclosure of climate data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia". Video of House of Commons Select Committee oral evidence session, held on Monday 1 March 2010 at 3 pm. Witnesses are: (1) Rt Hon Lord Lawson of Blaby, Chairman, and Dr Benny Peiser, Director, Global Warming Policy Foundation; (2) Richard Thomas CBE; (3) Professor Edward Acton, Vice-Chancellor, University of East Anglia, and Professor Phil Jones, Director of the Climatic Research Unit; (4) Sir Muir Russell KCB, Head of the Independent Climate Change emails Review; (5) Professor John Beddington, Government Chief Scientific Adviser, Professor Julia Slingo OBE, Chief Scientist, Met Office, and Professor Bob Watson, Chief Scientist, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Global warming and climate change

* * *

|

Temperatures

* * *
            
                            * Brightness temperature
                * Effective temperature
                * Geologic record
                * Hiatus
                * Historical climatology
                * Instrumental record
                * Paleoclimatology
                * Paleotempestology
                * Proxy data
                * Record of the past 1,000 years
                * Satellite measurements
            

|

Causes

* * *

| Anthropogenic  
(caused by human activity)|

            
                            * Attribution of recent climate change
                * Aviation
                * Biofuel
                * Black carbon
                * Carbon dioxide
                * Deforestation
                * Earth's energy budget
                * Ecocide
                * Fossil fuel
                * Global dimming
                * Global warming potential
                * Greenhouse effect
                * (Infrared window)
                * Greenhouse gases
                * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
                * Radiative forcing
                * Tropospheric ozone
            

---|---  
Natural|

            
                            * Albedo
                * Bond events
                * Climate oscillations
                * Climate sensitivity
                * Cloud forcing
                * Cosmic rays
                * Feedbacks
                * Glaciation
                * Global cooling
                * Milankovitch cycles
                * Ocean variability
                  * AMO
                  * ENSO
                  * IOD
                  * PDO
                * Orbital forcing
                * Solar variation
                * Volcanism
            

Models|

            
                            * Global climate model
            

|

History

* * *
            
                            * History of climate change science
                * Atmospheric thermodynamics
                * Svante Arrhenius
                * James Hansen
                * Charles David Keeling
            

|

Opinion and climate change

* * *

| General|

            
                            * Environmental ethics
                * Media coverage of climate change
                * Public opinion on climate change
                * (Popular culture)
                * Scientific opinion on climate change
                * Scientists who disagree with the mainstream assessment
                * Climate change denial
                * Global warming conspiracy theory
            

---|---  
By country & region|

            
                            * Africa
                * Arctic
                * Argentina
                * Australia
                * Bangladesh
                * Belgium
                * Canada
                * China
                * Europe
                * European Union
                * Finland
                * Grenada
                * India
                * Japan
                * Luxembourg
                * New Zealand
                * Norway
                * Russia
                * Scotland
                * South Korea
                * Sweden
                * Tuvalu
                * United Kingdom
                * United States
            

|

Politics

* * *

|

            
                            * Clean Power Plan
                * Climate change denial
                * (Manufactured controversy)
                * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
                * March for Science
                * People's Climate March
                * United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
                * Global climate regime
            

* * *

|

Potential effects and issues

* * *

| General|

            
                            * Abrupt climate change
                * Anoxic event
                * Arctic dipole anomaly
                * Arctic haze
                * Arctic methane emissions
                * Central American dry corridor
                * Climate change and agriculture
                * Climate change and ecosystems
                * Climate change and gender
                * Climate change and poverty
                * Drought
                * Economics of global warming
                * Effects on plant biodiversity
                * Effects on health
                * Effects on humans
                * Effects on marine mammals
                * Environmental migrant
                * Extinction risk from global warming
                * Fisheries and climate change
                * Forest dieback
                * Industry and society
                * Iris hypothesis
                * Megadrought
                * Ocean acidification
                * Ozone depletion
                * Physical impacts
                * Polar stratospheric cloud
                * Regime shift
                * Retreat of glaciers since 1850
                * Runaway climate change
                * Sea level rise
                * Season creep
                * Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
                * Surf breaks and waves
            

---|---  
By country|

            
                            * Australia
                * South Asia
                  * India
                  * Nepal
                * United States
            

|

Mitigation

* * *

| Kyoto Protocol|

            
                            * Clean Development Mechanism
                * Joint Implementation
                * Bali Road Map
                * 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference
            

---|---  
Governmental|

            
                            * European Climate Change Programme
                * G8 Climate Change Roundtable
                * United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
                * Paris Agreement
                  * United States withdrawal
                * Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
                * List of climate change initiatives
            

Emissions reduction|

            
                            * Carbon credit
                * Carbon-neutral fuel
                * Carbon offset
                * Carbon tax
                * Emissions trading
                * Fossil fuel phase-out
            

Carbon-free energy|

            
                            * Efficient energy use
                * Renewable energy
                * Low-carbon economy
                * Nuclear power
                * Carbon capture and storage
            

Personal|

            
                            * Individual action on climate change
                * Simple living
            

Other|

            
                            * Carbon dioxide removal
                * Carbon sink
                * Climate action
                * Climate Action Plan
                * Climate change mitigation scenarios
                * Climate engineering
                * Individual and political action on climate change
                * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                * Reforestation
                * Urban reforestation
            

|

Proposed adaptations

* * *

| Strategies|

            
                            * Damming glacial lakes
                * Desalination
                * Drought tolerance
                * Irrigation investment
                * Rainwater storage
                * Sustainable development
                * Weather modification
            

---|---  
Programmes|

            
                            * Land allocation decision support system
            
                * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Glossary
                * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Index
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Climate change
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Global warming
                * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
            

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climatic_Research_Unit_email_controversy&oldid=898372105"

Categories:

            
                            * Climate change controversies
                * Environmental skepticism
                * Ethics of science and technology
                * 2009 in science
                * 2009 in England
                * Conspiracy theories in Europe
                * 2009 controversies
                * Climate change in the United Kingdom
                * Email hacking
                * Controversies in the United Kingdom
            

Hidden categories:

            
                            * Webarchive template wayback links
                * All articles with dead external links
                * Articles with dead external links from May 2019
                * Articles with permanently dead external links
                * Articles with dead external links from February 2019
                * Wikipedia pending changes protected pages
                * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
                * Use British English from August 2011
                * Use dmy dates from November 2018
            

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

            
                            * Not logged in
                * Talk
                * Contributions
                * Create account
                * Log in
            

### Namespaces

            
                            * Article
                * Talk
            

### Variants

### Views

            
                            * Read
                * Edit
                * View history
            

### More

### Search

### Navigation

            
                            * Main page
                * Contents
                * Featured content
                * Current events
                * Random article
                * Donate to Wikipedia
                * Wikipedia store
            

### Interaction

            
                            * Help
                * About Wikipedia
                * Community portal
                * Recent changes
                * Contact page
            

### Tools

            
                            * What links here
                * Related changes
                * Upload file
                * Special pages
                * Permanent link
                * Page information
                * Wikidata item
                * Cite this page
            

### Print/export

            
                            * Create a book
                * Download as PDF
                * Printable version
            

### Languages

            
                            * Čeština
                * Dansk
                * Deutsch
                * Español
                * Français
                * 한국어
                * Italiano
                * עברית
                * Македонски
                * مصرى
                * Nederlands
                * 日本語
                * Norsk
                * Polski
                * Русский
                * Slovenčina
                * Svenska
                * தமிழ்
                * Українська
                * 中文
            

Edit links

            
                            * This page was last edited on 23 May 2019, at 04:00 (UTC).
                * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                * Privacy policy
                * About Wikipedia
                * Disclaimers
                * Contact Wikipedia
                * Developers
                * Cookie statement
                * Mobile view
                * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

