

__

__

            
                            * __
                * __
                * __
                * __
            

Support Our Work

# ![Climate

Central](/assets/img/cc_logo_horiz_667x50_flat_header_large_color.png)

_Researching and reporting the  
science and impacts of climate change_

* * *

× +

#### Who We Are

An independent organization of leading scientists and journalists researching
and reporting the facts about our changing climate and its impact on the
public.

#### What We Do

Climate Central surveys and conducts scientific research on climate change and
informs the public of key findings. Our scientists publish and our journalists
report on climate science, energy, sea level rise. Read More

#### About Our Expertise

Members of the Climate Central staff and board are among the most respected
leaders in climate science. Staff members are authorities in communicating
climate and weather links, sea level rise, climate. Read More

![Climate

Central](/assets/img/cc_logo_horiz_667x50_flat_header_large_color.png)

            
                            * Home
                * Research
                  * Publications
                * Partnerships Journalism
                * Gallery
                  * Interactives
                  * Graphics
                  * Maps
                  * Collections
                * Videos
                  * Extreme Weather
                  * States of Change
                  * On the Media
                  * Climate in Context
                  * News and Reports
                * Media Library
                * News Archive
                * What We Do
                  * Mission Statement
                  * What We Do
                  * Board
                  * Staff
                  * Our Programs
                    * Climate Science
                    * Energy
                    * Climate Matters
                    * Sea Level Rise
                  * History
                  * Funding
                  * For the Media
                  * Legal
                  * Jobs
                  * Climate Services
                  * Press Releases
                  * Editorial Independence Policy
                * Support Our Work
                *           * __
                  * __
                  * __
                  * __
                  * __
                * __
            

![The 10 Hottest Global Years on

Record](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/made/2019GlobalTemps_Bars_F_en_title_lg_900_506_s_c1_c_c.jpg)
Download high resolution versions

# The 10 Hottest Global Years on Record

__

            
                            * **Published:** February 6th, 2019
            

_By Climate Central_

At long last, the government is open and the year-end climate reports from
NOAA and NASA are out. As expected, 2018 was the fourth-hottest year on record
globally, and another near-record year for U.S. weather and climate disasters.
All of the years on record that were hotter or more disaster-filled came in
the past decade.

![](https://ccimgs-2019.s3.amazonaws.com/2019GlobalTemps/2019GlobalTemps_Map_en_title_lg.jpg)

To bring context to the global goal of limiting warming to 2°C, we compare the
global temperatures to an earlier, pre-industrial 1880-1910 baseline. 2018's
global temperatures were 1.90°F (1.06°C) above that baseline -- more than
halfway there. This made 2018 the second-warmest year on record without an El
Niño event, behind only 2017. (El Niño can enhance warming, but it can't
explain all of it). Only 2016 and 2015 were warmer years, and 2014 rounds out
the top five. With the five warmest years on record happening during the past
five years -- and the 20 warmest occurring over the past 22 -- a consistent
warming trend couldn't be clearer. Meanwhile, monthly averaged atmospheric CO2
concentrations have risen to 411 ppm at Mauna Loa Observatory, thanks in part
to an estimated 2.7 percent increase in global CO2 emissions from fossil
fuels.

While the U.S. had its 14th-warmest year in 2018, unusual heat in Europe and
the Arctic propelled the globe to higher numbers. The oceans also had their
warmest year on record -- a trend that intensifies sea level rise, coral
bleaching, and tropical cyclones such as hurricanes.

Hurricanes hit the U.S. especially hard, leading 2018's near-record list of 14
billion-dollar weather and climate disasters. Hurricanes Michael and Florence
combined for at least $49 billion in damages -- over half of the total from
the year's included events (cost estimates will be updated over time). In
addition, the Western wildfire season was the most expensive ever, with total
damages of at least $24 billion. Even the sheer number of billion-dollar
events is telling -- only 2011, 2016, and 2017 have had more. Unless we
rapidly reduce our climate-warming emissions, these costly climate disasters
will only get worse.

![](https://ccimgs-2019.s3.amazonaws.com/2019GlobalTemps/2019BillionDollarDisasters_Map_en_title_lg.jpg)

_**Methodology:** Calculations of average annual global temperature are
performed independently at NASA and NOAA. Small differences in their
calculations arise as NASA's calculations are extrapolated to account for
polar locations with poor station coverage, while NOAA relies more heavily on
the polar station data. Climate Central compares temperatures to an earlier
1880-1910 baseline to assess warming during the industrial era._

_National temperatures and disaster data are provided by NOAA. Cost of the
disasters has been adjusted for inflation. NOAA combines all Western wildfires
together as one annual event. Additional review of the methodology can be
found from Smith and Katz, 2013._

_Entry last updated on 2/6/2019_

Posted in Trends, Climate, Extremes, Heat, Global

## Featured Content

![THE BURNING SOLUTION: Prescribed Burns Unevenly Applied Across

U.S.](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_29_19_Report_TheBurningSolution_og.jpg)

### THE BURNING SOLUTION: Prescribed Burns Unevenly Applied Across U.S.

![POURING IT ON: How Climate Change Intensifies Heavy Rain

Events](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_15_19_Report_flooding_og.jpg)

### POURING IT ON: How Climate Change Intensifies Heavy Rain Events

![FAITH AND FLOODING: How Sea Level Rise Threatens America’s Houses of

Worship](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_1_19_Report_FaithAndFlooding_og.jpg)

### FAITH AND FLOODING: How Sea Level Rise Threatens America’s Houses of

Worship

__
![](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/gallery/2019GlobalTemps_Bars_F_en_title_lg.jpg)

# ![Climate Central](/assets/img/logo-climate-central-footer-rb.png)

Email Newsletter ![](/assets/img/footer-submit.png)

            
                            * Copyright (C) 2019 Climate Central.
                * Contact
                * Terms
                * Content Licensing
                * Privacy
                * Site Map
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

