

Jump to Navigation

![Home](http://akclimate.org/sites/default/files//acrc_header.png)

# Temperature Changes in Alaska

![Map of Alaska](http://akclimate.org/sites/default/files/Figure_1_color.png)

The topic of climate change has attracted widespread attention in recent years
and is an issue that numerous scientists study on various time and space
scales. One thing for sure is that the earth's climate has and will continue
to change as a result of various natural and anthropogenic forcing mechanisms.

This page features the trends in mean annual and seasonal temperatures for
Alaska's first-order observing stations since 1949, the time period for which
the most reliable meteorological data are available. The temperature change
varies from one climatic zone to another as well as for different seasons. If
a linear trend is taken through mean annual temperatures, the average change
over the last 6 decades is around 4.0Â°F. However, when analyzing the trends
for the four seasons, it can be seen that most of the change has occurred in
winter and spring, with the least amount of change in autumn.

Considering just a linear trend can mask some important variability
characteristics in the time series. The figure on the right shows clearly that
this trend is non-linear: a linear trend might have been expected from the
fairly steady observed increase of CO2 during this time period. The figure
shows the temperature departure from the climatological reference period
1981-2010 for all stations. It can be seen that there are large variations
from year to year. The stepwise shift appearing in the temperature data in
1976 corresponds to a phase shift of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation from a
negative phase to a positive phase. Synoptic conditions with the positive
phase tend to consist of increased southerly flow and warm air advection into
Alaska during the winter, resulting in positive temperature anomalies.

            
                            * Home
                * Climate
                  * Temperature Change in Alaska
                  * Climate Normals
                  * Alaska Climatology
                  * Alaska Climographs
                * Weather
                  * Current Weather (Pop-Up Map)
                  * Forecast Map (Pop-Up Map)
                  * Daily Weather Mailer
                  * Alaska Weather Forecasts (External)
                    * Fairbanks
                    * North Slope
                    * West and Arctic Coast
                    * Interior
                    * Southwest
                    * South Central
                    * Southeast
                    * All forecast zones (Pop-Up Map)
                  * Hourly Statewide Weather (External)
                * Products
                  * Research
                  * Monthly City Summaries
                    * Full Archive
                    * 2015
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2016
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2017
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2018
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2019
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                  * Monthly Statewide Summaries
                    * Full Archive
                    * Annual
                      * 2011
                      * 2012
                      * 2013
                      * 2014
                    * 2015
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * Decemter
                    * 2016
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2017
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2018
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                      * June
                      * July
                      * August
                      * September
                      * October
                      * November
                      * December
                    * 2019
                      * January
                      * February
                      * March
                      * April
                      * May
                  * Departure Maps
                  * Daily Data Browser
                  * Updated Arctic Sea Ice
                  * MESONETS
                    * Anchorage
                    * Fairbanks
                * Tourist's Information
                  * All Things Alaskan
                  * Climatology
                  * Daylight
                  * Long-lead Forecast
                  * Road Conditions
                  * The Golden Rule
                  * Weather Forecasts
                * Contact
                * About
            

## Search form

Search

## Temperature Changes in Alaska Figures

You may view charts of temperature climate trends by location here.

![](/sites/default/files/ClimateTrends/Annual_AK.png)

![](/sites/default/files/ClimateTrends/Seasonal_Yearly_Temp_Change_F2018.png)

![](/sites/default/files/ClimateTrends/Seasonal_Yearly_Temp_Change_F762018.png)

P.O Box 757320 Fairbanks, Alaska 99775-7320

A Recognized State Climate Office - American Association of State
Climatologists

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

