
            
                            * Billionaires
            
                  * All Billionaires 
                  * World's Billionaires 
                  * Forbes 400 
                  * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
                  * China's Richest 
                  * India's Richest 
                  * Indonesia's Richest 
                  * Korea's Richest 
                  * Thailand's Richest 
                  * Japan's Richest 
                  * Australia's Richest 
                  * Taiwan's Richest 
                  * Singapore's Richest 
                  * Philippines' Richest 
                  * Hong Kong's Richest 
                  * Malaysia's Richest 
                * Innovation
            
                  * All Innovation 
                  * AI & Big Data 
                  * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
                  * Cloud 100 2018 
                  * Consumer Tech 
                  * Cybersecurity 
                  * Enterprise & Cloud 
                  * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
                  * Games 
                  * Green Tech 
                  * Healthcare 
                  * Oracle BrandVoice 
                  * SAP BrandVoice 
                  * Science 
                  * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
                  * Sharing Economy 
                  * Social Media 
                  * Venture Capital 
                * Leadership
            
                  * All Leadership 
                  * Careers 
                  * CMO Network 
                  * Crowe BrandVoice 
                  * Deloitte BrandVoice 
                  * Diversity & Inclusion 
                  * Education 
                  * Entrepreneurs 
                  * ForbesWomen 
                  * Franchises 
                  * Leadership Strategy 
                  * Small Business 
                  * Under 30 
                  * Workday BrandVoice 
                * Money
            
                  * All Money 
                  * Banking & Insurance 
                  * Crypto & Blockchain 
                  * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
                  * Fintech 
                  * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
                  * Investing 
                  * Markets 
                  * Personal Finance 
                  * Retirement 
                  * Taxes 
                  * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
                  * Wealth Management 
                * Consumer
            
                  * All Consumer 
                  * Food & Drink 
                  * Hollywood & Entertainment 
                  * Media 
                  * Real Estate 
                  * Retail 
                  * SportsMoney 
                * Industry
            
                  * All Industry 
                  * Aerospace & Defense 
                  * Energy 
                  * Flexport BrandVoice 
                  * Manufacturing 
                  * Policy 
                  * Transportation 
                  * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
                * Lifestyle
            
                  * All Lifestyle 
                  * Arts 
                  * Boats & Planes 
                  * Capital One BrandVoice 
                  * Cars & Bikes 
                  * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
                  * Dining & Drinking 
                  * Forbes Travel Guide 
                  * ForbesLife 
                  * Watches & Jewelry 
                  * Travel 
                  * Vices 
                * BrandVoice
            
                  * AppDynamics 
                  * Capital One 
                  * Cole Haan 
                  * Crowe 
                  * Deloitte 
                  * ExtraHop 
                  * Flexport 
                  * Impact Partners 
                  * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
                  * Oracle 
                  * SAP 
                  * ServiceNow 
                  * Workday 
                * Lists 
                * Advisor
            
                  * All Advisor 
                  * Credit Cards 
                  * Personal Loans 
                  * Brokerage 
                  * Checking Accounts 
                  * Savings Accounts 
                * More
            
                  * 30 Under 30 2019 
                  * Daily Dozen Briefing 
                  * Forbes8 
                  * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
                  * Forbes Editors' Picks 
                  * Forbes Finds 
                  * Forbes Insights: AI 
                  * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
                  * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
                  * Forbes Video 
                  * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
                  * Newsletters 
                  * Tech MD 
                  * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
            

# Here Are The Odds Of You Seeing A Supervolcano Erupt In Your Lifetime

![Robin

Andrews](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/473cc81e41a0f909b5ce86a18dba3b69?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Robin Andrews

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Science

            
                            * Share to facebook __
                * Share to twitter __
                * Share to linkedin __
            

Is it me, or are supervolcanic eruptions heard of and never seen? Thankfully,
I suppose, this remains the case in modern society. Although this is a popular
science term rather than a truly technical one - it was popularized by the BBC
awhile back - it's rather useful as a way of describing utterly catastrophic
periods of volcanism, either those emitted over an extremely long time period
or short, sharp paroxysms that unleash city-sized amounts of volcanic debris
on the wider world.

If we focus on the more traditional, explosive definition of a supereruption,
then that means that there have been 42 in the last 36 million years alone
that have topped the Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI), an imperfect scale that
measures eruptions largely based on volcanic output, rather than actual energy
released. VEI 8 events produce more than 1,000 cubic kilometers of volcanic
matter, enough to completely fill Lake Tahoe up more than six-and-a-half
times.

Hot lava flows down the Mount Sinabung volcano in the night in Karo, North
Sumatra on July 30, 2017. (TIBTA PANGIN/AFP/Getty Images)

Life on Earth has long been affected by such spectacular outbursts - not
really because of the actual eruption itself, but because of the resulting
climate change. Volcanoes, across geological timescales, release both
greenhouse gases and/or sunlight-blocking aerosols; they have successfully
frozen and boiled the world several times.

Now, with all this epic imagery splashed across your screen, you may find it
difficult to actually envision what such an apocalyptic event may have
physically looked and felt like. That brings us to the crux of this thought
process; will any people alive today witness a volcanic supereruption?

Although it’s a crude measure, you could say that, based on all those VEI 8s,
one supereruption takes place every 857,142 years or so. Modern humans have
only been around for about 350,000 years or so, so it looks like it’s fairly
unlikely that we may ever see one in our lifetime. Take Yellowstone’s
supervolcano, for example: according to the USGS, there’s a mere one-
in-730,000 chance this year alone that it will empty out its colossal magma
supply onto the surface. Ho hum – no end of civilization for us.

Funnily enough, thanks to us serendipitously popping up on the evolutionary
tapestry at the right time, humans have seen a supervolcanic eruption before.
Although several eruptions could partly qualify as being epic enough and
voluminous enough to fall into the niche category of human-viewed
supereruptions, only one truly fits the bill: that of Toba, which rocked what
is now Indonesia 73,000 years ago.

Toba was a true monster. Its eruption produced a crater 100 kilometers long
and produced at least 2,800 cubic kilometers of volcanic debris, much of which
blasted upwards in a volcanic plume at least twice the height of Mount
Everest. By the week’s end, the entirety of South Asia was smothered by an ash
layer 15 centimeters deep. It even unleashed so much sunlight-blocking
aerosols that some studies suggest the planet enduring a six-year-long
volcanic winter, although this is proving difficult to confirm.

Until recently, it was thought that although humans would have certainly been
affected by this eruption to some degree, they probably wouldn’t have actually
seen it. However, a brand-new piece of research had something to say about
that.

Lake Toba, the flooded crater produced by the supervolcanic eruption 73,000
years ago, seen today. (Shutterstock)

Back in the late 19th Century, Dutch archaeologist, Eugène Dubois found some
teeth in a cave by the name of Lida Ajer, on the Indonesian island of Sumatra.
They were seen as novelties at the time but weren’t thoroughly studied. A new
team of Australian researchers, who had followed a mysterious trail of human
tools all the way up from that desert continent to the volcanic archipelago,
used contemporary dating techniques on these teeth and found that they were up
to 73,000 years old. Comparisons with other primates confirmed that the teeth
also belonged to modern humans, which makes them the oldest human remains in
the region.

That means that there’s a very good chance that humans arrived in Indonesia
just as Toba decided to blow its top. They would have been greeted by an image
of the end of days; a grim sky-high fire that choked their lungs and smothered
their new home. It’s something that they, and only they, have witnessed in the
entirety of human history.

Sure – one day, people will most likely be around to witness yet another
supervolcanic eruption. It will likely be several tens or hundreds of
thousands of years before it happens, but there’s a slim chance it could
happen tomorrow – unfortunately, the rarer the eruption type, the harder it is
to predict when the next one will be.

If you’re keen to have a front seat at the fireworks show, I’d suggest
eschewing Yellowstone and going to Naples instead, which sits atop Campi
Flegrei, Italy’s almost-supervolcano. I hear that the food in that part of the
world is better than anything you’ll find in Wyoming. No offense.

![Robin

Andrews](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/473cc81e41a0f909b5ce86a18dba3b69?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Robin Andrews

Contributor

Robin George Andrews is a doctor of experimental volcanology-turned-science
journalist. He tends to write about the most extravagant of scientific tales,
from eruptions ...

Read More

            
                            * Print
                * Site Feedback
                * Tips
                * Corrections
                * Reprints & Permissions
                * Terms
                * Privacy
                * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
                * AdChoices
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

