

﻿

Log In / Join

Hi,

Log Out

![What to Expect Logo](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/redesign/wte-new-

logo.svg) Search

  * ![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/mobile-profile-icon-new.svg) Log In / Join 

  * Getting Pregnant 

    * Fertility 
    * Ovulation 
    * Preparing for Pregnancy 
  * Pregnancy 

    * Week By Week 
    * Symptoms 
    * Baby Names 
    * Baby Shower 
    * Complications 
    * Due Date Calculator 
    * Labor & Delivery 
    * Screenings & Tests 
    * Signs of Labor 
  * First Year 

    * Month By Month 
    * Milestones 
    * Breastfeeding 
    * Postpartum Health 
    * Childproofing 
    * Newborn 
    * Vaccinations 
  * Toddler 

    * Month By Month 
    * Milestones 
    * Child Care 
    * Feeding 
    * Growth 
    * Potty Training 
    * Sleep 
    * Vaccinations 
  * Family 

    * Finances 
    * Celebrity Parents 
    * Kids' Health 
    * Relationships 
  * Baby Products 

    * Strollers 
    * Maternity 
    * Car Seats 
    * Monitors 
    * Baby Carrier 
    * Baby Furniture 
    * Nursing & Feeding 
  * Registry 

  * Community 

    * Featured & Popular 
    * Birth Month Groups 
    * Getting Pregnant 
    * Pregnancy 
    * First Year 
    * Family 
    * Health 
    * Stages 
    * International 
    * US Local 
    * All Groups A-Z 
  * News 

Pregnancy > Fetal Health

# Fetal Development: Baby's Nervous System and Brain

![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/WTE-editors-

Image-300x300.jpg?width=75)

by What to Expect Editors

![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/gray-tick.png) Reviewed
April 23, 2019

![fetal brain and nervous system](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/Fetal-

Development-Nervous-System-and-Brain-722x406.jpg?width=574)

Thinkstock

Your itty-bitty embryo is making big developmental moves even before that
pregnancy test comes back positive. Here’s how the fetal nervous system
develops.

The fetal nervous system -- i.e., your baby's brain and spinal cord -- is one
of the very first systems to develop. In fact, it's making big strides before
you even know you're pregnant.

## The parts of your baby's brain

Before we get into the science of fetal brain development, here's a quick
anatomy primer on your baby's brain. There are five different regions we're
familiar with, each responsible for different functions:

  1. **Cerebrum:** This is the biggest part of the brain, and it's responsible for thinking, remembering and feeling. This is where the cerebral cortex and its various lobes (including the frontal and temporal lobes) reside.
  2. **Cerebellum:** The area in charge of motor control.
  3. **Brain stem:** The engine driving many of your baby's most vital functions, including heart rate, breathing and blood pressure.
  4. **Pituitary gland:** This pea-sized gland releases hormones into your body that are responsible for growth, metabolism and more.
  5. **Hypothalamus:** This area deals with body temperature, hunger, thirst, sleep and emotions.

With the biology lesson out of the way, read on to find out how and when these
various parts start developing.

## First trimester: Baby starts moving

A mere 16 days after conception, your fetus's neural plate forms (think of it
as the foundation of your baby's brain and spinal cord). It grows longer and
folds onto itself, until that fold morphs into a groove, and that groove turns
into a tube -- the neural tube.

Once the neural tube closes, at around week 6 or week 7 of pregnancy, it
curves and bulges into three sections, commonly known as the forebrain,
midbrain and hindbrain. Just to the rear of the hindbrain sits the part that
will soon turn into your baby's spinal cord. Soon, these areas bubble into
those five different regions of the brain that we're most familiar with: the
cerebrum, cerebellum, brain stem, pituitary gland and the hypothalamus. Of
course, all of these fetal brain areas need more time to be fully up and
running!

More on Fetal Development

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby’s Bones and Skeletal System

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby's Hair, Skin & Nails

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby’s Digestive System

Fetal Development: Baby’s Bones and Skeletal System

Fetal Development: Baby's Hair, Skin & Nails

Fetal Development: Baby’s Digestive System

At the same time, special neural cells form and move throughout the embryo to
form the very beginnings of nerves. Your baby's nervous system is made up of
millions upon millions of neurons; each of these microscopic cells have itty-
bitty branches coming off of them so that they can connect and communicate
with each other. With this comes baby's first synapses, which essentially
means baby's neurons can communicate and create early fetal movements...like
curling into the fetal position.

Other movements follow quickly, with your fetus wiggling his developing limbs
at around 8 weeks. By the end of the first trimester, your baby-to-be has
garnered quite a repertoire of motion, though you won't be able to feel it
quite yet. And at about the same time as baby first wiggles his limbs, he
begins to develop the sense of touch.

## Second trimester: Baby sucks, swallows, blinks and dreams

During the second trimester, your baby's brain is directing steady
contractions of the diaphragm and chest muscles (think of them as practice
breathing movements). Baby's first sucking and swallowing impulses kick in
around 16 weeks. By 21 weeks, your baby's natural reflexes will allow him to
swallow several ounces of amniotic fluid every day. And all of that swallowing
means baby's tasting, too, another sense that's now in full gear.

At around 18 weeks of pregnancy, you'll feel baby's first kick (but don't
worry if it takes a few weeks longer -- that's common, especially among first-
time moms). Around the same time, your baby's nerves become covered with
myelin, a protective insulation that speeds messages between nerve cells
(myelin continues to grow until your baby's first birthday). And at 24 weeks,
another big reflex occurs: Blinking.

At the tail-end of trimester two, your little one's brainstem (controlling
heart rate, breathing, blood pressure) is almost entirely mature, resting just
above the spinal cord but below the cerebral cortex (the last area to mature).
By now, the fetal nervous system is developed enough so your baby is startled
by loud noises outside the womb -- and may even turn his head toward the sound
of your voice! Another exciting development: At 28 weeks, fetal brainwave
activity features sleep cycles, including REM (the stage when dreaming
occurs).

## Third trimester: Baby's brain grows

The third trimester is brimming with rapid development of neurons and wiring.
Baby's brain roughly triples in weight during the last 13 weeks of gestation,
growing from about 3.5 ounces at the end the second trimester to almost 10.6
ounces at term. And it's starting to look different, too: Its formerly once
smooth surface is becoming increasingly grooved and indented (like the images
of brains you're used to seeing).

At the same time, the cerebellum (motor control) is developing fast -- faster
now than any other area of the fetal brain (its surface area increases 30-fold
in the last 16 weeks of pregnancy!).

All of this growth is big news for the cerebral cortex (thinking, remembering,
feeling). Though this important area of the brain is developing rapidly during
pregnancy, it really only starts to function around the time a full-term baby
is born -- and it steadily and gradually matures in the first few years of
life, thanks to baby's enriching environment.

## Eating to support baby's brain development

Because your baby's nervous system starts developing right out of the starting
gates, it's important to consume 400 micrograms of folate (aka folic acid or
vitamin B) daily as soon as you think you might want to get pregnant. This
nutrient is essential for fetal cell growth, tissue development and DNA -- and
consuming enough before (and early in) pregnancy reduces a baby's chance of
serious neural tube defects (like spina bifida) by 70 percent. Research also
suggests that the nutrient can reduce the chances your child will be born with
an autism spectrum disorder by up to 40 percent. So take your prenatal vitamin
(which should have at least 400 mcg), and make sure to eat plenty of folate-
rich foods (like leafy greens and whole grains).

Another important nutrient for brain (and eye) development: omega-3 fatty
acids, specifically DHA (aka docosahexaenoic acid). Getting enough --
especially during your third trimester, when baby's brain is developing the
fastest -- is vital, since it's a major structural fat in the brain and eyes.
The good news: DHA is found in lots of safe-to-eat fatty, cold water fish
(like salmon, trout and cod), along with seaweed and DHA-fortified eggs.

From the What to Expect editorial team and Heidi Murkoff, author of What to
Expect When You're Expecting. Health information on this site is based on
peer-reviewed medical journals and highly respected health organizations and
institutions including ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists), CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and AAP
(American Academy of Pediatrics), as well as the What to Expect books by Heidi
Murkoff.

View Sources

>   * _What to Expect When You're Expecting_ , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff and
Sharon Mazel.

>

>   * WhatToEpect.com, Watch: 8 Folate-Rich Foods to Eat During Pregnancy,
February 2018.

>

>   * WhatToEpect.com, 24 Weeks Pregnant, January 2019.

>

>   * WhatToEpect.com, Fetal Movement During Pregnancy, October 2017.

>

>   * WhatToEpect.com, 8 Weeks Pregnant, January 2017.

>

>   * Mayo Clinic, Fetal Development: The 1st Trimester, 2019.

>

>   * National Institutes of Health, U.S. National Library of Medicine, Fetal
Development, April 2019.

>

>   * _Annual Review Biomedical Engineering_ , Mapping Fetal Brain Development
in utero Using MRI: The Big Bang of Brain Mapping, August 2011.

>

>   * The Cleveland Clinic, Fetal Development: Stages of Growth, September
2014.

>

>   * Merck Manual, Stages of Development of the Fetus, November 2016.

>

>   * The Urban Child Institute, Baby's Brain Begins Now: Conception to Age 3,
2019.

>

>   * March of Dimes, Neural Tube Defects, February 2018.

>

>   * _Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology_, Sonographic examination of the
fetal central nervous system: guidelines for performing the 'basic
examination' and the 'fetal neurosonogram', January 2007.

>

>   * March of Dimes, Vitamins and Other Nutrients During Pregnancy, February
2018.

>

>   * _Fetal Growth and Development_ , Richard Harding and Alan D. Bocking,
2001.

>

>   * _A Child is Born_ , Lennart Nilsson and Lars Hamberger, 2003.

>

>   * _Reviews in Obstetrics & Gynecology_, Omega-3 Acids and Pregnancy, Fall
2010.

>

>   * _Report: A host of common chemicals endanger child brain development_ ,
July 2016.

>

>   * National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Phthalates,
May 2017.

>

>

Related Topics

Fetal Health

Pregnancy

Pregnancy Groups

### Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Week

1

Week

2

Week

3

Week

4

Week

5

Week

6

Week

7

Week

8

Week

9

Week

10

Week

11

Week

12

Week

13

Week

14

Week

15

Week

16

Week

17

Week

18

Week

19

Week

20

Week

21

Week

22

Week

23

Week

24

Week

25

Week

26

Week

27

Week

28

Week

29

Week

30

Week

31

Week

32

Week

33

Week

34

Week

35

Week

36

Week

37

Week

38

Week

39

Week

40

Week

41

Week

42

## ![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-

placeholder.svg) Trending On What to Expect

  * Weirdest Pregnancy Symptoms

  * ![Moms Tell Us What the Few Days With Baby Are Really Like ](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Moms Tell Us What the Few Days With Baby Are Really Like

  *     * ### ⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled.

Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our
partners.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

  * ![Allergies During Pregnancy](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Allergies During Pregnancy

  * ![Can Pregnancy-Related Depression Be Prevented?](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Can Pregnancy-Related Depression Be Prevented?

  * ![Best Maternity Leggings](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Best Maternity Leggings

  * ![8 Tricks for Getting Your Baby to Move in Utero](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### 8 Tricks for Getting Your Baby to Move in Utero

Follow Us On

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Find advice, support, and good company (and some stuff just for fun).

* * *

  * What to Expect Apps
  * Popular Topics
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Advertise With Us
  * About Heidi Murkoff
  * Accessibility

  * What to Expect Foundation

  * What to Expect Awards
  * What to Expect Bookstore
  * Advertising Policy
  * Help
  * AdChoices ![](https://c.evidon.com/pub/icong1.png)
  * Feedback

* * *

* * *

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our team of
experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical
information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed
What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This site complies with the HONcode
standard for trustworthy health information. This educational content is not
medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use
and privacy policy. © 2019 Everyday Health, Inc

A property of ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=973422942732185&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

