

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

                    
                                                * Our Work
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                              * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * About
                              * Accomplishments & History
                              * Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * Ways to Give
                              * News Center
                              * Jobs at UCS
                              * Contact Us
                              * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
                            * Take Action
                              * Science Network
                            * Subscribe
                            * Donate
                              * Renew Your Membership
                              * Become a Member
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Make a Planned Gift
                              * More Ways to Give
                              * Gifts in Honor or Memory
                              * Gift Memberships
                            * Science Network Leaders
                    

**search**

## You are here

                    
                                                1. Global Warming
                            2. » Global Warming Science
                    

# How Does the Sun Affect Our Climate?

### The Sun-climate connection

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

sun.jpg)

Active regions of the Sun  
Image: NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory

The Sun is the source of most of the energy that drives the biological and
physical processes in the world around us—in oceans and on land it fuels plant
growth that forms the base of the food chain, and in the atmosphere it warms
air which drives our weather.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

variation-sun-energy.jpg)

Figure 1. Approximately two and a half solar cycles of Total Solar Irradiance
(TSI), also called 'solar constant', in power (watts) per square meter. These
annual, average TSI measurements were compiled by the Active Cavity Radiometer
Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM), the Physikalisch-Meteorologisches Observatorium /
World Radiation Center (PMOD), and the Royal Meteorological Institute of
Belgium (RMIB).  
Image: IPCC AR5

The rate of energy coming from the Sun changes slightly day to day. Over many
millennia the Earth-Sun orbital relationship can change the geographical
distribution of the sun’s energy over the Earth’s surface. It has been
suggested that changes in solar output might affect our climate—both directly,
by changing the rate of solar heating of the Earth and atmosphere, and
indirectly, by changing cloud forming processes.

Over the time-scale of millions of years, the change in solar intensity is a
critical factor influencing climate (e.g., ice ages). However, changes in the
rate of solar heating over the last century cannot account for the magnitude
of the rise in global mean temperature since the late 1970s.

### Are changes in solar radiation contributing to global warming?

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

sunspots.jpg)

The bottom two black spots on the sun, known as sunspots, appeared quickly
over the course of Feb. 19-20, 2013. These two sunspots are part of the same
system and are over six Earths across. This image combines images from two
instruments on NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO): the Helioseismic and
Magnetic Imager (HMI), which takes pictures in visible light that show
sunspots and the Advanced Imaging Assembly (AIA), which took an image in the
304 angstrom wavelength showing the lower atmosphere of the sun, which is
colorized in red.  
Image: NASA/SDO/AIA/HMI/Goddard Space Flight Center

Scientists have considered the sun-climate hypothesis to explain Earth’s rapid
warming. The evidence collected show that the sun noticeably affects our
climate over millions of years, but it is not the cause of recent warming.

The rate at which energy from the Sun reaches the top of Earth’s atmosphere is
called “total solar irradiance” (or TSI). TSI fluctuates slightly from day to
day and week to week. In addition to these rapid, short-term fluctuations,
there is an 11-year cycle in TSI measurements related to “sunspots” (a part of
the Sun’s surface that is temporarily cooler and darker than its neighboring
regions).

Two different hypotheses have been proposed to test whether solar radiation
can explain climate change.

#### Hypothesis 1: UV rays, ozone, and clouds

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-EMS-

nasa.jpg)

The Electromagnetic Spectrum  
Image: NASA

The first hypothesis relies on the fact that in both the 11 year cycle and, in
the longer term, the changes in solar energy are highest at ultraviolet
(short) wavelengths.

The short wavelength radiation is particularly effective in modifying ozone
concentrations in the level of the atmosphere above where typical weather
occurs.

According to this hypothesis, modifications in the ozone layer could in turn
filter down to that level of the atmosphere where our weather is formed,
potentially modifying clouds and temperatures there.

#### Hypothesis 2: Cosmic rays and clouds

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

cosmic-rays-nasa.jpg)

Cosmic rays were discovered unexpectedly in 1912. It is now known that most
cosmic rays are atomic nuclei. Most are hydrogen nuclei, some are helium
nuclei, and the rest heavier elements.  
Image: Simon Swordy (U. Chicago), NASA

The second hypothesis relies on the fact that changes in solar activity also
change the flow of small, charged, highly energetic particles (known as cosmic
rays) that travel through the atmosphere toward Earth.

These particles in turn create more ions (charged atoms or molecules) from air
molecules in the atmosphere, and it has been suggested that these ions might
modify cloud formation, causing large changes in weather and temperatures
below. However, the effect of cosmic rays on cloud formation is too weak to
effect the Earth’ climate in a significant way.

So far, there is no convincing evidence that either of these hypotheses
adequately demonstrate a causal link between small changes in solar irradiance
and the increase in Earth’s surface temperature that has been measured for
more than a century.

The 11 year solar radiation cycle, as well as small increase in TSI since
1750, appear in some studies to be correlated with variations in cloud
patterns. But, these changes in solar energy absorbed by the Earth appear to
be far too small to explain the major changes in our climate.

### Are other particles causing global cooling?

The rate at which solar energy reaches the Earth’s surface in any location
depends on the season, time of day, cloudiness and the concentration of small
aerosol particles in the atmosphere. (See aerosols FAQ).

During the last two decades, aerosol emissions increased in some countries and
decreased in others. Research shows that the impact of these particles on
global average surface temperature over this time period is small.

### What is causing increases in the Earth’s average temperature, and how do

we know this?

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

history-climate-drivers.png)

Drivers of global average surface temperature “anomalies” (changes away from
the 1961-1990 average global surface temperature). (a): Global average surface
temperature measurements (in black) and (in red) global average surface
temperature modeled by a computer using solar, volcanic, and other natural
(internal variability) factors, as well as human (anthropogenic) factors. The
extent to which changes in solar radiation (b), volcanoes (c), other internal
variability (d) factors, and human (anthropogenic) (e) factors have driven
changes in global average surface temperature.  
Image: IPCC AR 5

We do know with a good degree of certainty that between 1750-2011, or since
the beginning of the industrial period until today, the average increase in
energy hitting a given area of the atmosphere (radiative forcing, measured in
a unit called watts per square meter) due to heat-trapping gases is 56 times
greater (~ 2.83 watts per square meter) than the increase in radiative forcing
from the small shift in the sun’s energy (~0.05 watts per square meter).

In its Fifth Assessment Report, IPCC scientists evaluated simulations of
historical climate variables using a number of numerical models. They first
assumed no increase in heat-trapping gases since 1750, so that the
temperatures calculated were those that would have been achieved if only solar
variability, volcanic eruptions, and other natural climate drivers were
included.

The temperature results were similar to observed temperatures only for the
first half of the century, but the models did not accurately show the general
warming trend that has been recorded during the second half of the twentieth
century.

When computer models include human-induced heat-trapping gases, they
accurately reproduce the observed warming during the twentieth and twenty-
first centuries.

The evidence shows that although fluctuations in the amount of solar energy
reaching our atmosphere do influence our climate, the global warming trend of
the past six decades cannot be attributed to changes in the sun.

Last revised date: August 3, 2017

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

## Share

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

## Related Content

                    
                                                * The Causes of Global Warming: A Global Warming FAQ
                    
                            * Humans Are Major Cause of Global Warming
                    
                            * CO2 and Heat-Trapping Gases FAQ
                    
                            * Ozone Hole & Global Warming FAQ
                    

## From our blogs

                    
                                                * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
                            * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
                            * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019
                    

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

## EXTREME WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Extreme Weather and Climate Change

Infographic](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

extreme-weather-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=Ig86J4OV)

Strong scientific evidence links climate change with increasing heat waves,
coastal flooding, and other extreme weather events.

## Take Action

                    
                                                * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)
                    

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    
                            * About Us
                              * UCS Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * History & Accomplishments
                              * Jobs & Internships
                              * News
                            * Issues
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                            * Our Podcast
                              * Got Science?
                            * Publications
                            * Reports & Analysis
                            * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * Action Center
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * State Disclosures
                            * Our Blogs
                              * The Equation
                              * All Things Nuclear
                            * Site Map
                            * Contact Us
                            * UCS Store
                    
                            * Ways to Give
                              * Donate
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Planned Gifts
                            * How to Help
                              * Become a Member
                              * Take Action
                              * Subscribe
                    
                            * A **Normal Font Size**
                            * A **Larger Font Size**
                            * A **Largest Font Size**
                    

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

