

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/logo.svg)

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

facebook.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-twitter.png)
![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

youtube.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-instagram.png) Donate Subscribe

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

check-arrow.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/spinner.gif)

# Thank You!

Yes

No

##### The Daily Dish

Serving economic news and views every morning.

##### U6 Fix

Analysis on the underemployment number in the monthly jobs report.

##### The Week in Regulation

Weekly analysis of newly proposed and final rules, including their cost.

##### Weekly Checkup

Weekly analysis of what’s happening in health care.

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

search.png)

At least one search term must be present.

                    
                                                * The Daily Dish
                            * Research
                            * Press
                            * About AAF
                            * Events
                            * Experts
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * The Daily Dish
                            * Research
                            * Press
                            * About AAF
                            * Events
                            * Experts
                    

At least one search term must be present.

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

facebook.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-twitter.png)
![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

pdf.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-print.png)

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

mobile-share.png)

                    
                                                * ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-facebook.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-twitter.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-pdf.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-print.png)
                    

Insight

June 25, 2018

# OPEC Still Influences Oil Prices

Philip Rossetti

### **Summary**

                    
                                                * Despite huge increases in U.S. oil production, the combination of increased oil demand and artificial constraints on output through an agreement between OPEC and Russia, which together control more than half of global oil production, has forced prices to rise.
                            * Agreements to cut production, such as OPEC's, are often difficult to maintain as higher oil prices encourage nations to boost production, but falling production in Venezuela allows other OPEC members to boost production without exceeding the overall compliance targets.
                            * High oil prices encourage policymakers to act, but the best policy response is usually to do nothing: High prices on their own will incentivize increased non-OPEC production, improved efficiency, and fuel substitution.
                    

* * *

### **Introduction**

At an Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) summit last
week, the cartel of petroleum exporters deliberated on whether to increase
their oil output, eventually agreeing to increase total production by an
assumed 600,000 barrels per day. As oil prices were relatively high most of
that week, with Brent crude oil trading at $75 per barrel, even President
Trump was on the bandwagon calling for OPEC to increase its production.

The events of the past week show just how much power OPEC still holds over
U.S. energy security, even though just two years ago the cartel seemed broken.
As oil prices rise, the allure of government action to lower prices
strengthens. Such action, while potentially attractive politically, would be
policy folly, as it ignores the market dynamics at work when prices rise.

* * *

### **But I thought OPEC was dead…?**

Tales of OPEC’s death have been exaggerated. In late 2014, oil prices took a
nose dive from over $100 per barrel to lows that dipped under $30 per barrel.
Prices dropped initially because shale oil production in the United States
caused U.S. oil production to double from around 5 million barrels per day
(b/d) to 10 million b/d (and still increasing, recently reaching 10.5 million
b/d). This massive increase threatened the ability of OPEC to manipulate
prices. The cartel functions because member countries can raise prices by
cutting output in a coordinated way, but the increased U.S. output reduced
OPEC’s overall market share, and thus their leverage. The shale oil revolution
meant the demise of OPEC, at least in theory.

In 2015, decisionmakers in Saudi Arabia saw a threat from the upstart U.S.
producers and kept their oil output high, believing that a period of sustained
low oil prices would force costly producers in the United States out of the
market. Yet as shale producers in the United States proved exceptionally
resilient even under low prices (due to rapidly improving productivity), Saudi
Arabia—whose finances rely heavily on oil revenues—eventually caved and cut
output to force a price increase. This output cut came in the form of the 2016
Vienna Agreement among OPEC members and Russia. OPEC represents approximately
40 percent of the world’s crude oil production, and Russia around 13 percent.
OPEC and Russia together controlled enough of global oil production that they
could force a price increase by cutting output (a classic example of market
manipulation by a cartel). In the 2016 agreement, OPEC and Russia agreed to
cut their combined output by 1.8 million barrels per day.

Stability in an agreement like what came from OPEC and Russia in 2016 is often
tenuous. When prices rise, participants have incentives to defect and claim
more money by increasing output. When prices fall, oil-reliant nations still
have incentives to defect because increasing production can alleviate revenue
shortfalls. Yet instead OPEC was over-compliant and managed to keep under
proposed production caps. U.S. production alone is not enough to keep up with
rising demand (1.65 million b/d per year), and prices are consequently rising.
Even the recent deal to increase OPEC output merely returns production levels
to the agreed upon targets from 2016. How did OPEC manage to succeed in this?

The strength of OPEC’s agreement has been aided by involuntary output
cuts—mostly in Venezuela. The South American producer’s output has slid from
2.2 million barrels per day in 2016 to a mere 1.4 million barrels per day in
2018 due to the nation’s inability to invest in productivity improvements as
it struggles with political and economic crises. Venezuela alone represents 44
percent of the required output cut from OPEC. Elsewhere, conflict is flaring
up in Libya’s oil crescent and disrupting output, and President Trump’s
promise to reimpose sanctions on Iran threatens their oil sales on the market.
Not to mention other crises in oil producing nations, such as Nigeria. The
upshot is that major players in OPEC’s market collusion have had to make
relatively few changes to their output to meet production targets, making
production caps easy to comply with. As a result, the United States—despite
its huge output increase—is not entirely free of OPEC’s influence.

### **Policy Solution: Patience**

The lesson of the latest OPEC agreement is that the United States is not yet
comfortably “energy secure.” Americans still care about OPEC because they
still control enough of market production to influence prices. That means when
the United States is interacting with foreign oil producers politically—such
as sanctioning Venezuela, Russia, or Iran—it still must be cognizant of how
those actions will affect domestic oil prices.

Policymakers today may be tempted to attempt to depress oil prices. In the
past policies to control prices were tried, mostly unsuccessfully. During the
oil crises of the 1970s, President Nixon implemented price controls on oil
which lasted through President Carter’s Administration. President Carter
sought creation of a “solar bank.” In 2005 and again in 2007, Congress enacted
the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), a policy intended to replace petroleum fuel
with ethanol (mostly from corn). All of these efforts have failed, with the
RFS especially not only raising prices but also hurting incentives for
domestic oil production more than those of foreign producers, AAF has shown.

The latest proposed policy is a reconsideration of “NOPEC,” an old legislative
effort that would allow OPEC members to be sued by Americans for market
manipulation. Until recently, U.S. presidents have always rejected NOPEC, as
it would legitimize the efforts of foreign actors to sue the United States.
President Trump is reportedly more amenable to the idea, but it is not
entirely clear how, in practice, a U.S. court would extract court-awarded
damages from a foreign government is not entirely clear.

The best policy, as time has shown, is to minimize government interference. As
OPEC pushes prices higher, it creates incentives for other producers to enter
the market. OPEC’s “spare capacity” is projected to decline, which shows a
weakening of the cartel’s ability to manipulate prices and force out risk-
taking competitors. Higher oil prices also spur the consumption of alternative
fuels, improvements in efficiency, and the substitution of equipment (e.g.
electric vehicle adoption). High oil prices in the 1970s incentivized
electricity producers to use less oil, and now America only gets 0.5 percent
of its electricity from petroleum. Reagan’s lifting of price controls
incentivized productivity and caused oil prices to fall in 1981, and more
recently high prices were what allowed U.S. oil producers to take risks with
shale production techniques. Government subsidies or regulations won’t break
OPEC—the market will.

### **Conclusion**

The continued ability of OPEC to influence global oil prices demonstrates that
the U.S. economy remains far from immune to the influence of other oil-
producing nations. Policymakers will continue to have incentives to focus on
the near-term, but markets, as ever, hold much stronger incentives to diminish
the power of cartels like OPEC, and that fact should be a guiding principle
for any upcoming change in policy. Long-term energy security will require that
government interventions do not undercut incentives for the private sector to
improve productivity or reduce consumption.

Disclaimer

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/Rossetti-2-300x300.png)

# Philip Rossetti

## Director of Energy Policy and Data Analyst

Philip Rossetti is the Director of Energy at the American Action Forum.

# Related Posts

April 19, 2018

Research

# The Renewable Fuel Standard’s Policy Failures and Economic Burdens

Philip Rossetti

The RFS has failed to achieve its policy goals while imposing significant
other costs on consumers, and reforming the program’s design would not fix…

August 31, 2016

Research

# Reformed Saudi Economy Could Be Good for Oil Markets

Philip Rossetti

Increased oil production in the United States not only lowers prices and
increases energy independence, but decreases the market share of price-
manipulating…

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/Rossetti-2-300x300.png)

# Philip Rossetti

## Director of Energy Policy and Data Analyst

Philip Rossetti is the Director of Energy at the American Action Forum.

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

facebook.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-twitter.png)
![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-

youtube.png) ![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-

content/themes/aaf/images/aaf-instagram.png)

Donate The Daily Dish Careers Internships Contact Us

### Daily Dish Signup Footer

                    
                                                * Get the Daily Dish*
                    

Privacy Policy

![](https://www.americanactionforum.org/wp-content/themes/aaf/images/logo.svg)

The American Action Forum is a 21st century center-right policy institute
providing actionable research and analysis to solve America’s most pressing
policy challenges.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

