

Skip to content. | Skip to navigation

Personal tools

                    
                                                * Log in Register
                    

Search Site

only in current section

Advanced Search…

![OSS Foundation](http://ossfoundation.us/logo.jpg)

Navigation

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Projects & Resources
                            * Services
                            * Our View
                            * About
                    

Navigation

                    
                                                * Economy
                            * Education
                            * Energy
                            * Environment
                              * Global Warming
                                * Current Climate Conditions
                                * Summary Reports
                                * Myths vs. Facts: Global Warming
                                * Books
                                * Links
                                * 1958 - Frank Capra warns of Global Warming
                                * 1989 - Margaret Thatcher
                                * 2009 - Chancellor Angela Merkel before the US Congress
                                * Atmospheric Aerosols
                                * Antarctic Ice Melt
                                * Antarctic Oscillation (AAO)
                                * Arctic Ice Melt
                                * Arctic Oscillation (AO)
                                * Atmospheric Circulation
                                * Arctic/Polar Amplification Effect
                                * Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO)
                                * Atmospheric Composition
                                * Attribution
                                * Climate Models
                                * Climate Feedback/Sensitivity
                                * Climate Forcing
                                * Dansgaard Oeschger Events
                                * Earth's Radiation Budget
                                * Empirical: Modeling v. Observations
                                * Galactic Cosmic Rays
                                * Greenhouse Gases/Effect
                                * Greenland Ice Melt
                                * History of Climate Science
                                * Human Caused Global Warming
                                * IPCC Reports
                                * Keeling Curves
                                * Latitudinal Shift
                                * Maunder Minimum
                                * Medieval Warm Period
                                * Methane & Hydrate/Clathrate
                                * Milankovitch Cycles
                                * Natural Cycle
                                  * images
                                * Natural Variation
                                * North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
                                * El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
                                * Southern Oscillation Index (SOI)
                                * Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO)
                                * Pacific/North American Pattern (PNA)
                                * Risk Analysis
                                * Sea Level Rise
                                * Security
                                * Solar
                                * Temperature (Global)
                                * Thermal Inertia
                                * Tipping Points
                                * Weather Intensity
                                * Weather v. Climate
                                * What We Know
                                * What We Can Do About Global Warming
                                * What We Don't Know
                              * Economics
                            * Info Technology
                            * Security
                    

Search

                    
                                         Advanced Search…
                    

Understanding Global Warming

_**Summary & News**_

                    
                                                1. Current Climate Conditions
                            2. The Leading Edge
                            3. Security Overview
                            4. Security Reports
                            5. Significant Extremes
                    

_**Global Climate Monitor**_

                    
                                                1. Arctic
                            2. Antarctica
                            3. Atmosphere
                            4. Greenhouse Gases
                            5. Oceanic Climate
                            6. Temperature
                            7. Solar
                            8. Storms & Trends
                            9. Land, Fire & Ice
                    

**_The Basics of Climate Science_**

                    
                                                1. Natural Cycle
                            2. Greenhouse Gases
                            3. Climate Forcing
                            4. Temperature
                            5. Climate Feedbacks
                    

**_Separating Fact from Fantasy_**

                    
                                                1. Climate Myths v. Facts
                            2. Related Climate Images
                    

Leading Edge

                    
                                         2014 Jan - The Leading Edge 
                     2013 December - The Leading Edge 
                     2013 November - The Leading Edge 
                     2013 October - The Leading Edge 
                     2014 October - The Leading Edge 
                     Leading Edge -  More…
                    

|

You are here: Home / Projects & Resources / Environment / Global Warming /
Natural Cycle

Info

# Global Warming Natural Cycle

The idea that Global Warming is a natural cycle is well understood from paleo
data covering the past 1 million years. Is there a difference between current
climate, and the natural cycle? For the past million years the natural climate
has oscillated between warm periods and ice ages. This shifting in and out of
warm periods and ice ages is correlated strongly with Milankovitch cycles. In
order to understand the difference between natural cycle and human-
caused/influenced global warming, one needs to consider changes in radiative
forcing and how this affects systems on Earth such as the atmosphere,
vegetation, ice and snow, ocean chemistry and ocean heat content overturn
cycles and related effects. The current radiative forcing levels are clearly
outside of the natural cycle range.

Contents

Is global warming a natural cycle? Or is global warming affected by human
influence? What does the science say? Both are true. In the natural cycle, the
world can warm, and cool, without any human interference. For the past million
years this has occurred over and over again at approximately 100,000 year
intervals. About 80-90,000 years of ice age with about 10-20,000 years of warm
period, give or take some thousands of years.

The difference is that in the natural cycle CO2 lags behind the warming
because it is mainly due to the Milankovitch cycles. Now CO2 is leading the
warming. Current warming is clearly not natural cycle.

Where are we currently in the natural cycle (Milankovitch cycle)? The warmest
point of the last cycle was around 10,000 years ago, at the peak of the
Holocene. Since then, there has been an overall cooling trend, consistent with
a continuation of the natural cycle, and this cooling would continue for
thousands of years into the future if all else remained the same. But since
1750 however, the CO2 content of the atmosphere has deviated from the natural
cycle. Instead of decreasing, it has increased because of the fossil-fuel
burning. Methane and nitrous oxide have also increased unnaturally because of
agricultural practices and other factors. The world has also warmed
unnaturally. We are now deviating from the natural cycle.

The natural cycle is understood by examining the paleo records. The fact that
the earth goes in and out of ice ages distinctly outlines the natural cycles
of Earth's climate. This occurs about every 100,000 years. We are currently in
a warm period. Generally, Earth spends about 80-90,000 years in an ice age and
around 10-20,000 years (or so) in a warm period.

## Natural Cycles

### The National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Board on

Atmospheric Science and Climate Present 'Climate Change: Lines of Evidence -
Natural Cycles'

## The Natural Cycle - Climate Minute

## Rapid Climate Change In The Natural Cycle

## 9,000 Years

![Marcott 2013 Holocene Temperature analysis with

HADCRU](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-warming/natural-

cycle/images/marcott-2013)

## 12,000 Years

![Holocene Temperature

Variations](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/myths/images/temperature-

records/Holocene_Temperature_Variations_Rev.png)

The Holocene temperatures peaked around 8,000 years ago. This temperature peak
was associated with the perihelion phase of the Milankovitch cycles. That was
when it is estimated that the natural cycle climate forcing was at maximum,
including associated climate feedbacks. Since then the forcing levels have
been slowly dropping and the temperature has been following the slope of
forcing in line with the changes in the Milankovitch cycle forcing combined
with system feedbacks.

Recent significant changes in climate forcing due to human cause factors have
produced a net positive forcing causing temperatures to rise. This is a
departure from the natural cycle.

                    
                                                * Holocene Temperature Variations
                            * Holocene Temperature Variations Sources
                    

The current global mean temperature (GMT) is above the temperature peak
associated with the forcing imposed on the climate system when we came out of
the last ice age.

Source:
http://www.globalwarmingart.com/wiki/Image:Holocene_Temperature_Variations_Rev_png

## 150 Thousand Years

![Global Mean Temperature 150,000

years](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-warming/natural-

cycle/images/150kyrs_petit150.jpg)

Source: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/globalwarming/paleobefore.html

## 450 Thousand Years

In the image below we can see that the cycle has been fairly regular for the
past 450,000 years.

![450k years](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/450kyrs_GMT-Co2_524x291.jpg)

Source: http://eetd.lbl.gov/AQ/smenon/temperature-CO2.jpg

Source: http://eetd.lbl.gov/AQ/smenon/mainintro.htm

## 5 Million Years

The last 5 million years of climate history shows us settling in to our
current 100k year cycles.

![5 Million Year Temperature

Record](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-warming/natural-

cycle/images/Five_Myr_Climate_Change_Rev.png/image_large)

## 65 Million Years

The image below shows the climate was much warmer prior to 7 million years
ago. Here we can see the Eocine optimum and the PETM event, which is assumed
to have involved a methane hydrate clathrate release that caused a temperature
spike.

![Eocene Optimum](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/65_Myr_Climate_Change_Rev.png/image_large)

## 542 Million Years

The past 542 million years of climate as it is currently understood.

![542 Million Years Global Temperature Record

\(Geocarb\)](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/542M_palaeotemps_2385x1067.png/image_large)

There are many reasons for the dramatic temperature differences and science is
continually investigation to better understand past climate. Some of the
reasons include Pangaea which is when the land mass of earth was connected 250
million years ago. Imagine the more land all facing the sun. Easy to
understand how that can produce a warmer world. But that is an
oversimplification of influences and science is never entirely settled but
rather investigated further.

That does not mean that there are many things we understand fairly well or are
even very certain of. Don't assume that because knowledge is not perfect that
one can not have a very strong understanding of what influences climate. In
our recent history, the past one million years, we have very strong
understanding of climate influences.

Mulitin Milankovitch calculated the cycles that influence the general climate
of earth in the early part of the 20th century. It was not until after his
death that his hypothesis was confirmed by the deep ocean sediment core
studies.

## The Milankovitch Cycles

                    
                                                * Learn more about Milankovitch Cycles
                    

![Milankovitch Cycles Eccentricity, Obliquity Tilt, Precession

w/caption](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/MilankovitchCycles.jpg/image_large)

These cycles increase and decrease the amount of solar forcing imposed within
our climate system and that actually causes the temperature to rise and fall
with calculable regularity. The more time the earth or land mass spends closer
to the sun (at perihelion), the more energy it receives thus warming. The more
time it spends farther form the sun (at aphelion) the less energy it receives
and the earth cools.

                    
                                                * The 'eccentricity' cycle period is around 100,000 years. This causes the orbit of the earth to elongate or become more elliptical. Imagine that the more elliptic it becomes, the less time during the year it spends near the sun. So the planet receives less solar energy and cools a bit.
                            * The 'obliquity' cycle tilts the earth every 41,000 years and that causes the land mass of the norther hemisphere to face more towards the sun or less towards the sun.
                            * The 'precession' cycle occurs about every 26,000 years and influences the wobble of the polar axis. This also influences earths climate by causing winters and summers to be warmer or colder depending on the amount of land surface being more or less exposed to the sun.
                    

These are three main influences considered in the Milankovitch theory that
regulate the general amount of energy received in our earth climate system. As
we warm and cool, more or less of our natural greenhouse gases are released
into the atmosphere, or stored in the oceans, ice and earth.

## Solar Cycles

                    
                                                * Learn more about Solar Cycles
                    

The sun also goes through cycles. Solar observations began in the time of
Galileo. Even then they noticed that the number of sunspots changed and might
be connected to climate.

![Solar Sunspot Cycles](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/Sunspot_Numbers.png/image_large)

This sunspot cycle was detected as early as the 5th century. NASA began taking
satellite readings of the total solar irradiance in 1978.

![Solar Irradiance](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/SolIrradG.gif)

Over the years, they refined their ability to calculate the total solar
irradiance and we now have a very accurate measurement of the amount of energy
that reaches our outer atmosphere.

## A Change in the Atmospheric Composition

                    
                                                * Learn more about Atmospheric Composition
                    

The main difference between the natural cycle and what is now called the
anthropogenic cycle is that we have altered the atmospheric composition of
greenhouse gases and therefore increased the climate forcing.

![Greenhouse Gas

Development](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/ghg-development.gif/image_large)

## A Change in the Forcing Levels

                    
                                                * Learn more about Climate Forcing
                    

This following image shows the last 800,000 years of temperature and forcing
levels. Essentially, we have largely departed the climate forcing from the
natural cycle.

![Forcing Levels 800kyrs](http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-

warming/natural-cycle/images/Forcing-Temp_1.9wm2.png/image_large)

### Links

                    
                                                * http://ipcc-wg1.ucar.edu/wg1/FAQ/wg1_faq-2.1.html
                            * 12,000 Years: http://www.globalwarmingart.com/wiki/Image:Holocene_Temperature_Variations_Rev_png
                            * 150,000 Years: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/globalwarming/paleobefore.html
                            * 450,000 Years: http://eetd.lbl.gov/AQ/smenon/temperature-CO2.jpg
                            * 450,000 Years: http://eetd.lbl.gov/AQ/smenon/mainintro.htm
                    

Related content

                    
                                         Milankovitch Cycles
                     Dansgaard Oeschger Events
                     Natural Variation
                    

Document Actions

                    
                                                * Send this
                    

Filed under: Climate Change, Natural Cycle, Global Warming

---|--- 

© 2008-2019 by OSS Foundation All rights reserved. – Web CMS designed by:
Haritomedia

                    
                                                * Powered by Plone & Python
                    
                            * Site Map
                            * Accessibility
                            * Contact
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

