

NASA

Global Climate Change

Vital Signs of the Planet

![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

Skip Navigation

# Facts

                    
                                                * Evidence 
                            * Causes 
                            * Effects 
                            * Scientific Consensus 
                            * Vital Signs 
                            * Questions (FAQ)
                    

Evidence Causes Effects Scientific Consensus Vital Signs Questions (FAQ)

# The Causes of Climate Change

![A layer of greenhouse gases – primarily water vapor, and including much
smaller amounts

of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide – acts as a thermal blanket for
the Earth, absorbing heat and warming the surface to a life-supporting average
of 59 degrees Fahrenheit (15 degrees
Celsius).](/system/content_pages/main_images/1_greenhouse_effect_rev_5-22-19.gif)

A simplified animation of the greenhouse effect. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

Scientists attribute the global warming trend observed since the mid-20th
century to the human expansion of the "greenhouse effect" **1** -- warming
that results when the atmosphere traps heat radiating from Earth toward space.

Certain gases in the atmosphere block heat from escaping. Long-lived gases
that remain semi-permanently in the atmosphere and do not respond physically
or chemically to changes in temperature are described as "forcing" climate
change. Gases, such as water vapor, which respond physically or chemically to
changes in temperature are seen as "feedbacks."

Gases that contribute to the greenhouse effect include:

![Link](/system/internal_resources/details/original/249_Causes-greenhouse-gas-

molecules-cropped-more-55.jpg)

                    
                                                * Water vapor. The most abundant greenhouse gas, but importantly, it acts as a feedback to the climate. Water vapor increases as the Earth's atmosphere warms, but so does the possibility of clouds and precipitation, making these some of the most important feedback mechanisms to the greenhouse effect.
                            * Carbon dioxide (CO2). A minor but very important component of the atmosphere, carbon dioxide is released through natural processes such as respiration and volcano eruptions and through human activities such as deforestation, land use changes, and burning fossil fuels. Humans have increased atmospheric CO2 concentration by more than a third since the Industrial Revolution began. This is the most important long-lived "forcing" of climate change.
                            * Methane. A hydrocarbon gas produced both through natural sources and human activities, including the decomposition of wastes in landfills, agriculture, and especially rice cultivation, as well as ruminant digestion and manure management associated with domestic livestock. On a molecule-for-molecule basis, methane is a far more active greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, but also one which is much less abundant in the atmosphere.
                            * Nitrous oxide. A powerful greenhouse gas produced by soil cultivation practices, especially the use of commercial and organic fertilizers, fossil fuel combustion, nitric acid production, and biomass burning.
                            * Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Synthetic compounds entirely of industrial origin used in a number of applications, but now largely regulated in production and release to the atmosphere by international agreement for their ability to contribute to destruction of the ozone layer. They are also greenhouse gases.
                    

![Not enough greenhouse effect: The planet Mars has a very thin atmosphere,

nearly all carbon dioxide. Because of the low atmospheric pressure, and with

little to no methane or water vapor to reinforce the weak greenhouse effect,

Mars has a largely frozen surface that shows no evidence of

life.](/images/mars-250.jpg) **Not enough greenhouse effect:** The planet Mars
has a very thin atmosphere, nearly all carbon dioxide. Because of the low
atmospheric pressure, and with little to no methane or water vapor to
reinforce the weak greenhouse effect, Mars has a largely frozen surface that
shows no evidence of life.

![Too much greenhouse effect: The atmosphere of Venus, like Mars, is nearly

all carbon dioxide. But Venus has about 154,000 times as much carbon dioxide

in its atmosphere as Earth \(and about 19,000 times as much as Mars does\),

producing a runaway greenhouse effect and a surface temperature hot enough to

melt lead.](/images/venus-250.jpg) **Too much greenhouse effect:** The
atmosphere of Venus, like Mars, is nearly all carbon dioxide. But Venus has
about 154,000 times as much carbon dioxide in its atmosphere as Earth (and
about 19,000 times as much as Mars does), producing a runaway greenhouse
effect and a surface temperature hot enough to melt lead.

On Earth, human activities are changing the natural greenhouse. Over the last
century the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil has increased the
concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). This happens because the
coal or oil burning process combines carbon with oxygen in the air to make
CO2. To a lesser extent, the clearing of land for agriculture, industry, and
other human activities has increased concentrations of greenhouse gases.

The consequences of changing the natural atmospheric greenhouse are difficult
to predict, but certain effects seem likely:

                    
                                                * On average, Earth will become warmer. Some regions may welcome warmer temperatures, but others may not.
                            * Warmer conditions will probably lead to more evaporation and precipitation overall, but individual regions will vary, some becoming wetter and others dryer.
                            * A stronger greenhouse effect will warm the oceans and partially melt glaciers and other ice, increasing sea level. Ocean water also will expand if it warms, contributing further to sea level rise.
                            * Meanwhile, some crops and other plants may respond favorably to increased atmospheric CO2, growing more vigorously and using water more efficiently. At the same time, higher temperatures and shifting climate patterns may change the areas where crops grow best and affect the makeup of natural plant communities.
                    

### The Role of Human Activity

In its Fifth Assessment Report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
a group of 1,300 independent scientific experts from countries all over the
world under the auspices of the United Nations, concluded there's a more than
95 percent probability that human activities over the past 50 years have
warmed our planet.

The industrial activities that our modern civilization depends upon have
raised atmospheric carbon dioxide levels from 280 parts per million to 400
parts per million in the last 150 years. The panel also concluded there's a
better than 95 percent probability that human-produced greenhouse gases such
as carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide have caused much of the observed
increase in Earth's temperatures over the past 50 years.

The panel's full Summary for Policymakers report is online at
**https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_summary-for-
policymakers.pdf**.

### Solar Irradiance

![solar irradiance](/internal_resources/1802) The above graph compares global
surface temperature changes (red line) and the Sun 's energy received by the
Earth (yellow line) in watts (units of energy) per square meter since 1880.
The lighter/thinner lines show the yearly levels while the heavier/thicker
lines show the 11-year average trends. Eleven-year averages are used to reduce
the year-to-year natural noise in the data, making the underlying trends more
obvious.

The amount of solar energy received by the Earth has followed the Sun's
natural 11-year cycle of small ups and downs with no net increase since the
1950s. Over the same period, global temperature has risen markedly. It is
therefore extremely unlikely that the Sun has caused the observed global
temperature warming trend over the past half-century. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

It's reasonable to assume that changes in the Sun's energy output would cause
the climate to change, since the Sun is the fundamental source of energy that
drives our climate system.

Indeed, studies show that solar variability has played a role in past climate
changes. For example, a decrease in solar activity coupled with an increase in
volcanic activity is thought to have helped trigger the Little Ice Age between
approximately 1650 and 1850, when Greenland cooled from 1410 to the 1720s and
glaciers advanced in the Alps.

But several lines of evidence show that current global warming cannot be
explained by changes in energy from the Sun:

                    
                                                * Since 1750, the average amount of energy coming from the Sun either remained constant or increased slightly.
                            * If the warming were caused by a more active Sun, then scientists would expect to see warmer temperatures in all layers of the atmosphere. Instead, they have observed a cooling in the upper atmosphere, and a warming at the surface and in the lower parts of the atmosphere. That's because greenhouse gases are trapping heat in the lower atmosphere.
                            * Climate models that include solar irradiance changes can't reproduce the observed temperature trend over the past century or more without including a rise in greenhouse gases.
                    

* * *

### References

                    
                                                1. IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, 2014
                    

United States Global Change Research Program, "Global Climate Change Impacts
in the United States," Cambridge University Press, 2009

Naomi Oreskes, _" The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change," _Science 3
December 2004: Vol. 306 no. 5702 p. 1686 DOI: 10.1126/science.1103618

                    
                                                2. Mike Lockwood, _" Solar Change and Climate: an update in the light of the current exceptional solar minimum,"_ Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 2 December 2009, doi 10.1098/rspa.2009.0519;
                    

Judith Lean, _" Cycles and trends in solar irradiance and climate,"_ Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, vol. 1, January/February 2010,
111-122.

# We Live in a Greenhouse

Life on Earth depends on energy coming from the Sun. About half the light
reaching Earth's atmosphere passes through the air and clouds to the surface,
where it is absorbed and then radiated upward in the form of infrared heat.
About 90 percent of this heat is then absorbed by the greenhouse gases and
radiated back toward the surface, which is warmed to a life-supporting average
of 59 degrees Fahrenheit (15 degrees Celsius).

# Is the Sun to Blame?

![Sun](/system/internal_resources/details/original/240_Sun-animation-20.gif)
The Sun as seen from NASA's STEREO-B mission. Credit: NASA's Scientific
Visualization Studio.

How do we know that changes in the Sun aren't to blame for current global
warming trends?

Since 1978, a series of satellite instruments have measured the energy output
of the Sun directly. The satellite data show a very slight drop in solar
irradiance (which is a measure of the amount of energy the Sun gives off) over
this time period. So the Sun doesn't appear to be responsible for the warming
trend observed over the past several decades.

Longer-term estimates of solar irradiance have been made using sunspot records
and other so-called "proxy indicators," such as the amount of carbon in tree
rings. The most recent analyses of these proxies indicate that solar
irradiance changes cannot plausibly account for more than 10 percent of the
20th century's warming. **2**

## Latest resources

                    
                                                * ![Video: Ozonewatch 2018](/system/resources/list_images/186_ozone_dec31_1979-2018_print-320x240.jpg)
                    

Video: Ozonewatch 2018

                    
                                                * ![Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science](/system/resources/list_images/184_list_call_of_science.jpg)
                    

Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science

                    
                                                * ![Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world](/system/resources/list_images/167_Screen-Shot-2018-05-16-at-12.37.30-PM.jpg)
                    

Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world

# Explore

## Interactives, galleries and apps

![Images of Change](/system/feature_items/images/9_images_of_change.jpg)

##

# Images of Change

Explore a stunning gallery of before-and-after images of Earth from land and
space that reveal our home planet in a state of flux.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Mobile

Apps](/system/feature_items/images/26_climate_mobile_apps.jpg)

##

# Climate Mobile Apps

Keep track of Earth's vital signs, see the planet in a state of flux and slow
the pace of global warming with NASA's free mobile apps.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Time

Machine](/system/feature_items/images/27_climate_time_machine.jpg)

##

# Climate Time Machine

Travel through Earth's recent climate history and see how increasing carbon
dioxide, global temperature and sea ice have changed over time.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Eyes on the Earth](/system/feature_items/images/37_eyes_on_earth-2.jpg)

##

# Eyes on the Earth

Track Earth's vital signs from space and fly along with NASA's Earth-observing
satellites in an interactive 3D visualization.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Global Ice Viewer](/system/feature_items/images/28_global_ice_viewer.jpg)

##

# Global Ice Viewer

Earth's ice cover is shrinking. See how climate change has affected glaciers,
sea ice, and continental ice sheets.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

more multimedia

## Get the Newsletter

## Stay Connected

![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

### Facts

                    
                                                *               * Evidence
                              * Causes
                              * Effects
                              * Scientific Consensus
                              * Vital Signs
                              * Questions (FAQ)
                    

### Articles

                    
                                                *               * News and Features
                              * Blog
                              * Fun Facts
                    

### Solutions

                    
                                                *               * Mitigation and Adaptation
                              * Government Resources
                    

### Explore

                    
                                                *               * Images of Change
                              * Earth Minute Videos
                              * Interactives
                              * Mobile Apps
                              * Beautiful Earth Gallery
                              * Earth 360
                    

### Resources

                    
                                                *               * Graphics and Multimedia
                              * For Educators
                              * Climate Kids
                              * About Global Warming
                              * About Climate Change
                    

### NASA Science

                    
                                                *               * Science Mission Directorate
                              * Earth System Science
                              * Earth Science Missions
                              * History
                    
                            * About Us
                    

|

                    
                                                * Feedback
                    

|

                    
                                                * Awards
                    

|

                    
                                                * Earth Observatory
                    

|

                    
                                                * SEA LEVEL CHANGE
                    

|

                    
                                                * Privacy
                    

|

                    
                                                * Climate Data Initiative
                    

|

                    
                                                * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT
                    

This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
Science Editor: Susan Callery

Site last updated: May 28, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

