

![VOA](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-world/wp-content/themes/voa-top-

content/img/voa-logo_142x60_2x_f8f8f8.png)

__Search

Search for:

__Menu

                    
                                                * Archives
                            * Contact
                            * Science World
                    

![Science World](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2017/07/cropped-2017-07_science-world-header_974x190_2x.jpg)

# Debate Over Global Warming/Climate Change Heats Up

![Rick Pantaleo](//blogs.voanews.com/science-world/files/2015/05/Rick-

Pantaleo_avatar_1432138236-67x67.jpeg)

Rick Pantaleo February 11, 2012

Share

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

Hardly a week goes by that we aren't reporting a story on concerns about
global warming.

But, a growing number of people in the scientific community are coming forward
to express doubts about the prevailing scientific opinions concerning global
warming.

Recently, 16 respected scientists signed a letter, published in the Wall
Street Journal, which indicated there is no need to panic about global
warming, arguing there's no compelling scientific argument for drastic action
to 'decarbonize' the world's economy.

A few days after the letter appeared, NASA's Goddard Institute for Space
Studies (GISS) released a study which finds human activity contributes to
global warming.

The NASA study, "Earth's energy imbalance and implications," was recently
published in the journal Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics.

The study was led by James Hansen, director of GISS, a respected scientist who
is well known for his work in climatology.

![Data collected by Argo floats, such as this one, helped Dr. Hansen's team

improve the calculation of Earth's energy imbalance. \(Photo: Argo Project

Office\)](//blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2012/02/619622main_Arvor_pourquoi_pas05b-300x199.jpg)

Data collected by Argo floats, such as this one, helped Dr. Hansen's team
improve the calculation of Earth's energy imbalance. (Photo: Argo Project
Office)

Many say it was his testimony on climate change before the US Congress in
1988, that was responsible for increasing awareness of global warming and
climate change, bringing the issue to the forefront of the public's
consciousness.

At the heart of the new paper is an emphasis that greenhouse gases generated
by human activity - and not changes in solar activity - are the primary force
driving global warming.

The study calculated the balance of energy the Earth takes in from the sun,
the amount of energy that's absorbed by the surface of the Earth and compared
it to what energy is returned from the Earth to space in the form of heat.

The researchers found, despite unusually low solar activity between 2005 and
2010, Earth continued to absorb more energy than it returned to space.

Dr. Gavin Schmidt, a colleague of Dr. Hansen's at the Goddard Institute for
Space Studies, tells us that basically, we're putting greenhouse gases - which
are primarily water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone -
into the atmosphere, making it harder for energy coming in from the sun and
processed by Earth's climate systems to make it back out to space.

Schmidt says that their research showed that temperatures are changing because
of increases in greenhouse gases. The increased emissions of greenhouse gases
into the atmosphere keep more energy trapped near the ground than what would
be considered normal.

![Dr. Gavin Schmidt \(Photo: NASA/GISS\)](//blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2012/02/Gavin_Schmidtb.jpg)

Dr. Gavin Schmidt (Photo: NASA/GISS)

That imbalance - more energy coming into Earth than is leaving it - is part of
the whole global warming story.

As far as other evidence supporting the theory of human-caused global warming,
Dr. Schmidt points to conditions such as the temperature changes that
scientists are recording around the world; the heat content changes in the
ocean; stratospheric cooling, which he says is a "very clear signature of
carbon dioxide;" as well as the spectral radiation scientists are measuring
from satellites.

Dr. Schmidt says those along, with other signs to look for, such as sea ice,
the phenology of plants and glacial melting, prove that the actual fact of
warming is incontrovertible, that the planet has clearly warmed over the last
100 years and that the warming has increased over the last few decades.

Dr. William Happer, a professor of physics at Princeton University is one of
the 16 scientists who signed the Wall Street Journal letter, and he raises
doubts about what has almost become conventional wisdom on global warming.

Dr. Happer also testified before Congress, in 2009, saying, "I believe that
the increase of CO2 is not a cause for alarm and will be good for mankind."

Dr. Happer says the Wall Street Journal letter is the result of a scientific
examination of global warming and increasing CO2, which found "there's more
smoke than fire there," and demonstrates that not all scientists think there's
a drastic problem that must be immediately addressed.

![Dr. William Happer \(Photo: Denise Applewhite, Princeton University Office

of Communication\)](//blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2012/02/happerb.jpg)

Dr. William Happer (Photo: Denise Applewhite, Princeton University Office of
Communication)

The Wall Street Journal letter was directed toward "candidates running for
public office in any contemporary democracy who may have to consider what, if
anything, to do about 'global warming.'"

The signatories of the letter said that they were speaking for "many
scientists and engineers, who have looked carefully and independently at the
science of climate," and that their basic message to the candidates was that,
"there is no compelling scientific argument for drastic action to
"decarbonize" the world's economy. Even if one accepts the inflated climate
forecasts of the IPCC, aggressive greenhouse-gas control policies are not
justified economically."

Many people today believe that anthropogenic global warming is a cold, hard
and irrefutable fact. But, scientists such as Dr. Happer say this might not
necessarily be true.

Dr. Happer describes climate change as happening all the time, that it's been
changing and that it has clearly warmed up over the last 200 years. But Dr.
Happer insists the current warming trend started from a very cold period at
the end of what has been called the "little ice age".

"Most of the warming you hear about and most of the glacier melting was over
by 1900," says Dr. Happer.

Dr. Happer finds it hard to believe the early phase of the warming, which he
says is the biggest part, was all independent of CO2 because its levels hadn't
increased much before 1900.

In the Wall Street Journal letter, Dr. Happer points out there has been no
warming for over 10 years. He invites anyone to "look it up on the Internet."

![CO2 \(Image: David Gaya/Generated with KPovModeler via

Wikimedia\)](//blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2012/02/Carbon_dioxide-300x243.jpg)

CO2 (Image: David Gaya/Generated with KPovModeler via Wikimedia)

"Just look at the graph of temperature versus time since the year 2000 and
there has been no warming," says Dr. Happer.

According to Dr. Happer, the data implies that the models, which predicted
quite a lot of warming, have greatly exaggerated the effect of C02.

Dr. Happer thinks that most, if not all, of those who signed the letter
believe CO2 will cause some warming but that the amount has been enormously
exaggerated.

You, of course, can find volumes and volumes of information and data that
support both sides of this issue on the Internet or in your local library.

But, by sharing what Drs. Happer and Schmidt shared with us on this issue, we
wanted to give you just a little "food for thought" so that you draw your own
conclusions regarding global warming and whether or not it's been primarily
caused by human activity.

Both Dr. Gavin Schmidt, from NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies and,
Dr. William Happer of Princeton University join us this weekend on the radio
edition of "Science World."

They'll each give us their insight into the global warming/climate change
issue. Tune in (see right column for scheduled times).

**Other stories we cover on the "Science World" radio program this week
include:**

                    
                                                * Mating call of prehistoric katydid chirps again
                            * Pakistani fisherman reel in a big one - a 12-meter whale-shark
                            * President Obama holds science fair at White House
                            * Scientists: plants can talk to each other
                            * Russian scientists say they've drilled through thick Antarctic ice to reach freshwater lake
                            * Researchers reverse Alzheimer's disease in mice
                            * Farming may have helped rainforests of Central Africa disappear
                    

Share

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

__Categories Earth Science: Oceans, Geology, Environment, Plants and Animals,
Technology __Tags

![]()

Previous Post

#### Science Scanner: Russian Researchers Reach Ancient Antarctic Lake

Next Post

#### Babies Understand You More Than You Know

![]()

484 Comments

                    
                                                1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7a1b4efbc782b0d744f2845e67ec4960?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Anthony Westerling says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 3:59 am

VOA claims to be "a trusted source of news and information", but shows it is
anything but with this article.

It presents the viewpoints of Happer and Schmidt as somehow equivalent in
terms of scientific authority on climate change, when they are not.

It claims that "a growing number of people in the scientific community are
coming forward to express doubt", when that is not really true in any
meaningful way… it is mostly the same science deniers over and over again.
Certainly there has been no weakening of the overwhelming scientific consensus
on climate change.

It presents Happer's arguments at face value, without reporting how they have
been shown to be false over and over again, conclusively.

It mentions the WSJ article without pointing out that the signers are either
unqualified, or compromised, or both. It neglects to mention the rebuttal by
real climate scientists that was published in the WSJ the following week, or
that the WSJ had previously rejected an editorial signed by hundreds of
leading climate scientists, that was subsequently published in Science.

It leaves it to the readers to draw their own conclusions, without providing
the information they would need.

Distorting the truth to set up a 'debate' might boost ratings for the radio
show, but it is irresponsible journalism. Context is everything.

                    
                                                2. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0cd0586f01c99dc04268502d3458c839?s=67&d=mm&r=g) John Dodds says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 8:08 am

GET over it.  
The subject is covered by dozens of sources. They can NOT agree.  
The so called independant Scientific Organizations (IGU, AAAS etc) say they
have a solution (greenhouse gases cause warming by trapping photons)but it is
simple to prove that it does not happen. IF it did happen then just how come
all that trapped heat is not evident? Why haven't we warmed up more since we
have been trapping energy photons for billions of years? Why can you still
find GHGs at ambient temperature? IF they trap the energy  
If they trap heat why do they cool down every night? Don't they then release
the heat by transporting it out?- ie they do NOT trap it. They just transport
it out, just like convection and conduction. The Greenhouse Effect is a simple
Heat transport mechanism.  
As for Hansen's non- equilibrium. Is he saying that the Stephan-Boltzmann Law
does not impose equilibrium at the speed of light by radiating out more or
less heat energy depending upon the temperature to the fourth power? IN
VIOLATION of the conventional Laws of Physics?  
How about the CO2 causes warming belief. IF the sun, the so called sole source
of warming energy (per IPCC) has not changed since the 1960s (see Schmidt's
blog) then where exactly do we get the extra energy that this extra CO2 uses
to warm the earth? Do the GHGs make it? DO they not believe in Conservation of
Energy and that Man cannot create or destroy energy? How about the Earth's
decay heat? doesn't it exist? How about the tidal energy that the variation in
the Moon's orbit induces into the ocean. Since it doesn't come from the sole
source sun, does it not exist?  
I'm sorry, these so called experts are total idiots- they are giving science a
bad name by ignoring obvious sources of energy because it does not agree with
their favorite theory.  
We have 4 sources of Earthly temperature since ~1850 which ALL pretty much
agree that the Earth has gone thru 60 year warming and cooling cycles,
including the 1970thru 1998 warming and the not quite cooling from 1998 thru
now due to bottom in 2028 or so. Just wait to see what it does until 2028, the
end of the current 30 year cooling cycle., which follows each 30 year warming
cycle .  
I will predict that the hansen schmidt CO2 causes warming contention will be
thrown out as the temperature cools for the next few years thru 2028 just like
it did in the 1530s! and from 1880 to 1910, and from 1940 to 1970 etc etc  
In fact I will go put on a limb and predict that the temperature will cool
every night in spite of the claim that the steadily increasing number of GHGs
and CO2 will trap all the energy they absorb. Are you all so stupid that you
do not believe we at the surface cool down every night?  
How about Trenberth's energy balance diagram? Since heat rises from hotter to
colder places (or so I was taught) just how can he have heat radiated from
cold upper atmosphere CO2 DOWN to the obviously hotter surface? It just AIN"T
POSSIBLE unless you throw out 400 years of science.

What I do not understand is how all you so called scientists can adopt such an
obviously disprovable theory.. OR am I supposed to ignore the last 400+ years
of science currently taught in schools?  
As a scirntist/engineer with a masters degree I am totally disgusted with this
subject. All I see is more so called scientists claiming that the Earth is
undergoing (irreversible)global warming or climate change. Excuse me but you
are all total idiots. I can prove it is cyclical and natural using 19th
century science. I can prove that the temperature goes down experimentally
every single DAMN night imspite of the imcreasing man caused CO2 in the air.
Why can't you? Are you that incompetent?

                    
                                                3. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 1:56 am

I agree with you, John Dodds . To maintain that a trace gas, CO2, that makes
up only 36% of the earth's atmosphere and is 1 and 1/2 times heavier than air
is the driver of something as complex as the earth's climate is, quite
frankly, insane.

This, with out any doubt, proves that CO2 is heavier than the rest of the
atmosphere and I think every one knows that that has ever used a CO2 fire
extinguisher:

Carbon dioxide is one and one half times heavier than "air". This point was
sadly proven on Aug, 21, 1986 when Lake Nyor in Cameroon released about 1.6
million tons of CO2 that spilled over the lip of the lake and down into a
valley and killed 1,700 people within 16 miles of the lake. "Carbon dioxide,
being about 1.5 times as dense as air, caused the cloud to "hug" the ground
and descend down the valleys where various villages were located. The mass was
about 50 metres (164 ft) thick and it travelled downward at a rate of 20–50
kilometres (12–31 mi) per hour. For roughly 23 kilometres (14 mi) the cloud
remained condensed and dangerous, suffocating many of the people sleeping in
Nyos,Kam,Cha,andSubum.  
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L…

This coincides with the above fact about CO2:  
ppm of CO2 with altitude and mass of CO2 in atmosphere to 8520 metres beyond
which there is practically no CO2  
http://greenparty.ca/blogs/169/2009-01-03/ppm-co2-altitude-and-mass-
co2-atmosphere-8520-metres-beyond-which-there-practic

There are some obsessed with the supposed increase of 280 ppm to 392ppm of CO2
and I hope that this information will help them to sleep better at nights.  
This, I hope, will put this into some kind of a perspective that makes one
understand just how insignificant this increase is.  
A part per million is like 1 drop of ink in a large  
kitchen sink.  
A large kitchen sink is about 13-14 gallons. There  
are 100 drops in one teaspoon, and 768 teaspoons  
per gallon.  
Some other things that are one part per million are…  
One drop in the fuel tank of a mid-sized car  
One inch in 16 miles  
About one minute in two years  
One car in a line of bumper-to-bumper traffic from  
Cleveland to San Francisco.  
One penny in $10,000.  
I know that they understand that these 112 additional ppm are spread out over
this 16 miles in different one inch segments and wouldn't it be a task to be
told to sort out the 392 pennies from the number that it would take to make up
$10,000.  
At 392 parts per million CO2 is a minor constituent of earth's atmosphere-
less than 4/100ths of 1% of all gases present. Compared to former geologic
times, earth's current atmosphere is CO2- impoverished.

The last point is, when was anyone able to trap anything with a gas?

The intellectual Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (AD 121-180) must have foreseen
Global Warmism. He said: "The object in life is not to be on the side of the
majority, but to escape finding oneself in the ranks of the insane." I'm not
sure that "deniers" are in the minority, but you get my point.

                    
                                                4. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 2:32 pm

To see why a trace gas like CO2 can drive the climate, just look at the
science.  
1. If there was no CO2 in the atmosphere, the Earth's temperature would be about 60 degrees colder than it is (not sure 60 is right, but that's about the right amount)  
2. Doubling CO2 to 560 pmm (from the amount in 1750) will raise the Earth's temp about 1.5 degrees all by itself  
3. As the atmosphere warms, it holds more water vapor, and that adds significantly to the temp.  
4. The final result is a about at 3 degree warming for a doubled CO2 in the short run. 

This is not speculation. I know it's hard to believe that a trace gas can have
such an influence, but the effect can be shown with simple physics and math

                    
                                                5. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:46 am

Bruce Parker; Just where do you come up with such flawed information as this:
" If there was no CO2 in the atmosphere, the Earth’s temperature would be
about 60 degrees colder than it is (not sure 60 is right, but that’s about the
right amount)" Bruce, in fact from what I have read that you have posted and
that was a waste of both of our precious moments of life on earth, you writing
it and my reading it, you have been right about virtually nothing.

You should know that water vapor in the atmosphere in what ever form it takes,
vapor, clouds or what ever comprises what constitutes 95% the earth's green
hose effect. I want to apply some simple logic to this. I do not know if you
have had experience with cold and winters. The coldest nights of the winter
always occur when the skies are clear, no cloud cover. Deserts can be 120
degrees F in the day time and get down to freezing at night, again no cloud
cover to shade the earth or to hold any heat at night. You seem to want to
imagine that the green house effect comes from what Al Gore wants fools to
believe and that is a continues pane of glass like "something or the
other(CO2?)" making a trap for heat. Please tell me just what you can trap
with a trace gas, CO2, that makes up only .036% of the atmosphere. Add a cloud
cover and there is a retention of heat, as I have demonstrated to you.

"Long-anticipated results of the CLOUD experiment at CERN in Geneva appear in
tomorrow’s issue of the journal Nature (25 August). The Director General of
CERN stirred controversy last month, by saying that the CLOUD team’s report
should be politically correct about climate change (see my 17 July post
below). The implication was that they should on no account endorse the Danish
heresy – Henrik Svensmark’s hypothesis that most of the global warming of the
20th Century can be explained by the reduction in cosmic rays due to livelier
solar activity, resulting in less low cloud cover and warmer surface
temperatures."

http://ktwop.wordpress.com/2011/08/25/its-the-sun-stupid-svensmark-vindicated-
cern-shows-cosmic-rays-do-influence-cloud-formation/

                    
                                                6. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6f1824a29b5521c9f9ff0b276b3494a8?s=67&d=mm&r=g) paul says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 12:32 pm

Could you tell me what is the connection with the 400+years of science?
Meteorology is not a science now! They work with predictions and almost none
until now were correct. All the 'big computers prediction' for more then 3
months were false! Where is the science here?

                    
                                                7. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/44f9b9c02e5a08b6f61d2f8ccb7c770f?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Anna says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 4:58 am

This story presents a false equivalence between sixteen politically motivated
scientists, mostly energy physicists, publishing in a right-of-center
newspaper on one side, and the vast majority - 97% in one survey - of climate
scientists, who publish in the actual peer-reviewed scientific journals on the
other. Also sounding the alarm on climate change are the National Academies of
every advanced nation, including our own, and the laborious and incredibly
detailed and carefully edited IPCC process. Presenting this as a controversy
is like presenting the debate about whether men landed on the moon as a
controversy. The so-called debate continues only because of oil-industry
funded think tanks with deep pockets.

                    
                                                8. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cb534aa4810401b4e36f9d1d563d59e2?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Red Jeff says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 3:54 am

Anna do you mean the $26 million that Chesapeake Gas paid the Sierra Club?
"The Sierra Club quietly accepted $26 million in donations from gas industry
interests from 2007 to 2010 — years when the group’s national leaders were
talking up gas as a cleaner, greener “bridge fuel” alternative to coal…  
New York state anti-fracking activist Walter Hang, president of the
environmental data service Toxics Targeting, called the disclosure “incredibly
embarrassing. … It basically looks like they're shilling for the No. 2 natural
gas producer in America.” dubya dubya
dubya.politico.com/news/stories/0212/72581.html

Oh and just so you know, one of the signers of the Wall Street Journal piece
(Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 astronaut) actually really really really DID
WALK ON THE MOON!!!!!!!!!

                    
                                                9. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 1:14 am

One minor detail: According to HadCRUt3 (the climategate guyz), it has cooled
over the last 10 years (going by linear trend). And the ever-changing HadCRU
and GHCN calculations have been called into serious question.

Much of perceived warming is spurious: an artifact of poor station siting.

Going by the raw data of well sited stations, warming is real -- but
exaggerated by about a factor of two over the last 30 years. The "adjustment"
procedure does not adjust the trends of poorly sited stations DOWNward to
match the well sited stations. Instead, it adjusts the well sited station
trends UPward to match the poorly sited station trends. (Stations rated
according to Leroy, et al., 2010, raw and adjusted trend data from Fall, et
al., 2011.)

Unfortunately we can only judge station microsite quality back to around 1980,
as site information is either irredeemably crude or simply unavailable.

                    
                                                10. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 1:34 pm

The Earth HAS NOT cooled over the last 10 years.  
1. You need to look at both ATMOSPHERE and OCEAN temperatures /heat content  
2. The TOTAL heat content of the earth has been increasing steadily for a long time,  
(see a graph at http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2009/10/10/204783/skeptical-
science-global-warming-not-cooling-is-still-happening-ocean-heat-content/)  
3. The atmosphere contains only about 10% of the heat being absorbed by the earth  
4. The high temp im 1998 was caused by strong el nino event, which dumped extra heat ino the atmosphere  
5. When looking at climate, you need to look at trends, which occur over decades, and not such short periods as 10 years. The Earth has been warming at roughly 0.15-0.20°C per decade since 1975  
6. Poor station siting is NOT a problem. A group of "deniers" tried to prove this and ended up confirming global warming (see http://articles.latimes.com/2011/apr/04/local/la-me-climate-berkeley-20110404)
                    
                                                11. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 1:00 am

Where to begin?

-- No skeptic I have ever met claims there has been no warming since 1900. Or
since 1980. Every skeptic I know is part of the "97%".

-- Surface temperatures have cooled, even after "adjustment". (Using raw data,
the cooling is considerably greater.)

-- The Argo buoys (the only reliable source) show no ocean warming since they
came online in 2005. Three out of four recent studies indicate less heat
content.

-- The term "deniers" is quite offensive. It is a very deliberate reference to
holocaust deniers. Kindly do not employ that term. And neither of the top co-
authors of the Berkeley team (Muller or Curry) is a skeptic. But that gets
into personalities and is beside the point. What matters is the science.

Poor siting does matter. Tmean trends are not different using the highly
flawed Leroy (1999) rating system, which accounts only for distance to the
nearest heat source or sink but makes no account whatever of heat sink area
within given radius. We used to have a joke: "All Class 4 stations are equal,
but some are more equal than others."

Fortunately, Leroy (2010) readdresses this issue and takes area of heat
source/sink into account. Using this method, Class 1 & 2 stations warm
significantly slower than Class 3 - 5. Class 1\2 raw data shows half the
warming of the adjusted figure for Class 1 - 5 from 1979 - 2008. The sample
set is quite robust: over 1000 USHCN stations (no with no cherrypicking
whatever).

-- If you want to consider trends, consider that HadCRUt3 shows a near-equal
amount of warming from 1901 to 1950 as from 1951 - 2000. And the positive PDO
periods during each of those times shows the same slope as well. Yet CO2
emissions did not start to take off until 1950. Therefore, CO2 is not likely
to be the main driver, although I do believe it has a limited effect on the
climate.

-- Going forward, the feedback debate is what is going to decide the issue.
Raw forcing of CO2 is no emergency. It only matters if that effect is
multiplied via the mechanisms put forth by the IPCC. But feedback is highly
disputed aty this time and does not appear to apply to the 20th century.

-- I agree that the globe has warmed. The question is how much.
Instrumentation and methods therefore become very important. NOAA and the Met
office need to publish their full and complete adjustment procedure will full
code and manuals so it can be reproduced independently. (The homogenization
code alone doesn't cut it.)

                    
                                                12. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9fa2185f31830c4abc450f354a974793?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bob Ward says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 8:13 am

I'm afraid that this discussion of temperature trends is poorly informed.

If one considers global average annual temperature measurements from the last
10 years, you have just 10 data points. You can plot these and use simple
linear regression (although this is not actually how you should analyse annual
temperatures) to obtain a trend - it is negative (ie cooling). But the trend
is not statistically significant ie you cannot be sure that there is no
cooling trend. If you take the previous 10 data points (ie annual temperatures
from 2001 to 2010) and plot these, you obtain a very slight cooling trend, but
again it is not statistically significant. If you plot the previous 10 data
points (ie annual temperatures from 2000 to 2009), you find a positive warming
trend, but again it is not statistically significant.

Indeed if you plot each of the 10-consecutive-year periods since 1970, you
find that only five of these 33 periods shows a statistically significant
trend. Does this mean there has not really been any warming since 1970? Of
course not. Plot the entire set of 42 data points and you find a very strong
and unambiguous warming trend that is statistically significant. More
explanation can be found here:
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/Media/Commentary/2012/February/anthropogenic-
global-warming-1997.aspx

The plain fact is that trying to detect and measure underlying trends in very
small and noisy sets of just 10 temperature data points is very poor
statistical practice. It is laughable that Dr Happer should be relying on such
flawed reasoning, and it is astounding that Science World on Voice of America
should actually be promoting such unscientific nonsense.

                    
                                                13. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 1:50 pm

What matters is the science - you are correct.  
Think of climate change science as 100-leg stool in soft sand. If a few legs
need to be made longer or shorter or to be removed (as is what happens in
science), the stool still stands as firm as ever. So some "sightings" might be
poor or a few buoys might not show warming- so what? The science is still
undeniable - if we continue burning fossil fuels at the current accelerating
rate the Earth WILL warm to such an extent that the Earth's climate WILL be
severely impacted. The EXACT dates cannot be determined with any accuracy, but
there is a very high probability that by the end of the century things could
be really bad. The major factors are climate sensitivity (which is known
reasonable well for decadal response times (about 3 degrees C), the amount of
CO2 in the atmosphere now, the amount being added each year, and the yearly
increase in these amounts. With those factors, you can compute an expected
“equilibrium” temperature. Climate models can then give an idea of the ways
the climate can change, which will be due to more heat in the atmosphere,
rising sea temperatures, more moisture in the atmosphere, etc. Scientists
cannot say for certain what will happen, but can say that there is a very high
probability that we need to keep the temperature rise under 2 degrees C. And
according to the IPCC, even the widely accepted target of a rise in
temperatures of two degrees Centigrade above pre-industrial levels would cause
major disruption. Can you show me any SCIENCE which contradicts any this?  
I don't think there is any SIGNIFICANT disagreement on how much the Earth has
warmed (.8 degrees since 1750) and .1-.2 degrees C per decade since 1975. The
Earth is still in an “energy imbalance” mode, where more energy is being
received from the Sun than is being radiated into space – so the Earth will
continue to warm.

                    
                                                14. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 1:11 am

The problem is that 85 of the 100 legs are off-kilter.

Only 15% of climate stations are Class 1 or 2 (i.e., acceptable according to
NOAA's own standards). The rest are Class 3 or worse.

Obviously this affects the actual readings. This would not matter much, except
that it also affects the trends in a very big way. The adjustment procedures
of GISS, NOAA, and HadCRU make the matter worse rather than better by writing
off the correctly sited stations as "outliers" and doubling their trends to
match those of the poorly sited stations.

What I am saying is that, according to the Leroy (2010) rating system, the
temperature change over the last 30 years is exaggerated by roughly a factor
of two. This confirms a number of peer reviewed papers on the subject.

As for a warming of 2C, I consider it quite unlikely. Even stipulating that
the earth has warmed at the "adjusted" amount of 0.7C since 1900 (and I
suspect it's closer to +0.4C), we have a CO2 increase of 40% plus non-CO2
anthropogenic causes, plus natural recovery from the LIA. That leaves no room
for positive feedbacks whatever.

If we continue to increase CO2 use at our current rate, we will not even
increase current levels by 50% by the end of the century. Even if CO2 doubled
(very unlikely given all factors, including technological advance), we'd only
be 1C warmer without the feedback, for which there is zip empirical evidence.

Bottom line: no positive feedbacks -- or countering negative feedbacks -- and
there is no emergency whatever.

                    
                                                15. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:24 am

Global Temperatures Have Dropped 0.5C In The Last 12 Months  
http://discover.itsc.uah.edu/amsutemps/  
150 years of global warming (0.7C) going down the drain.

Perhaps the key point discovered by Smith was that by 1990, NOAA had deleted
from its datasets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers in service around
the globe.  
Now, 75% represents quite a drop in sampling population, particularly
considering that these stations provide the readings used to compile both the
Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN) and United States Historical
Climatology Network (USHCN) datasets.  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html  
Yet as disturbing as the number of dropped stations was, it is the nature of
NOAA’s “selection bias” that Smith found infinitely more troubling.  
It seems that stations placed in historically cooler, rural areas of higher
latitude and elevation were scrapped from the data series in favor of more
urban locales at lower latitudes and elevations. Consequently, post-1990
readings have been biased to the warm side not only by selective geographic
location, but also by the anthropogenic heating influence of a phenomenon
known as the Urban Heat Island Effect (UHI).  
For example, Canada’s reporting stations dropped from 496 in 1989 to 44 in
1991, with the percentage of stations at lower elevations tripling while the
numbers of those at higher elevations dropped to one. That’s right: As Smith
wrote in his blog, they left “one thermometer for everything north of LAT 65.”
And that one resides in a place called Eureka, which has been described as
“The Garden Spot of the Arctic” due to its unusually moderate summers.  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html

                    
                                                16. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:14 am

I seriously doubt that you ever looked into what Richard Muller had said about
your hero Mann and other dishonest members of your group. You can get up to
speed on it here:  
Climategate 'hide the decline' explained by Berkeley professor Richard A.
Muller  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8BQpciw8suk

                    
                                                17. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:20 am

One of Al Gore's (AGWers) main claim is that as CO2 rises temperatures rise,
that is in fact what they hockey stick disingenuously tries to show, however
while this sounds great and graph is pretty, historically and scientifically
it lacks credibility.

Let's look at CO2 and temperature historically:

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Carboniferous……….14…………………………800  
Permian……………… 16…………………………900  
Triassic……………… 17……………………….1750  
Jurassic……………… 16.5…………………….1950  
Cretaceous…………. 18……………………….1700  
Paleogene……………18…………………………500  
Carboniferous………14………………………… 800……………..14…………………………280

## The first thing one notices is how little correlation CO2 has with
temperature

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Carboniferous……………14…………………………800  
Neogene…………………. 14…………………………280

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Cretaceous……………. 18………………………1700  
Paleogene………………18………………………. 500

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Permian…………………16……………………….. 900  
Jurassic…………………16.5…………………….1950

                    
                                                18. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6f1824a29b5521c9f9ff0b276b3494a8?s=67&d=mm&r=g) paul says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 4:50 pm

Could you also tell me from where the money for the suites of "green"
scientist? because they cost a lot of money too, of course. Only the access to
a Cray computer which can make the previsions on a large scale and with so
many factors included cost hundred of thousand of dollars an hour.  
Or maybe they used a private PC?!?!

                    
                                                19. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 8:55 am

Anna: Do you actually believe this? "The so-called debate continues only
because of oil-industry funded think tanks with deep pockets." Why would the
oil industry have to fund anything regarding this when, at present, there is
nothing to take the place of oil for transportation and be reminded that oil
only provides .8% of the US's electrical needs. The oil companies do fund
alternate energy research and be reminded that how Shell and BP founded CRU in
1972. Also be reminded of how many different new ways the oil companies employ
to recover more oil from old fields. This information may be disagreeable to
you but it is true.

                    
                                                20. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9fa2185f31830c4abc450f354a974793?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bob Ward says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 10:42 am

It is amazing that such a misleading, ill-informed and poorly-researched
article could appear on the VOA website!

The opinion article published by the ‘Wall Street Journal’ was an attempt to
influence Republican Presidential hopefuls. It was a political intervention.
Very few of the authors have actually carried out or published any research on
climate change, and their views are at odds with the great weight of
scientific evidence.

By contrast, the views expressed by Dr Schmidt are consistent with the
conclusions drawn by the overwhelming majority of the world’s climate
scientists, as well as the United States National Academy of Sciences,
representing America’s best scientists, every other national science academy
in the world, and indeed every other major scientific organisation in the
world.

Here is what the most recent report by the US National Academy of Sciences
concluded:

“Climate change is occurring, is very likely caused primarily by the emission
of greenhouse gases from human activities, and poses significant risks for a
range of human and natural systems. Emissions continue to increase, which will
result in further change and greater risks. Responding to these risks is a
crucial challenge facing the United States and the world today and for many
decades to come.”

http://dels-old.nas.edu/basc/climate-change/ACC_Final_Report_Brief04.pdf

Remember, the National Academy of Sciences represents America’s best
scientists, who have scrutinised the work of climate researchers and the
evidence they have documented. The reputation and funding of the National
Academy does not depend on man-made climate change!

Dr Happer attempts to justify his views by claiming that man-made global
warming has “stopped”. He does not cite any scientific papers to support this
contention because there are none. His argument is entirely misleading and
based on very poor science and statistics. The warming of the Earth over the
past 40 years is clear and unambiguous. The data shows that the Earth has been
warming over the past 15 years as well, but the trend is not statistically
significant. But if you select any 15-consecutive-year period over the last 40
years you will find that many do not define a statistically significant
warming trend. That is because if you use too few data points you are unable
to distinguish a signal from the background noise. Dr Happer should know that.
It is all explained here:
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/Media/Commentary/2012/February/anthropogenic-
global-warming-1997.aspx

So please VOA, do make more effort next time to give your listeners and
readers a less misleading and inaccurate impression of the state of knowledge
about climate change.

                    
                                                21. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0264ec6840e54b91ac9b829c4a349582?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Michale says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 12:26 pm

The "debate" is only in the sphere of public policy and not the scientific
world. The "skeptics" are largely funded by the fossil fuel industry or the
few "scientists" that may have a different opinion and are largely brought to
the forefront by the industry to maintain a image of "doubt".  
All this is to keep the status quo. The tobacco industry did the same tactic
in regard to cancer and smoking, the oil/coal companies are following their
script.

                    
                                                22. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 2:23 pm

When NASA puts out a study supporting man-made global climate change they
should include a disclaimer showing how much money they are getting to promote
that belief.

If NASA was to report a study with results to the contrary, they would lose
hundreds of $millions in funding.

                    
                                                23. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6eb7ab1c609101345c2a532fe400abd4?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Ohio Engineer says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 2:31 pm

The Wall Street Journal (with ties to Rupert Murdock) often publishes articles
with questionable validity about global climate change. Veteran award-winning
NASA climatologist and "Storms of My Grandchildren" author James E. Hansen,
PhD gets my vote for both defining climate problems and proposing solutions!

                    
                                                24. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/48bcfa48dec324421da71adec73f43a0?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bob says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 2:07 am

Rupert Murdock is a member of the Church of AGW look it up fool.

                    
                                                25. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3ef908607572643e0f8a20ece97444ed?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jim Spriggs says:
                    

August 11, 2012 at 9:16 pm

No name calling, please.

Rupert Murdoch and his Newscorp may be practicing "green" behavior, but his
Fox "News" host-models consistently advocate on the side of the fossil fuel
industry. The only one who may be an exception is Bill O'Reilly.

Anyone here who watches Fox "News" can back me up on this.

                    
                                                26. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/840b4bba5897f763e245551e7918ad83?s=67&d=mm&r=g) David44 says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 8:48 pm

Thanks for a well written and balanced update on the climate debate. There is
indeed a debate. Arguments from authority by climate alarmists, as most of the
critical comments here are, no longer cut it. The debate is not that there has
been no warming, not about the Tyndall effect, not that there has been no
human contribution to climate; rather, it is about the amount of warming
caused by human contributions, whether warming is even harmful and if so, how
harmful, and the harmful economic effects on both developed and under-
developed societies of draconian "solutions" to the climate "problem.
Commenters here ascribe political motives and avarice to doubters yet ignore
political motives of climate alarmists and research funding motives of climate
scientists. Alarmist climate scientists dismiss out-of-hand the research and
hypothesis of Svensmark and others who postulate a cosmic ray amplifying
effect for solar energy yet accept with out question an unproven positive
feedback water vapor amplification on CO2 effects, upon which climate modelers
are wholly dependent for their alarmist predictions.  
BTW, one sentence in the article does not seem to follow the gist of Happers
argument. I think that  
"Dr. Happer finds it hard to believe the early phase of the warming, which he
says is the biggest part, was all independent of CO2 because its levels hadn’t
increased much before 1900." should read  
"…was all dependent on CO2…"  
not "was all independent of CO2"  
I think his argument is that 19th and early 20th century warming was largely
independent of CO2 because atmospheric CO2 concentrations had not yet risen to
levels sufficient to cause detectable warming. This view is widely accepted by
climate science, alarmist or otherwise.

                    
                                                27. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 11:15 pm

There is a real concern that we are going into a "Dangerous cooling cycle."

We may soon be looking into ways to warm the earth to ward off starvation and
death from cold on a global scale. Unfortunately we will have to be halfway
into an ice age before NASA admits they may be in error in their data and
computer model.

                    
                                                28. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3ef908607572643e0f8a20ece97444ed?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jim Spriggs says:
                    

August 11, 2012 at 9:32 pm

Hilarious!

Thanks for lampooning David44's post.

                    
                                                29. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 10:23 pm

Since this is a scientific issue, the only people whose views matter are
scientists, and there are no genuine skeptics regarding AGW in the climate
science community. There are of course cranks in every field, and climate
science is no exception - Richard Lindzen is one, Roy Spencer is another, but
their arguments are readily shown to be disingenuous and insincere at best,
and dishonest at worst - i.e. they are not genuinely held views by people of
intellectual integrity. Their arguments are readily and repeatedly disproven,
so they know they are not valid.

We know global warming is happening, that we are causing it, and that our
present path has already started to cause substantial changes to the global
climate, which will only become greater as time goes on. The issues now are
how bad it's going to get, and how soon - those are what we need to be working
on. AGW denial is a dangerous and dishonest distraction from the real issues.

                    
                                                30. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 12:16 am

Well I used to work for Caltech at a NASA facility and I know what the so-
called scientists were saying about AGW when they thought no one was
listening, so you can knock off the crap.

                    
                                                31. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 12:25 am

Not falling for that hoax Jose, sorry.

                    
                                                32. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 1:06 am

You fell for one of the greatest hoaxes in history, so I really don't care
what you causes you to fall.

I was a part time academic for a few years being paid by Caltech and I learned
a lot about how budgets at NASA funded.

                    
                                                33. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3ef908607572643e0f8a20ece97444ed?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jim Spriggs says:
                    

August 11, 2012 at 9:40 pm

As a "part-time academic" for Caltech, and in light of your contempt for your
fellow academicians and scientists, I'm sure they were glad to see you go.

                    
                                                34. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cb534aa4810401b4e36f9d1d563d59e2?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Red Jeff says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 4:03 am

Ic, It's hard to take your arguement seriously when appeal to authority is
your only reasoning. Also refering to an MIT professor of atmospheric sciences
as a "crank" shows a very limited understanding of the science.

                    
                                                35. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 11, 2012 at 11:34 pm

> Jose says:  
>  February 11, 2012 at 11:15 pm  
>  There is a real concern that we are going into a “Dangerous cooling cycle.”

No, there isn't. Fake concern, perhaps.

                    
                                                36. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 1:12 am

We shall see.

                    
                                                37. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 5:43 pm

Global cooling killing millions of bats

Federal researchers say an infectious and lethal cold-loving fungus sweeping
through parts of North America and Canada has killed millions more bats over
the last five years than previously estimated.

The rapidly spreading fungus responsible for white-nose syndrome is now
believed to have killed 5.7 million to 6.7 million bats, a count several times
higher than earlier estimates, across 16 states as far west as Oklahoma.

                    
                                                38. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/840b4bba5897f763e245551e7918ad83?s=67&d=mm&r=g) David44 says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 7:28 pm

Jose,  
I'm on your side in this debate, but you need to get your facts straight. The
spread of the white-nose syndrome fungus is not a result of environmental
cooling. By cold-loving, it is meant that the fungus thrives in the cool
environment of bat caves. It has most likely been spread, at least initially,
by spelunkers going from cave to cave with out decontaminating themselves and
their gear just as boaters and fishermen inadvertently spread the New Zealand
mud snail from river to river by not decontaminating waders and boat bottoms.

                    
                                                39. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 8:00 pm

They weren't my facts but I suppose I am responsible for repeating them. When
you say "most likely" as how the fungus is spreading it does leave it open to
global cooling as a possiblity.

Temperature sensors were put next to air conditioners, airplane exhaust, paved
parking lots, etc. with resulting temperature increases. Then when the money
sucking "scientists" were busted they subtracted a small magic number to
compensate.

The axis of rotation for the molten spinning iron core in the earth could have
a geothermal affect on the polar ice that has nothing to do with the
atmosphere.

The science of global climate change is complex and there most likely are many
variables that have not yet been accounted for.

                    
                                                40. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 11:54 pm

Jose, the rapidly melting ice all over the planet testifies to just how fast
we're heating up the climate system. Glacier National Park in the US has
already lost most of its glaciers. The Arctic will be ice-free in the summer
by 2015, give or take a year. The rapidity of anthropogenic global warming has
no analogue in the fossil record, not even in the mass extinction events
millions of years ago. That's because we're adding greenhouse gases to the
climate system about 10,000 times faster than nature normally does. This is a
planetary emergency and the main reason we're not making a wartime-scale
effort to avert disaster is that gullible people were taken in by the fossil
fuel industry's AGW denial fraud, constructed to protect their short term
profits. It's a great pity that the education system failed these people,
failed to give them a good grounding in science, reason, critical thinking.
We're all going to suffer for that failure.

                    
                                                41. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:23 am

Are you serious lacarus62? You need to read up on the actual science. Where is
ice melt a concern? Ice has been receding since the little ice age, which has
been without a doubt the most beneficial climatic shift for mankind since the
MWP. I guess you missed the study published in Nature showing that the
Himalayan glaciers have lost no ice over the last ten years. I guess they
won't be gone by 2035 as IPCC claimed. Heck, they wont be gone by 2350 either.
More ice in Arctic since 2007. Antarctica on balance gaining substantial ice.
You are not even close to right in any of your comments.  
All the pro CAGW points here have zero substance to them. Appeals to
authority, denigration of highly respected scientists, and no grasps of the
basic scientific arguments. Can any of the previous posters present a CAGW
hypothesis? What is the null hypothesis? Hypothetically speaking, if you
could, for the next 200 years lock in a higher average global temperature of
1.5 C or a lower average global temperature of 1.5 C, which would you choose?
And why? What are the economic impacts of increasing or decreasing
temperatures? And yes, average global temperature is a bogus concept i
realize, but these are interesting discussions to have if one is not so tied
to a dogmatic line of thinking, some of you really should try it.

                    
                                                42. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b654c75a2fa98f1895191ca7938eb692?s=67&d=mm&r=g) vbasic says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 5:09 am

The science and solutions are still in flux. But, assuming Man Made Global
Warming is true, what do the scientists want? "Decarbonize".  
Let's see. Just in the last couple of weeks, EPA regulations have forced US
utilities to close older coal fired plants. Six will close here in North East
Ohio. Already, we will be scrambling to replace lost power and were warned to
prepare for our bills to go up.  
Meanwhile, India and the Chinese build the equivalent of one coal plant every
week and no one seems to care. China sells more cars to its citizens then the
US and India's car industry is booming. It seems the point of decarbonize is
to reduce the West to the Third World while letting China and India do what
they will.  
So there is no way people in the West will agree to that. Citizens will resist
this international government overreach which has a Socialist Leftist
undertone. It's not only about "decarbonizing" but also the Left's favorite
goals of centralized control and punishing (in their view) the materialistic
West.

                    
                                                43. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 10:38 am

We're not going to 'decarbonise'. Not by choice, anyway. The most likely
scenario is that we burn most of the fossil fuels we can get our hands on,
without any significant emissions reductions. The only way to avoid large
global warming is to reduce our emissions virtually to zero in the next couple
of decades, and clearly that's not going to happen. There is too much profit
to be had and we can't run global civilisation on wind turbines and solar
panels - we won't stop using fossil fuels, because we can't. Hence we're
heading back to the hotter climate state of millions of years ago. Perhaps the
most pertinent question is how much more carbon we can get out of the ground
and burn before the devastating effects of climate chaos cause a sufficient
collapse of global civilisation to substantially reduce emissions for us.

                    
                                                44. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2ac6e999bd8bad6dc446c4a338cb64cc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) richare says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 3:18 pm

Yes,you west have enjoyed car and other oil-powered vehicel for dacades and
dacades,why not let chinese and indian share the results of industry?

                    
                                                45. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5bf090386743e2c21a02862050d3357b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Ecowarrior says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 6:20 am

This winter,global cooling is felt.Is this the result of the emission of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere by human activities?

                    
                                                46. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 12, 2012 at 1:24 pm

This article is typical of the coverage on climate change – in an attempt be
“balanced”, it covers the issue as if it were horse race, choosing just enough
tidbits to sound balanced as the race proceeds. Unfortunately, the article
excludes two very important facts – the Wall Street Journal had earlier
refused to publish a similar letter from 255 scientists from the National
Academy of Sciences that supported the mainstream view on climate change. And,
more importantly, all of the “science” that the 16 scientists include in the
article has been thoroughly debunked real climate scientists (see
http://theconversation.edu.au/we-do-need-drastic-action-on-climate-change-a-
response-to-the-wall-street-journal-5059 and
http://www.climatesciencewatch.org/2012/02/01/like-dentists-practicing-
cardiology-climate-scientists-respond-to-wall-street-journal/. The latter
article contains “In a letter to the WSJ, 38 climate science experts call down
Rupert Murdoch’s newspaper for publishing an op-ed ("No Need to Panic About
Global Warming") "by the climate-science equivalent of dentists practicing
cardiology. While accomplished in their own fields," the climate scientists'
letter says, "most of these authors have no expertise in climate science. The
few authors who have such expertise are known to have extreme views that are
out of step with nearly every other climate expert." As Stephen Schneider told
us in an interview on his climate science expert credibility study, "It really
matters what your credentials are. We’re talking about planetary life support.
That’s why it’s so important to understand who’s credible."). As a graduate of
MIT, I’m embarrassed that an MIT professor would sign a letter that is so full
of misinformation and only serves to distort the real understanding of the
issues.

                    
                                                47. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 1:34 am

The wheels are coming off CAGW science.

Yes, I do believe in AGW. But Size Matters. (Not to mention the Motion of the
Ocean.)

The only possible reason for serious concern is positive feedback. CO2 warming
alone poses no danger whatever. The IPCC estimates that positive feedback will
increase warming by four- to fivefold (mainstream scenario). Yet there is zip
empirical evidence of positive feedback and growing evidence of negative
feedback coming into play.

CO2 doubling is believed to have a raw effect of c. +1C. We added 40% during
the 20th century (and 4% over the last flat-to-cooling decade). It is quite
unlikely that the amount will be doubled by 2100. Not only are diminishing
returns coming into play, but CO2 persistence time is still very much
disputed.

The solar issue is still quite moot, so I am not commenting on that other than
to say that if TSI is the relevant factor, there will be little effect on
climate and if solar wind is the relevant factor, there may be considerable
effect. As we may be approaching a Grand Minimum (The Ad Ho Minimum?), we may
be about to find out.

                    
                                                48. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cbc149fcc3ad6c03897bb040e2d8fd4e?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jean Demesure says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 10:53 am

When people believe a warmer, wetter and with more plants food (aka CO2) would
be a catastrophe, merchant of fear can make them believe in anything

                    
                                                49. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/840b4bba5897f763e245551e7918ad83?s=67&d=mm&r=g) David44 says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 4:48 pm

Evan Jones, I agree. Consider the following:  
The fatal flaw

Several years ago Danish scientists, Henrik Svensmark and Eigil Friis-
Christensen proposed a theory linking global climate with the activity of the
sun, via cosmic rays.  
Svensmark's subsequent lab results demonstrated an observed link between
cosmic rays and cloud formation. Whether the CLOUD study now underway at CERN
will confirm this on a larger scale is a matter of conjecture at this point.  
Critics of Svensmark's theory point out that, while it may have shown fairly
good correlation with global temperature in earlier years the link after
around the mid-1980s is poor.  
This is often referred to as the "fatal flaw" in Svensmark's theory.  
This argument may be valid, but it raises the question:  
Is there an actually observed link between atmospheric CO2 concentration and
global temperature?  
The Hadley Centre has a published record of "monthly globally averaged land
and sea surface temperature" that goes back to 1850.  
http://hadobs.metoffice.com/hadcrut3/diagnostics/global/n … …  
Actual measurements of atmospheric CO2 concentration only started in 1958.  
http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/co2_data_mlo.htm … …  
IPCC estimates based on ice core readings go back to pre-industrial times.
These show an estimated gradual increase from around 285 ppm in 1850 to 315
ppm in 1958, when actual measurements started. See the IPCC 2007 SPM report:  
http://ipcc-wg1.ucar.edu/wg1/Report/AR4WG1_Print_SPM.pdf  
CO2 concentrations have risen steadily over the entire period. The rate of
increase has accelerated slightly over the period, particularly following
WWII.  
Global temperatures have risen over the period, but a closer look at the
record shows that this has been anything but steady.  
Period…….Trend….Years..Change  
1860-1879 +0.196 20 +0.39  
1879-1906 -0.047 27 -0.13  
1906-1940 +0.161 35 +0.56  
1940-1976 -0.020 36 -0.07  
1976-1998 +0.175 22 +0.39  
1998-2008 0.000 10 .0.00  
Trend is linear decadal trend in degreesC/decade  
Change is linear change over period in degreesC  
Over the past 150 years since the record started temperature has increased by
around 1.1C.  
Between 1850 and around 1860 there was a slight cooling trend.  
This trend reversed to a warming trend for the next 20 years until around 1879
(at +0.196C per decade this period shows the highest decadal rate of increase
since records have been taken) and represents around 30% of the total warming
recorded since 1850. There was essentially no increase in CO2 during these
"horse and buggy" years.  
This was followed by another cooling trend until around 1906 (-0.047C per
decade).  
Then came another warming trend until around 1940 (+0.161C per decade),
representing around 40% of the total warming recorded since 1850.  
This period was followed by a slight cooling trend until around 1976 (-0.02C
per decade), during the post-war boom period of rapid increase in CO2  
Following this, we had a trend with the second highest decadal rate of
increase (+0.175C per decade) from 1976 to around 1998. This trend occurred
during a period of rapid CO2 increase and represented 30% of the total warming
from 1850 to today. This period has gotten a lot of attention as evidence of
anthropogenic greenhouse warming (AGW).  
Since the end of the 20th century, this rapid warming trend has stopped. Over
the ten-year period since 1998 there has actually been a very slight cooling
trend, despite the continued high rate of increase of CO2. Starting the trend
with the year 2001 rather than the strong El Niño year 1998 shows the same
flat to slight cooling trend.  
In summary, there were three warming periods that contributed to the overall
warming plus two periods of cooling and the most recent "plateau" showing
essentially no change.  
And it appears that last 25 years of the 20th century provide the only
observed link between CO2 and temperature.  
The immediately preceding period had CO2 increase with cooling.  
The immediately ensuing period since the end of the 20th century shows slight
cooling with high increase in CO2.  
The late 19th century warming period showed the highest rate of temperature
increase of all periods recorded, with essentially no CO2 increase whatsoever.  
The early 20th century warming period also showed warming, with relatively
small increase in CO2.  
In summary, the actually observed data show that there does not appear to be a
very "robust" link between atmospheric CO2 concentration and global
temperature.  
IPCC has used the late 20th century warming cycle to demonstrate the
anthropogenic cause stating in its AR4 WG1 report Chapter 9 (p.681):  
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1- …  
"The simulations also show that it is not possible to reproduce large 20th-
century warming without anthropogenic forcing regardless of which solar or
volcanic forcing reconstruction is used,… stressing the impact of human
activity on the recent warming."  
In other words, since no other cause can be identified to explain the observed
warming other than anthropogenic forcing (from greenhouse gases), this must be
the cause by default.  
This assumption is based on the rather weak foundation of greenhouse theory,
25 years of observation, model studies, and conjecture.  
Most damaging for this assumption is the fact that no analysis has been made
of the two prior warming periods in order to support this suggestion, despite
the fact that these periods together count for 70% of the warming observed
over the entire record.  
Strangely IPCC does not even mention the late 19th century period that showed
the highest decadal rate of temperature rise of all periods since measurements
started. Nor has an analysis been made to determine the causes for this period
of rapid warming. It is obvious that it could not have been caused by
increased CO2, as there was no significant increase. Sunspot records show no
unusual solar activity that could have been a factor. What, then, were these
"unexplained" causes? Why have they not been investigated?  
As regards the warming period of the early 20th century, IPCC states (p.691):  
"Detection and attribution as well as modelling studies indicate more
uncertainty regarding the causes of early 20th-century warming than the recent
warming."  
Again there are apparently "unexplained" causes resulting in "uncertainty",
but, again, no studies have been made to clear up this uncertainty and attempt
to understand how large an impact these "unexplained" causes might have had.  
Could these same "unexplained" causes have been the principle forcing factor
for the late 20th century warming, rather than the assumed "anthropogenic
forcing" from greenhouse gases? How can we be sure this is not the case?  
Only by making these analyses and clearly identifying that there were no major
"unexplained" factors in the two earlier warming periods can one make the
claim that AGW is the predominant forcing factor for late 20th century warming  
To simply assert that this is so "by default" since no other explanation can
be found is no argument at all.

                    
                                                50. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 11:33 am

Svensmarck may (or may not) be right. In any event, it looks as if we're about
to find out!

It's true that CO2 and temperatures don't correlate very well. I think CO2 is
an underlying fingerprint, but is relatively minor and just one of several
influences. I believe that other anthropogenic influences are greater than CO2
(such as land use, deforestation, soot accumulation in the Arctic, etc.).

As for heat budget, we are finally just beginning to develop tools to measure
that. We'll find out about that, too. And feedbacks.

Yes, kids, there is definitely a legitimate debate here. And one heck of a lot
to learn.

                    
                                                51. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0cd0586f01c99dc04268502d3458c839?s=67&d=mm&r=g) John Dodds says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 2:15 am

IPCC says that ONLY solar insolation causes warming. So that means that there
is no such thing as the Moon's gravity causing tidal energy, and there is no
such thing as Decay Heat from disintegrating Uranium etc causing 52% of the
Earth's Temperature (Nature Geoscience July 2011), and no such thig as the
variable orbit of Jupiter and Saturn causing warming and cooling. Since the
Moon's orbit causes the variable tidal energy, why doesn't the 60 year cycle
caused by Jupiter and Saturns resonance orbit cause the 60 year warming
cooling cycle in the temperature record (eg 1500 warms to 1530 & cools to
1560, Hadcrut temp measurements show warming to 1880, cooling to 1910, warming
to 1940, cooling to 1970, warming to 1998, cooling thru now etc  
Sorry but you all can NOT just claim CO2 "causes" without some basic
scientific justification and logic. If CO2 causes then just where is all this
hotter than the air CO2?. The CO2 is AT THE SAME temperature as the air. Just
because some idiot IPCC researchers claim that the sun's solar insolation does
NOT cause warming, does NOT mean that some other unknown cause (eg gravity)
can NOT cause it. Basic science says CO2 is totally incapable of creating
energy. It can NOT cause warming unless you can identify the source of the
energy. YOU HAVE NOT DONE THAT. END of absurd discussion.

                    
                                                52. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 5:10 pm

"Basic science says CO2 is totally incapable of creating energy" - absolutely
true - but totally irrelevant

"It can NOT cause warming unless you can identify the source of the energy"
-Easy - the source is the infrared radiation from the Earth's surface - the
CO2 absorbs the radiation and warms up. It's all part of the "greenhouse
effect', which is why the Earth supports life and why the Moon is cold.

                    
                                                53. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 11:25 am

"The plain fact is that trying to detect and measure underlying trends in very
small and noisy sets of just 10 temperature data points is very poor
statistical practice."

On the other hand, what you are doing (plotting from 1970) is including a
period from 1976 - 2001 where all six of the major oceanic-atmospheric
oscillations (PDO, AMO, NAO,SO, AO,AAO) flipped from cool phase to warm phase
-- entirely on schedule. You bet your boots there was "a very strong and
unambiguous warming trend that is statistically significant".

But the 1976 - 2001 slope is almost identical to the 1910 - 1940 period when
the PDO was in warm phase. And prior to 1950 there was little CO2 emitted
compared with the 1950 - 2000 period. Same degree of warming, greatly
different levels of CO2 emission. Therefore CO2 is demonstrated not to be the
primary driver.

(This begs the question of whether the surface stations were intended to or
are even capable of making such fine measurements -- which they're not.)

                    
                                                54. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 3:50 pm

Author: Bruce Parker  
Comment:  
To see why a trace gas like CO2 can drive the climate, just look at the
science.  
1. If there was no CO2 in the atmosphere, the Earth's temperature would be about 60 degrees colder than it is (not sure 60 is right, but that's about the right amount)  
2. Doubling CO2 to 560 pmm (from the amount in 1750) will raise the Earth's temp about 1.5 degrees all by itself  
3. As the atmosphere warms, it holds more water vapor, and that adds significantly to the temp.  
4. The final result is a about at 3 degree warming for a doubled CO2 in the short run. 

This is not speculation. I know it's hard to believe that a trace gas can have
such an influence, but the effect can be shown with simple physics and math

Wow Bruce, did you really graduate from MIT? Hard to believe. Do they have a
good liberal arts program? So you propose that CO2 by itself raises the
temperature of the planet by 60 degrees? That is a completely ignorant
statement. And if it were true, how would doubling CO2 only raise the
temperature by another 1.5 degrees???? How does that make any sense? You have
no idea what you are talking about. It is very sad when a supposed graduate of
MIT, ridicules a brilliant and highly accomplished fellow alum, all the while
displaying a complete lack of understanding of the basic science of the
matter.

                    
                                                55. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 5:50 pm

Greenhouse gas forcings are straightforward calculations from the
spectroscopic properties of the gas molecules - they are not in dispute.
That's why even so-called 'skeptical' scientists such as Richard Lindzen agree
that the 'no feedback' warming from a doubling of atmospheric CO₂ is around
1°C.

If we know that the Earth has a radiative imbalance of 3.7W/m², which is the
magnitude of the forcing from doubled atmospheric CO₂ (from 280 to 50ppm), we
can use the Stefan-Boltzmann equation to work out how much it has to warm up
in order for outgoing radiation to increase by 3.7W/m² and thereby return to
equilibrium. Agreed? That gives us the 'no feedback' warming, and it's almost
exactly 1°C.

The only _genuine_ debate (not including dishonest nonsense from the AGW
denialist hoaxers) is over positive feedbacks, which Lindzen argues are non-
existent, but the rest of the climate science community finds to be
substantial, amplifying global warming by about 3 times in the short term from
fast feedbacks (mainly water vapour and floating ice) and possibly twice as
much again from slow feedbacks (ice sheets, greenhouse gases etc.).

From 1900 to 2010, CO₂ rose from about 290 to 380ppm. Can we agree on that?
The 'no-feedback' warming would therefore be calculated as follows:

ΔF = 5.35 * ln(C/C₀)  
= 5.35 * ln(380/290)  
= 1.44W/m²

ΔT = ΔF * 0.27 (because as everyone agrees, the 'no feedback' warming from CO₂
is about 1°C from a doubling of CO₂, and a doubling of CO₂ is a forcing of
about 3.7W/m², and hence the no-feedback climate sensitivity would be 1/3.7 =
0.27°C/W/m²).

Therefore ΔT in this scenario is 1.44 * 0.27 = 0.39°C at equilibrium. Climate
inertia means that we would expect to see about 60% of that in 2010, i.e.
about 0.23°C.

As you're no doubt aware, we have seen much more warming in the period than
that - about 0.7°C, or 3 times as much. Numerous studies show that net natural
temperature change over this period would have been roughly zero in the
absence of anthropogenic forcings, and we know that the net anthropogenic
forcing is about equivalent to the CO₂ forcing, so this 0.7°C of warming can
be attributed to the anthropogenic increase in atmospheric CO₂.

Clearly the existence of large positive feedback is very much supported by
this data - in fact, a factor of 3 (i.e. 0.27/0.23=3.04) is precisely what
climate scientists are citing as the best estimate for fast feedback climate
sensitivity, as Bruce correctly says.

                    
                                                56. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:20 pm

How many years was the flat earth theory "not in dispute?"

Someone above mentioned the Argo buoys as the only reputable tool to determine
whether or not we are warming and so far the verdict is cooling.

You can take pieces of science and try to extrapolate it out to some political
agenda but reality is reality.

                    
                                                57. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:33 pm

So you agree with Bruce saying that CO2 is responsible for 60 degrees (or
approximately so) of the planets temperature?

The existance of positive feedbacks is anything but settled! Do you assume the
temperature of the planet will stay the same if "man caused" atmospheric Co2
output were eliminated? If so, you ignore the entire history of the planet. If
not, than what is the level of natural variation not attributed to Co2, and
what is its cause? (since you are so sure on the precise impact of CO2 this
should be easy for you). What were the primary drivers of the planet's climate
coming out of the Little Ice Age, prior to industrialization? Why have
temperatures level off, no temp increase or a slight decrease over the last 15
years, even though CO2 levels continue to rise? Negative Feedbacks perhaps.
How much of the rise in CO2 levels over the last couple hundred years is due
to man's burning of fossil fuels, 100%??? Why had it changed so dramatically
prior to industrialization?  
Finally answer this. If most climate experts believe in positive feedbacks of
3x's in the short term, multiplied by 2x in the long term, as you claim, where
is the steelply rising curve of temperature over the last 15 years? And
shouldn't "long term x 2 " have kicked in already for all of the CO2 added
from the 50's through the 90's. Your claims are preposterous based on the
actual temperature data. Have you checked out the satellite data on
atmospheric temps? How about the Argo data? Where is the accellerating
temperatures? Go back and read all of the model predictions your camp likes to
parrot about. How many years of failure will it take for you to admit that the
models have been extremely poor predictors in the short term, therefore
worthless in forecasting the long term. Really, under what circumstances will
you admit that the theory of catastrophic global warming is hogwash?

                    
                                                58. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 3:13 am

Ask him how much of his career is invested in this idea.

                    
                                                59. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 8:37 pm

answer to lacarus62….  
No one with a brain disputes the greenhouse effect or that CO2 contributes
some warming. Your argument is essentially that since you can't explain the
difference between what you calculate to be the primary effect of added CO2
(excluding feedbacks) that it must be due to a positive feedback. REALLY? It
must be? Does your statement follow the scientific method. How about a change
in aerosols? How about a change in cloud cover due to a flux in cosmic rays?

Again, can you explain the changes in climate prior to mankind burning
significant amounts of fossil fuels? Or do you believe that climate was static
until we started screwing it up? You and bruce seem to ignore all of the
question i pose.

                    
                                                60. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:10 am

It would be simple and probably nice if the earth's climate and ocean actions
could be explained with something as simple as a trace gas, carbon dioxide,
that makes up .035-8% of the atmosphere and 15.1% of the ocean's makeup but
only simple people could believe such a thing. They should know just how
dynamic and complex the climate is and all of the factors that affect it
before making such a flawed judgment. Here are some sites to look into, if you
care to. The biggest flows out of the atmosphere are photosynthesis on land
and CO2 uptake by cold ocean water. These are about 30 times and 40 times
respectively the flow of carbon into the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning.
What follows also adre3sses the utterly insane allegation that CO2 is
increasing the acidity of the oceans.

"The pycnocline (meaning rapid change of density) separates the surface layer
of the ocean from the deep ocean. Deep ocean water has a temperature of about
3 degrees Celsius and a salinity measuring about 34-35 psu." (What does all of
this do to the ocean's pH? Where and what depth are your pH observations taken
from?)  
http://www.windows2universe.org/earth/Water/deep_ocean.html

"The interaction between water temperature and salinity effects density and
density determines thermohaline circulation, or the global conveyor belt. The
global conveyor belt is a global-scale circulation process that occurs over a
century-long time scale. Water sinks in the North Atlantic, traveling south
around Africa, rising in the Indian Ocean or further on in the Pacific, then
returning toward the Atlantic on the surface only to sink again in the North
Atlantic starting the cycle again." (Again, your narrow time span makes your
worries groundless if you are looking at 20-30 years and who & where and at
what depths were these readings taken regarding PH? Also NASA seems to want to
compress this circulation time span into centuries when most believe it is at
least a thousand year cycle)  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” [The
Global Conveyer Belt has suddenly stopped for several speculated reason in the
past and caused dramatic and rapid climate changes always to the cold side;
therefore, warm is preferable to cold any day]  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water temperature increases, the increased mobility of gas molecules make
them escape from the water, thereby reducing the amount of gas dissolved.
[Could this be why warming forces the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere by
hundreds years & not what the alarmist want one to believe that it is the CO2
that is causing the warming?]  
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/oceano/seawater.htm

"It is thought that the carbon dioxide in the sea exists in equilibrium with
that of exposed rock and bottom sediment containing limestone CaCO3 (or sea
shells for that matter). In other words, that the element calcium exists in
equilibrium with CO3. But the concentration of Ca (411ppm) is 10.4 mmol/l and
that of all CO2 species (90ppm) 2.05 mmol/l, of which CO3 is about 6%, thus
0.12 mmol/l. Thus the sea has a vast oversupply of calcium. It is difficult
therefore to accept that decalcification could be a problem as CO3 increases.
To the contrary, it should be of benefit to calcifying organisms. Thus the
more CO2, the more limestone is deposited. This has also been borne out by
measurements (Budyko 1977)." [maybe, just maybe as with so many things in
nature, this is a self-regulating factor that has been taking care of the
ocean's pH without humans having one thing to do with it]  
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/issues/global/acid.htm

                    
                                                61. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:24 pm

You show your extreme ignorance of climate change science by making
accusations that are incredibally uniformed on basic science. The paragraphs
below are from the NOAA Web site
(http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/globalwarming.html) and confirms my #1
above. If you look at other science-based Web sites, you will find
confirmation of the other three points. I challenge you to refute my points.
Otherwise I think I'm due an appology.

            1. What is the greenhouse effect, and is it affecting our climate?

The greenhouse effect is unquestionably real and helps to regulate the
temperature of our planet. It is essential for life on Earth and is one of
Earth's natural processes. It is the result of heat absorption by certain
gases in the atmosphere (called greenhouse gases because they effectively
'trap' heat in the lower atmosphere) and re-radiation downward of some of that
heat. Water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas, followed by carbon
dioxide and other trace gases. Without a natural greenhouse effect, the
temperature of the Earth would be about zero degrees F (-18°C) instead of its
present 57°F (14°C). So, the concern is not with the fact that we have a
greenhouse effect, but whether human activities are leading to an enhancement
of the greenhouse effect by the emission of greenhouse gases through fossil
fuel combustion and deforestation.

                    
                                                62. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:30 pm

(May have accitentally posted this in the wrong place below)  
You show your extreme ignorance of climate change science by making
accusations that are incredibally uniformed on basic science. The paragraphs
below are from the NOAA Web site
(http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/globalwarming.html) and confirms my #1
above. If you look at other science-based Web sites, you will find
confirmation of the other three points. I challenge you to refute my points.
Otherwise I think I’m due an appology.

            1. What is the greenhouse effect, and is it affecting our climate?

The greenhouse effect is unquestionably real and helps to regulate the
temperature of our planet. It is essential for life on Earth and is one of
Earth’s natural processes. It is the result of heat absorption by certain
gases in the atmosphere (called greenhouse gases because they effectively
‘trap’ heat in the lower atmosphere) and re-radiation downward of some of that
heat. Water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas, followed by carbon
dioxide and other trace gases. Without a natural greenhouse effect, the
temperature of the Earth would be about zero degrees F (-18°C) instead of its
present 57°F (14°C). So, the concern is not with the fact that we have a
greenhouse effect, but whether human activities are leading to an enhancement
of the greenhouse effect by the emission of greenhouse gases through fossil
fuel combustion and deforestation.

                    
                                                63. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 6:42 pm

Bruce, no one doubts the existance of the greenhouse effect. Please cite your
evidence for a positive feedback mechanism from CO2 forcings.  
without that CAGW cannot occur from increases in CO2 alone. You said CO2 was
responsible for 60 degrees of our temperature and that is flat out crazy. you
did not say the greenhouse effect in its entirety is responsible for 60
degrees, and even if you had, the numbers you cite to arrive at the 60 degree
figure whether CO2 is at 300 ppm or 500 and in of themselves say nothing about
the role of CO2 in the process. Answer some of my simple questions above to
show me why i should be worried about the increase of a trace gas in the
atmosphere that is essential to our biosphere.

                    
                                                64. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 7:10 pm

CO2 and it's feedbacks (water vapor,etc) are responsible for the 60 degrees
according to NASA. It may sound crazy and not be intuitive, but it's a fact.

For a great explanation of the role of CO2 search for "CO2 Control Knob".
Among the results are the following Web pages:  
http://blogs.nasa.gov/cm/blog/whatonearth/posts/post_1262067702260.html  
http://www.globalchangeblog.com/2010/10/co2-is-the-biggest-climate-control-
knob/

Let me know if you have any other simpe questions.

                    
                                                65. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 8:11 pm

NASA cannot even launch an astronaut into space. They are extremely desperate
for funding. Why should we listen to them?

                    
                                                66. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 8:31 pm

Bruce,  
Your simplistic and glib response illustrates your ignorance. Water Vapor is
not simply a feedback of CO2. Water vapor is the most prevelant and signficant
greenhouse gas. CO2's total contribution of the entire greenhouse effect is no
where near 60 degrees. While there is a theory that higher amounts of CO2 has
a positive feedback by increasing the content of water vapor in the atmosphere
that is not what you said. IF you can not understand the difference between
what you stated, what i called you on, and where you still make an ignorant
errror "CO2 and its feedbacks are responsible for 60 degrees…." you are a lost
cause.

But since you asked for another simple question, answer this if you can. What
is the cause of the increase in temperature coming out of the little ice age
prior to the industrialization of civilization?

                    
                                                67. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0cd0586f01c99dc04268502d3458c839?s=67&d=mm&r=g) John Dodds says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 2:25 am

Greenhouse gases do NOT trap heat. Where the hell IS all this trapped heat?
They absorb it & either pass it on (by collisions) or radiate it away.

                    
                                                68. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 11:22 pm

You are right - "They absorb it & either pass it on (by collisions) or radiate
it away." - that's what warms the atmosphere - and the more GHGs, the warmer
the atmosphere gets!

pass it on (by collisions) = warms the atmosphere

radiate it away (but at a lower energy) = to be absorbed by other GHG and the
cycle repeats - warming the atmosphere

the more GHGs, the warmer the atmosphere gets!

                    
                                                69. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 1:32 am

I dispute both of those premises.

We do know with relative certainly that the earth would be considerably cooler
if there were no CO2. We do not know by how much. And we also do not know for
sure where on the diminishing returns curve we stand.

What we do know is that after a rise of 40% of CO2, we have an adjusted
temperature increase of 0.7C, considerably lower if going by raw temperatures.

Second, without feedbacks, temperature would be expected to rise around 1C per
doubling of CO2. Not 1.5C for a <40% increase as you have stated.

Third, ambient vapor has increased very little. High-level clouds have also
increased very little. Those are positive feedbacks. What has increased
significantly is low-level cloud cover. That is a negative feedback.

More important, we have seen no evidence of positive feedback during the 20th
century. Surely if they were in play, we would have seen them by now. Or
perhaps these sensitivities are in play, but the forcing has been exaggerated.

The IPCC mainstream scenario is greater than +3C. This is four to five times
the rate of the adjusted trend of the 20th century. Perhaps 8 times or more
the raw trend. And considering the last decade of flat-to-cooling trend, that
goes up to 6 to 10 times the rate of warming that occurred last century.

Final result: If AGW wants to meet its +3C goal, it had better get off its
butt and get one heck of a move on. And I ain't seein' it.

What I am seeing is a negative PDO flip, a wavering AMO and NAO, and a
potential DeVries cycle Grand Minimum (degree and effects unknown, but clearly
not on the warm side).

                    
                                                70. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 9:29 pm

No, my simplistic response illustrates YOUR ignorance, because it's really
simple - increase CO2, temp goes up, you get more water vapor, etc. It is FACT
that is "higher amounts of CO2 has a positive feedback by increasing the
content of water vapor" - that is what I meant -sorry if it was not clear. And
it still seems that you don't believe NOAA when you write "where you still
make an ignorant error “CO2 and its feedbacks are responsible for 60
degrees….” you are a lost cause." Are climate scientists lost causes? What
will it take to convince you that you are wrong? I'd be delighted to look any
scientific arguments you have that support another thesis.

Did you even bother to look at two links I included? Richard Alley (sp?) gives
a very good talk on the CO2 "control knob" - much better that I can do.

For one possibility for "the little Ice Age" - see
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/01/31/volcanoes-little-ice-
age_n_1243976.html. "Coming out" was probably just a return to "normal
conditions". (See also http://www.skepticalscience.com/news.php?n=1257 which
reviews the previous theory. I highly recommend the skeptical science Web site
- it's a good place to see what climate scientists have to say about almost
all of the skeptics arguments)

                    
                                                71. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 14, 2012 at 9:59 pm

I'm not Bruce but if I had to pull an answer out of my rear end it would be
volcanoes.

I've heard that one big volcano puts out more green house gases than the total
created by mankind. If twenty major volcanoes went off at about the same time
maybe it would have had an effect.

                    
                                                72. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 3:09 am

GET YOUR OWN SIDEBAR WIDGET – INSTRUCTIONS BELOW:  
This sidebar widget can be used for any website or blog by anyone free of
charge.

http://wattsupwiththat.com/widget/

                    
                                                73. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 3:21 am

Dear VOA

Please continue your coverage in spite of the malice of those who wish you to
be silent. Your history is Golden. Now make an even bigger contribution.

Please, be America's voice. Let the frightening of children cease. Let the
Intellectual Left's dedication to collectivism be exposed for what it is.

http://www.tech-know.eu/uploads/Climate_Change_Email_02.12.pdf

                    
                                                74. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 3:27 am

I repeat Bob's question

Can any of the previous posters present a CAGW hypothesis? What is the null
hypothesis?

                    
                                                75. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 5:12 pm

The CAGW hypothesis is easy to explain and rests on the four assumptions
below. Any serious attempt to rebut the hypothesis merely needs to explain why
there is a high probability that the climate sensitivity is less than three
and/or that warming above 2 degrees C will be OK.

Assumptions:

            1. The Earth has warmed 0.8 degrees Celsius since pre-industrial times 
            2. About 45% of annual CO2 emissions remain in the atmosphere 
            3. Climate sensitivity is very likely about 3 degrees C for a doubled CO2 
            4. A 2 degree C increase will most likely cause significant climate disruption  
a. Recent studies indicate that even 1 degree C increase will be harmful  
b. Limiting the rise to 1 degree C is seen as impossible

Concentrations and Emissions  
1. The pre-industrial CO2 concentration was about 280 parts per million  
2. The current CO2 concentration is about 392 parts per million  
3. The CO2 concentration is growing at about 2 ppm/year

            1. The Earth’s atmosphere contains about 830 GTC 
            2. Current CO2 emissions are about 10GTC/year 
            3. CO2 emissions are increasing at about 3%/year

Calculations

To limit the increase to 2 degrees C, CO2 must be less than 450 ppm  
Total atmospheric CO2 must be limited to about 954 GTC  
Total atmospheric CO2 must not increase more than about 125 GTC  
The carbon emissions budget for this rest of this century is about 280 GTC  
At current accelerating rate of emissions, the emissions budget will be
exceeded in 2030  
If this rate continues the temperature could increase 5.5-6 degrees C by 2100
(IEA)

Accurate estimates of proven fossil fuel reserves are hard to come by.  
The following is from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2011

Fossil Fuel Reserves  
Oil 1,383 billion barrels  
Canadian Tar Sands 143 billion barrels  
Coal 860,938 million tons  
Natural Gas 6,608 trillion cubic feet

Fossil Fuel 2010 Consumption  
Oil 31 billion barrels  
Canadian Tar Sands .5 billion barrels  
Coal 7,273 million tons  
Natural Gas 111 trillion cubic feet

Fossil Fuel GTC 2010  
Oil 3.64  
Canadian Tar Sands .06  
Coal 4.3  
Natural Gas 2.0  
Total 10GTC

Fossil Fuel Total GTC thru 2030 at 3% growth  
Oil 104  
Canadian Tar Sands 2  
Coal 123  
Natural Gas 57  
Total 286GTC

                    
                                                76. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 5:54 pm

Bruce your assumptions are at best wildly speculative… I reasonably ask the
following regarding your assumptions

            1. How much of the .8 degree increase is natural variation and how much is anthropogenic? please cite peer reviewed studies if you believe natural variation does not/did not contribute and why it stopped as over this timeframe still coming out of LIA.

            2. Cite source please, but lets just accept this for now.

            3. There is no data that shows this. Please don't tell me you are relying solely on computer models that have been wrong time and time again. What empirical data shows this? This claim is baseless, has never been proven, and to have this in your original assumptions negates the rest of your argument, unless you have proof.

            4. Is this assumption based on model outputs or hard data? cite papers please.

5 and 6 don't mean much if 2 -4 are not back up by hard science.

                    
                                                77. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 5:29 pm

Well i doubt Bruce has even considered the existence of or logic behind having
a null hypothesis for CAGW. And Bruce, Dr. Alley is a total activist. Here is
but one article.

http://epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Minority.Blogs&ContentRecord_id=175b568a-802a-23ad-4c69-9bdd978fb3cd

I love this quote…Dr. Alley’s handout stated in part, “We don’t think
Greenland could melt completely in less than many centuries, but it might get
warm enough this century to start complete melting.” I mean, WTF???? What does
that say? Ridiculous.

while i have no doubt Dr. Alley is a very smart guy, most of his ideas are way
on the fringe. Do you realize he predicted a 20 degree C rise for global
warming was possible by end of the century? No one else believes that can
happen from man's use of fossil fuels. absurd.

http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2010/12/24/dr-richard-alley-
expects-20-degrees-of-warming/

He is a climate model hugger, who fear mongers to push forward his political
agenda. Can't remember who to attribute this quote to … " extraordinary
predictions require extraordinary evidence" or words to that effect. It is not
the skeptics who have to prove anything. Finally, it is unlikely that
Volcanism could throw us into the Little ice age. Volcanic effects are
generally only measure in years not decades or centuries. Short of Massive
super volcano erruptions or periods where extreme volcanism lasted many, many
years, that is unlikely. Since the LIA lies withing the human historical
record we know that not to be the case. More likely Maunder minimum, and
certainly a non human caused process. And that was my point! Whatever the
reason, it is clear the climate can change significantly, move back the other
direction, regardless of high CO2, low co2, and certainly without any
influence by man. So why on God's green earth is it unreasonable to believe
that most of the warming over the last 150 years plus is NATURAL?

Again, what is the CAGW null hypothesis. Under what conditions would you
accept that the premise is wrong?

                    
                                                78. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 6:42 pm

Bob -

As I said above, I will willingly accept that the CAWG hypothesis is wrong if
you can scientifically refute any of my four assumpions above. Under what
conditions would you accept that the premise is right?

To bad to don't understand Alley - "I love this quote…Dr. Alley’s handout
stated in part, “We don’t think Greenland could melt completely in less than
many centuries, but it might get warm enough this century to start complete
melting.” I mean, WTF???? What does that say? Ridiculous." - have you lost
your reasoning ability?  
1. Dr Alley thinks it will take many centuries for all of the ice in Greenland to melt  
2. If it gets warm enough this century, all of the Greenland ice will eventually melt
                    
                                                79. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 7:41 pm

Ok Bruce,  
I understand Alley, but it is an alarmist and useless comment from a
scientist.

So IF it gets really warm really soon, and STAYS THAT WAY for MANY CENTURIES
Greenland icecap will melt. Profound.

Wow, that is deep thinking and very valuable to know.

And if the climate cools considerably and stays that way for many centuries,
we will have a new ice age…… Attribute that one to me, it is just as valid a
statement, and i am not a PHD.

                    
                                                80. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 6:49 pm

Forgot add that you really should refrence only more up-to-date links - the
one you listed was for 2007.

This one is from 2010 (http://www.livescience.com/6462-greenland-rising-
rapidly-ice-melts.html)  
The ice is melting so fast in Greenland that the giant island is rising
noticeably as the weight is lifted. In some spots, the land is rising 1 inch
per year.

and another from last year:  
http://arstechnica.com/science/news/2011/03/uh-oh-greenland-and-antarctica-
melting-faster-than-expected.ars

Uh-oh. Greenland and Antarctica melting faster than expected

                    
                                                81. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 8:14 pm

Gee Bruce, great line of argumentation. How in the hell does my referencing
quotes and claims from Dr. Alley, as shown in articles from 2007 matter. You
want me to find an article from 2012 that reports on ridiculous claims made in
2007? In what context is what i said, and cited about Dr. Alley time
sensitive? Get a clue.

How about this for recent…….

http://wattsupwiththat.com/2012/02/14/sea-level-still-not-cooperating-with-
predictions/

Looks like all of that melting ice is joining all of the missing heat from the
model predictions. And while i am not suggesting that sea levels are falling
in any statistically significant way, the rate of sea level rise is certainly
not accellerating as per predictions. Isn't that what is suppossed to happen?
Ice melt is supposedly greater now then when coming out of LIA, but sea level
rise not accelerating? What gives Bruce?

                    
                                                82. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 9:06 pm

            1. The .8 degree increase is not used in any calcs, and is provided for info purposes only. see http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GlobalWarming/page4.php for "These natural causes are still in play today, but their influence is too small or they occur too slowly to explain the rapid warming seen in recent decades."

            2. Emissions in atmosphere  
http://www.global-greenhouse-warming.com/anthropogenic-climate-change.html  
http://cdiac.ornl.gov/pns/faq.html  
https://public.ornl.gov/site/gallery/detail.cfm?id=313&topic=&citation=24&general=&restsection=

3 Climate sensitivity - see  
http://www.skepticalscience.com/detailed-look-at-climate-sensitivity.html  
http://globalchange.mit.edu/news/news-item.php?id=88  
(If you don't belive something form MIT, what will you believe?)  
For paleocliamate - see
http://www.columbia.edu/~jeh1/mailings/2011/20110118_MilankovicPaper.pdf

Why do you think the claim is baseless? Almost all climate scientists think
it's in the range 2.5-4.5. Do you know of a peered-reviewed paper which shows
it's a lower value?

            1. Effects of 2 degrees of warming  
http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/1803317/updated-ipcc-chief-warns-degree-
rise-spells-bad-news  
http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/2009/08/g8s-2-degrees-goal/  
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2009/04/hit-the-brakes-hard/

                        
                                                    83. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                        

February 15, 2012 at 10:12 pm

Here's some more on the effects of global warming in the US  
http://www.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/global_warming/climate-costs-of-
inaction.pdf

                    
                                                84. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 10:22 pm

And here's a good site on the basics of global warming  
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/science/

                    
                                                85. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 10:47 pm

It's called Greenland because it used to be green. It's simply going back to
the condition it was previously known to be.

One place melts and another place freezes. It's been going on for millions of
years and it's normal. It takes an extreme amount of vanity to think you can
put a thermostat on the earth and dial in the desired temperature.

                    
                                                86. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 10:49 pm

More on climate sensitivity from MIT  
http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2010/explained-climate-sensitivity.html

                    
                                                87. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 10:55 pm

The VOA author writes:"A few days after the letter appeared, NASA’s Goddard
Institute for Space Studies (GISS) released a study which finds human activity
contributes to global warming.

The NASA study, “Earth’s energy imbalance and implications,” was recently
published in the journal Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics.

The study was led by James Hansen, director of GISS, a respected scientist who
is well known for his work in climatology."

The author should have taken a closer look. I did a search of the references
at the end of this document. James Hansen, an author, cited his own work 16
times. The IPCC is cited. The copyright dates in the References section are
from 2007 and older. This is hardly a ground-breaking study. Only Joe Romm at
ThinkProgress, Hansen's buddy, published it as news. Here they are at work:  
http://wonkette.com/426305/nasa-zombie-alliance-hosts-climate-change-
apocalypse-rally

…………..Interestingly, NASA and NOAA just launched a satellite that was
commissioned to bolster Al Gore’s alarmist claims of runaway global heating.
It is 6 years late in getting on 0rbit, ridiculously over budget and is still
working through its commissioning phase so it can move into an operational
state. Yet the NPP Soumi satellite has already captured some amazing data –
and it completely destroys the IPCC’s basic models of energy balance.

http://strata-sphere.com/blog/index.php/archives/18073

                    
                                                88. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 16, 2012 at 12:59 am

"Any serious attempt to rebut the hypothesis merely needs to explain why there
is a high probability that the climate sensitivity is less than three"

There is zip emprical evidence for positive feedback. CO2 is up c. 40% from
1900 to 2000 and the "adjusted" temperature increase is c. 0.7C. (The real
increase being around half that.)

That, despite continuing, natural recovery from the LIA, many other
anthropogenic inputs. And the period covered (the 20th century) consisting of
60% PDO warm phase vs. 40% cool phase, when you'd need a 50-50 split to avoid
pro-warming cherrypicking.

So where is the 1C to 2C positive feedback? Either the sensitivity is for the
birds or the fundamental forcing equation is way off. You can't get away from
the data. Even if stipulating the the exaggerated adjusted data is correct.
(And it ain't.)

"and/or that warming above 2 degrees C will be OK."

Call me when we get there. But we almost certainly won't. And any impact on
the environment will have been dwarfed by man's normal activites (going on
strong since well before the Pleistocene Overkill).

"Uh-oh. Greenland and Antarctica melting faster than expected"

Unless it isn't. SL rise is dropping off over the past few years. And even at
its worst it was c. 3mm, per year, which is a foot per century. Man the
lifeboats.

Without strong positive feedbacks, CAGW theory is sunk. Wake me when we see
any. Etraordinary claims require extraordinary proof, and the "known" (read
"exaggerated") Tmean trend data speaks for itself, even if one accepts it at
face value (which one shouldn't).

Warming? Yes. But size matters.

                    
                                                89. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

February 16, 2012 at 3:21 pm

My final post to this thread -

A quote from the Saudi Oil Minister Ali I. Al-Naimi, January 2012:

Greenhouse gas emissions and global warming are among humanity’s most pressing
concerns.

You can view a great PDF on climate change from the "Republicans for
Environmental Protection" web site at
http://www.rep.org/climate_presentation.html

The PDF is at http://www.rep.org/Hayhoe_Climate.pdf.

The science for potentially disruptive climate change is undeniable - please
take the time to really understand the science and don't just "bluster" about
how implausible it is. Your children's and grandchildren's future is at stake
and you owe it to yourself to be fully informed. The CAGW hypothesis is not
100% certain, but the probability is high enough that we need to start taking
action now.

                    
                                                90. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 16, 2012 at 5:08 pm

Fine Bruce, let's make this the final post. We can leave it by saying you
accept so many dogmatic beliefs about global warming, that you are unable or
unwilling to open your mind. You keep citing opinion pieces, all from the pro
AGW side. Fact of the matter is, if you take away Mann's hockey stick
(completely debunked statistically) and you take away the climate models (even
the constructors admit they are not scientific forecasts!), there is Literaly
zero argument for catastrophic global warming, and the need to take action to
lower our carbon output. ZERO. So you can continue to enjoy believing in a
myth, while the slow wind down of the CAGW hysteria fades into the ether
forever. Unfortunately we may be living with the terrible consequences of
higher fuel costs, food cost spikes (ethanol anyone?) and the hidden taxation
of the EPA radical regulation agenda for quite some time. It seems like you
heard it here first, so you will be able to look back at this moment and
ponder. CAGW is dead as a theory and concern. I hope the planet stays this
warm or gets a little warmer. The alternative sucks.

                    
                                                91. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 16, 2012 at 6:50 pm

i guess i couldn't let is go. Bruce sited this…  
http://www.skepticalscience.com/detailed-look-at-climate-sensitivity.html

In which is presented the following ridiculous claim….

.

What a complete load of crap. So one can't argue that sensitivity to C02 is
low, but is higher for other forcings like cosmic ray flux? What an illogical
argument this piece presents. Bruce, can you not see the fallacy in this
argument. Ok follow allong with me. Let's take the first sentence as accurrate
even though it is an ignorant statement. So accepting that C02 sensitivity is
high, by their logic, sensitivity must also be high for all of the other
influences as well. If that is the case, how can changes in climate seperate
the signal from the other influences with high sensitvity?  
Skeptical Science is a worthless site Bruce. You really should check out Watts
up with that, or for more of a pro AGW leaning site, Science of Doom. It is
heavy stuff, but you can learn so much about the processes we have discussed
here. Real Climate and Skeptical Science have about as much credibility as
Media Matters and Acorn, in regards to agenda bias.

                    
                                                92. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 16, 2012 at 6:51 pm

The claim didn't print. Will try this again below……..

A common misconception is that the climate sensitivity and temperature change
in response to increasing CO2 differs from the sensitivity to other radiative
forcings, such as a change in solar irradiance. This, however, is not the
case. The surface temperature change is proportional to the sensitivity and
radiative forcing (in W m-2), regardless of the source of the energy
imbalance.

In other words, if you argue that the Earth has a low climate sensitivity to
CO2, you are also arguing for a low climate sensitivity to other influences
such as solar irradiance, orbital changes, and volcanic emissions. Thus when
arguing for low climate sensitivity, it becomes difficult to explain past
climate changes. For example, between glacial and interglacial periods, the
planet's average temperature changes on the order of 6°C (more like 8-10°C in
the Antarctic). If the climate sensitivity is low, for example due to
increasing low-lying cloud cover reflecting more sunlight as a response to
global warming, then how can these large past climate changes be explained?

Utter nonsense……

                    
                                                93. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 10:04 pm

No, an inconvenient truth. Are your denial blinders on? What doesn't make
sense?

                    
                                                94. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b18bd5fff600b89dbb01ee6c4ce4d353?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Evan Jones says:
                    

February 20, 2012 at 2:24 am

Bear in mind that the objection of the CAGW advocates present is not merely
against skeptical scientific points, but against the very notion that debate
even be countenanced.

That is a sublimely anti-scientific and outstandingly anti-liberal position.

The proposition, held by the vast majority of CAGW ("post-normal science")
advocates, that data and methods may be concealed (even deliberately
destroyed), yet the results must mandate immediate, extraordinarily costly
policy decisions is quite extraordinary, and flatly contrary to scientific
method -- or prudence.

                    
                                                95. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 23, 2012 at 1:37 pm

In reality, honest debate and scientific scepticism is welcomed. Real
scientists object to the misrepresentation, cherry-picking, slander and
outright lying that the AGW deniers routinely use to confuse and deceive the
public. Since the evidence overwhelmingly supports dangerous AGW, the deniers'
only recourse is rank dishonesty, and they use it freely and shamelessly. It's
all they have.

                    
                                                96. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 23, 2012 at 2:45 pm

Icarus62, did you read the whole post when you responded?

The concealment of methods and destruction of data are not conducive to
"honest debate and scientific scepticism."

And how many times has Hansen reported "the science is settled?"

I am very concerned of the few people left that are capable of independent
thought.

                    
                                                97. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 23, 2012 at 7:37 pm

Some methoids were concealed, but that is actaully standard practice. I also
believe that some of the methods have since been posted to the internet. Do
you have specific examples the "concealment of methods and destruction of
data"?

And specifically what about the science is not settled?

Science deals in speficics, not inuendos or accusations that are not backed up
by actual observations.

                    
                                                98. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 3:31 am

> Some methoids were concealed, but that is actaully standard practice.

That's a good one Enviro. It is standard practice if the purpose is to prevent
“honest debate and scientific scepticism.”

> And specifically what about the science is not settled?

The part of the "science" that says people are causing climate change.

                    
                                                99. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 26, 2012 at 9:13 pm

You can think of methods as intellectual property. Even the skeptics do not
always divulge their methods. But in the case of the CRU, the methods have
been made public. Hiding methods does NOT prevent honest debate - "cherry
picking" data and dis-information does not contribute to an honest debate.

                    
                                                100. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 26, 2012 at 9:17 pm

The science that says humans cause most (not necessarily all) of the climate
change IS settled - it's simply the bruning of the fossil fuel. See:  
http://www.skepticalscience.com/10-indicators-of-a-human-fingerprint-on-
climate-change.html

                    
                                                101. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 2:30 am

To Enviro - for starters.

http://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02148/RSL-
HouseOfCommons_2148505a.pdf

                    
                                                102. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 2:31 am

Next

http://www.devilskitchen.me.uk/2009/11/data-horribilis-harryreadmetxt-
file.html

                    
                                                103. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 4:12 am

The link is dated Nov 2009. ALL detailed examinations of the complete set of
emails and CRU data found NOTHING that indicated problems with their methods
and data.I'll look of links at a later time. In addition, ALL other scientiic
measurements reach similar conclusions as the CRU. You are being duped by the
fossil fuel industry that wants you to believe that nothing is wrong (so they
can contiunue to make their fat profits)

                    
                                                104. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 25, 2012 at 3:04 pm

Enviro: The leaked CRU email showed comments in the methods they used that
indicated they knew they were lying and is obviious to any objective person
why they continue to hide their methods.

You are also ignoring the facts and trying to deflect the argument towards the
oil companies when in fact the oil companies make money from the global
climate scare too. They make money either way the "science" goes in the way of
tax breaks, carbon credits, etc.

I submit it is in fact you who are duped.

                    
                                                105. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 26, 2012 at 5:10 pm

How naive can you get! If the "climate scare" is real, the only solution is to
stop burining fossil fuels, and the oil/coal companiues will be forced out of
business by 2040 or 2050. That is why they are waging a dis-information
campaign.

We'll have to agree to disagree on the CRU emails - I prefer rigours reviews
like "Muir Russell Report: Jones and the CRU Vindicated (Again)" (see
http://mediaecologies.wordpresshpcom/2010/07/07/muir-russell-report-jones-and-
the-cru-vindicated-again/). You seem to be happy with cherry-picking bits and
pieces of some of the emails. The dis-information campaign seems to resonate
with people like you. Some day you will wake up and realize that 97% of
climate scentists are not wrong in believing there is a high probability (not
a certainty) that the climate will change in ways that are harmful to our
civilization, and that the only prudent thing to do is to take moderate steps
to quickly reduce CO2 emissions .

                    
                                                106. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 27, 2012 at 8:34 pm

Enviro:

Without access to the methods used to reach a conclusion, there is no such
thing as honest debate on whether the conclusion is correct.

One volcano puts out more greenhouse gases than all of human kind had done
with their fossil fuels over the period of their entire existence. The
presumption that the CRU was vindicated was nothing more than a cover up.

Climate scare is real and designed to pillage as much money as possible and
denying development to third world countries. It is promoted by a few
corporations that know how to use the power of government to achieve a
monopoly by preventing competitors from emerging.

                    
                                                107. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 27, 2012 at 11:02 pm

Enviro - I strongly suspect you're not reading the links. I further suspect
you haven't asked a good question in many many years. Is your livelihood
related to this idea perhaps?

………….Nobel Prize-winning physicist Ivar Giaever resigned as a fellow from the
American Physical Society, saying he could not live with its nonsensical
endorsement of global-warming alarmism. Dr. Giaever joins a host of other
eminent scientists who have dismissed concerns over global warming, including
Freeman Dyson, a Princeton physicist and America’s best known scientist,
Antonino Zichichi, the president of the World Federation of Scientists and
Italy’s best known scientist, Claude Allegre, a former socialist Minister of
National Education, Research and Technology and France’s best-known scientist,
and America’s Reid Bryson, known as the “father of scientific climatology” and
judged “the world’s most cited climatologist” by the journal of the Institute
of British Geographers.

In contrast to this Who’s Who of the scientific world, the list of top global-
warming scientists falls far short. No scientist has been awarded a Nobel
Prize in a science field for his work on global warming because no piece of
science in the field has achieved a major scientific breakthrough………………

http://opinion.financialpost.com/2011/09/16/lawrence-solomon-warmed-right-
over/

                    
                                                108. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 12:44 am

When 97% of climate scientists (and every major scientific orgainzation in the
US) think there is a very good chance that climate change will cause serious
problems, I'll listen to them, particluarly since the science is so
straightforward and easy to understand.

The sclence (primarily physics) of global warming from CO2 has been around for
so long (well over a hundred years) that no breakthrough is needed to
understand what's going on, ergo no Nobel prize expected. I would expect a
nobel prize to be awarded to any scientist who could prove that the warming
from CO2 will not be significant.

                    
                                                109. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 10:34 am

From 150 million years ago to 65 million years ago, CO2 levels decreased by
1000 ppm. During that same period, temperatures rose by 7 degrees Centigrade.

There are some obsessed with the supposed increase of 280 ppm to 392ppm of CO2
and I hope that this information will help Enviro to sleep better at nights.  
This, I hope, will put this into some kind of a perspective that makes one
understand just how insignificant this increase is.  
A part per million is like 1 drop of ink in a large  
kitchen sink.  
A large kitchen sink is about 13-14 gallons. There  
are 100 drops in one teaspoon, and 768 teaspoons  
per gallon.  
Some other things that are one part per million are…  
One drop in the fuel tank of a mid-sized car  
One inch in 16 miles  
About one minute in two years  
One car in a line of bumper-to-bumper traffic from  
Cleveland to San Francisco.  
One penny in $10,000.  
I know that you understand that these 112 additional ppm are spread out over
this 16 miles in different one inch segments and wouldn't it be a task to be
told to sort out the 392 pennies from the number that it would take to make up
$10,000.  
At 392 parts per million CO2 is a minor constituent of earth's atmosphere-
less than 4/100ths of 1% of all gases present. Compared to former geologic
times, earth's current atmosphere is CO2- impoverished.

                    
                                                110. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 8:46 pm

Not a good anology. Just look at SCIENCE as to WHY CO2 is such an important
greenhouse gas. The science has been known for over a hundred years.

See http://www.sciencemag.org/content/330/6002/356.abstract (below) - anyone
who could show otherwise would certainly get a Nobel prize! Do you know any
climate scientists who disagree with this article?

Atmospheric CO2: Principal Control Knob Governing Earth’s Temperature

Andrew A. Lacis*,  
Gavin A. Schmidt,  
David Rind and  
Reto A. Ruedy

Abstract

Ample physical evidence shows that carbon dioxide (CO2) is the single most
important climate-relevant greenhouse gas in Earth’s atmosphere. This is
because CO2, like ozone, N2O, CH4, and chlorofluorocarbons, does not condense
and precipitate from the atmosphere at current climate temperatures, whereas
water vapor can and does. Noncondensing greenhouse gases, which account for
25% of the total terrestrial greenhouse effect, thus serve to provide the
stable temperature structure that sustains the current levels of atmospheric
water vapor and clouds via feedback processes that account for the remaining
75% of the greenhouse effect. Without the radiative forcing supplied by CO2
and the other noncondensing greenhouse gases, the terrestrial greenhouse would
collapse, plunging the global climate into an icebound Earth state.

                    
                                                111. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 5:37 am

Here's a link with a table of "Professional Societies and Major Relevant
Research Institutions on whether humanity is driving climate change"

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/a-siegel/climate-change-science-
_b_1290259.html?ref=science

I'd need some really good reasons not to agree with all of these
organizations.

                    
                                                112. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/18d4f9718398cd9072342a7a620cf367?s=67&d=mm&r=g) BigTenBob says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 8:32 pm

First of all, the 97% claim of scientists is completely bogus. This is a
fictitous number (as it is applied) based on a study of less than 100 resonses
to questions that most skeptics would have answered affirmatively.  
The overall feedback mechanisms of the climate in response to C02 forcings is
not at all well understood. To think that it is shows a complete lack of
understanding of the current state of the science. It is amazing to me, how
many of the CAGW proponents, do not even understand the argument. No one with
any knowledge denies that C02 causes some warming and that mankind has an
impact (albeit small) on the climate. The whole issue is about if possitive
feedbacks magnifying the impact of C02. There is no good evidence for the IPCC
claims of roughly 3x magnification. Finally, even if one were to buy the whole
CAGW argument, the correct action to take should be widely debated. A simple
reading of the Economics analysis shows major disagreement in to how best to
mitigate AGW impacts.  
To simply parrot the CAGW line shows a lack of intellectual curiosity and
laziness. Anyone who truly believes this nonsense, yet has not taken the time
to study both sides of the argument is either gullible or lazy. Time to
bookmark a couple sites aside from realclimate and skeptical science people……

                    
                                                113. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 10:16 pm

What do you think the lower bound is for climate sensitivity? The upper bound?
What do you think the “probability distribution function” is for climate
sensitivity? To back up your claim, can you provide one or more links?

                    
                                                114. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 9:28 pm

Bob –

We may actually be on the same page. Let me try to summarize the climate
change debate:

Settled Facts  
1. The average temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere has increased about .8 degrees C since 1850.  
2. The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has increased from 280 ppm (1750) to 393 ppm (2011), primarily from the burning of fossil fuels  
3. A significant part of the temperature increase has been caused by CO2 from the burning of fossil fuels

Debate topics  
4. If we continue burning fossil fuels at the current rate, what will be the expected temperature increase by 2050 from pre-industrial times? (%probability for 4 degrees C)  
5. What are expected climatic impacts for different amounts of warming?  
6. How much acidification can the oceans take without seriously compromising the oceanic food chain?  
7. What is the relationship between temperature and sea level? (ice ages, 400 feet lower, ice-free planet, 200 feet higher)  
8. How much can the sea level rise without dramatically affecting coastal communities?  
9. What is a dangerous level of warming?  
10. Future temperatures cannot be forecast with great accuracy – how confident do we need to be when setting policies that try to keep temperatures from exceeding a dangerous level? (e.g., do we want to feel 90% confident that our policies will keep temperatures form rising above dangerous levels?)  
11. What will be the cost of implementing those policies?  
12. What will be the cost of not implementing those policies?  
13. What should we do?

So how do reasonable people try to reach a consensus on these topics?

                    
                                                115. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 27, 2012 at 11:14 pm

Here's just one tiny cherry-picked email, in case you couldn't find access to
them.

Hi Keith,  
What is your take on the Vagonov et al. paper concerning the influence of
snowfall and melt timing on tree growth in Siberia? Frankly, I can’t believe
it was published as is. It is amazinglly thin on details. Isn’t Sob the same
site as your Polar Urals site? If so, why is the Sob response window so
radically shorter then the ones you identified in your Nature paper for both
density and ring width? I notice that they used Berezovo instead of Salekhard,
which is much closer according to the map. Is that  
because daily data were only available for the Berezovo? Also, there is no
evidence for a decline or loss of temperature response in your data in the
post-1950s (I assume that you didn’t apply a bodge here). This fully
contradicts their claims, although I do admit that such an effect might be
happening in some places.

Cheers,  
Ed

http://climateaudit.org/2011/03/30/muir-russell-and-the-briffa-bodge/

                    
                                                116. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 12:24 am

Looks like scientists discussing issues, just as you'd expect them to do!

                    
                                                117. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 12:32 am

Jose -

You need to check your facts better - Humans emit 100 times more CO2 than
volcanoes. (http://skepticalscience.com/volcanoes-and-global-warming.htm)

And of course the fossil fuel industry wants you to think the vindiciation of
the CRU was a cover up - that's just a continuation of their dis-information
campaign.

                    
                                                118. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 12:41 pm

Enviro: Are you honestly implying that the "Scientist" at Skeptical Science
offer up facts? Then you want to depute such people as Christy, Singer, John
Coleman, , meteorologist Joesph D’Aleo and these folks:  
2012 Every candidate should support rational measures to protect and improve
our environment, but it makes no sense at all to back expensive programs that
divert resources from real needs and are based on alarming but untenable
claims of "incontrovertible" evidence.  
Claude Allegre, former director of the Institute for the Study of the Earth,
University of Paris; J. Scott Armstrong, cofounder of the Journal of
Forecasting and the International Journal of Forecasting; Jan Breslow, head of
the Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism, Rockefeller University;
Roger Cohen, fellow, American Physical Society; Edward David, member, National
Academy of Engineering and National Academy of Sciences; William Happer,
professor of physics, Princeton; Michael Kelly, professor of technology,
University of Cambridge, U.K.; William Kininmonth, former head of climate
research at the Australian Bureau of Meteorology; Richard Lindzen, professor
of atmospheric sciences, MIT; James McGrath, professor of chemistry, Virginia
Technical University; Rodney Nichols, former president and CEO of the New York
Academy of Sciences; Burt Rutan, aerospace engineer, designer of Voyager and
SpaceShipOne; Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 astronaut and former U.S.
senator; Nir Shaviv, professor of astrophysics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem;
Henk Tennekes, former director, Royal Dutch Meteorological Service; Antonio
Zichichi, president of the World Federation of Scientists, Geneva.

Glenn Tamblyn: Glenn studied Mechanical Engineering at Melbourne University.  
Andy Skuce originally came from the UK but now lives on the West Coast of
Canada. He chose to study geology, mainly because he was a keen rock climber,
and went on to get a postgraduate degree in geophysics.  
Robert Way: Robert is an MSc student studying at Memorial University of
Newfoundland.  
Daniel Bailey: Daniel completed science degrees in Earth Science, Cartography
and Remote Sensing at Central Michigan University in the United States. After
graduating, he took employment with the US Department of Defense in
Washington, DC, for many years. Daniel is currently employed in the
pharmaceutical industry, where he is much happier. No doubt due to the meds.  
Doug Mackie: In the 70's I had a dinosaur book that included a Keeling curve
as part of the inevitable 'what happened discussion'. (This was before
Alvarez). Even before I could spell exponential I still wondered what the
Keeling curve would mean for me when I grew up. When I began my PhD I found
out.  
Rob Painting: Rob is an environmentalist, scuba diver, spearfisherman, kayaker
and former police officer. Has researched climate science, in an amateur
capacity, for 4 years. A long-time reader of Skeptical Science and now
contributor.  
Dana Nuccitelli is an environmental scientist at a private environmental
consulting firm in the Sacramento, California area. He has a Bachelor's Degree
in astrophysics from the University of California at Berkeley, and a Master's
Degree in physics from the University of California at Davis. He has been
researching climate science, economics, and solutions as a hobby since 2006,
and has contributed to Skeptical Science since September, 2010.  
John Cook: John is the Climate Communication Fellow for the Global Change
Institute at the University of Queensland. He originally studied physics at
the University of Queensland.  
Riccardo :Graduated in physics, I got my PhD at the University of Catania
(Italy). As an experimental material scientist I spend my working hours mainly
in a lab torturing some material and trying to convince it to behave as I
wish. Being a long time sailor, I needed to know at least the basics of
meteorology. http://www.skepticalscience.com/team.php

                    
                                                119. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 5:05 pm

What facts on skeptical science do you think are not facts? Can you provide
links that show the facts are wrong? No obfuscating - just facts.

                    
                                                120. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 1, 2012 at 6:19 am

I'm certainly not going to waste my time going through a bunch of nonsense put
out by some group on the same level as Peter Gleick. The point is, who cares
about a trace gas that makes up .036-8% of the atmosphere and is 1&1/2 times
heavier than air? I know from experience that there is about 50% of the O2
that is available at sea level at 17,770 feet; so, a question for you, Enviro
. How much C02 is there at this altitude?

ppm of CO2 with altitude and mass of CO2 in atmosphere to 8520 metres beyond
which there is practically no CO2

http://www.greenparty.ca/blogs/169/2009-01-03/ppm-co2-altitude-and-mass-
co2-atmosphere-8520-metres-beyond-which-there-practic

                    
                                                121. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 2:13 pm

Who cares how CO2 varies by altitude? EVERY scientists KNOWS that CO2 IS
linked to warming – it’s simply physics!

See  
http://ecocentric.blogs.time.com/2010/10/14/climate-why-co2-is-the-control-
knob-for-global-climate-change/

which summarizes

http://www.sciencemag.org/content/330/6002/356.abstract

                    
                                                122. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 4:59 am

"Sea level has been plummeting for four years, and is lower than it was in
2003 when EU’s Envisat satellite was launched. This is solid proof that
Greenland and Antarctica are melting down at unprecedented rates and flooding
the oceans with negative water.  
John Cook says that the four year decline is due to rain in Australia which
started in 2011."  
http://www.real-science.com/proof-ice-sheets-melting

Is that what you also think, Enviro?

"About John Cook  
Lastly, for those wondering about who runs Skeptical Science, the website is
maintained by John Cook. I studied physics at the University of Queensland but
currently, I'm not a professional scientist - I run this website as a layman."  
http://www.skepticalscience.com/Newcomers-Start-Here.html

It would appear Enviro, that your source for all things pertaining to your
scam, anthropogenic warming, is headed up by some one who shares the same
amount of scientific qualifications as Al Gore and that amounts to none, zero.
That you embarrass your self by continually referencing this site is evident
from what you post.

                    
                                                123. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 2:43 pm

If you search the web, you wlll find lots of sites with the following quote:

'Water flows downhill, and the extra rain will eventually find its way back to
the sea. When it does, global sea level will rise again. ‘We’re heating up the
planet, and in the end that means more sea level rise’

For example, see

http://news.discovery.com/earth/rain-falls-sea-falls-111006.html

When reviewing CLIMATE TRENDS, you need to look at DECADES, not YEARS

                    
                                                124. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 1:55 pm

Enviro: You can see how open and mature your favorite source of information,
skepticalscience.com is with someone that knows what they are talking about,
such as Dr. Roger Pielke Sr.  
Roger A. Pielke Sr.  
Senior Research Scientist, Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental
Sciences (CIRES), University of Colorado in Boulder  
Professor Emeritus of the Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins  
B.A., Mathematics, Towson State College, 1968  
M.S., Ph.D., Meteorology, Pennsylvania State University, 1969, 1973  
He is currently a Senior Research Scientist in CIRES and a Senior Research
Associate at the University of Colorado-Boulder in the Department of
Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences (ATOC) at the University of Colorado in
Boulder (November 2005 -present). He is also an Emeritus Professor of
Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University and has a five-year
appointment (April 2007 - March 2012) on the Graduate Faculty of Purdue
University in West Lafayette, Indiana.

My Interactions With Skeptical Science – A Failed Attempt (So Far) For
Constructive Dialog  
http://pielkeclimatesci.wordpress.com/2011/09/17/my-interactions-with-
skeptical-science-a-failed-attempt-so-far-for-constructive-dialog/

                    
                                                125. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 8:09 pm

            1. I'll stick w Skeptical Science, AS THE END OF YOUR LINK STATES:

10-Roger on that. The inescapable conclusion one is forced to draw is that Dr.
Pielke under no circumstances will admit to having been wrong. Thus, he cedes
the Field of Truth to Skeptical Science.

            1. Don't shoot the messenger - prove that is message is wrong 
            2. Climate science is evolving, so there will be modifications around the edges 
            3. The quote below was from NASA (I'll stick with the experts)

‘Water flows downhill, and the extra rain will eventually find its way back to
the sea. When it does, global sea level will rise again. ‘We’re heating up the
planet, and in the end that means more sea level rise’

                    
                                                126. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 3:41 pm

Enrviro

As usual the parameters are twisted on volcanoes to change the results.

A volcano can spew CO2 for thousands of years. The article written by
scientists who like to twist the facts to qualify for government grants take
the supposed peak of human kind and compare it to a volcano that was probably
relatively dormant when they calculated the value.

                    
                                                127. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 4:52 pm

The following is from http://hvo.wr.usgs.gov/volcanowatch/2007/07_02_15.html

volcanoes on land and under the sea release a total of about 200 million
tonnes of CO2 annually

This seems like a huge amount of CO2, but a visit to the U.S. Department of
Energy's Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC) website
(http://cdiac.ornl.gov/) helps anyone armed with a handheld calculator and a
high school chemistry text put the volcanic CO2 tally into perspective.
Because while 200 million tonnes of CO2 is large, the global fossil fuel CO2
emissions for 2003 tipped the scales at 26.8 billion tonnes. Thus, not only
does volcanic CO2 not dwarf that of human activity, it actually comprises less
than 1 percent of that value.

Can you provide a link to a web site that supports your contention?

Just the facts please.

Thanks!

                    
                                                128. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 9:33 pm

Also the fact that atmospheric CO₂was constant at 280 ± 5 ppm for all of the
last 10,000 years up until the beginning of the Industrial Revolution means
that volcanic CO₂emissions are naturally balanced by CO₂sinks (mainly
sequestration in ocean sediments). Even in periods of the geological past when
there were long-term trends in atmospheric CO₂they were about 20,000 times
slower than the current extremely rapid 2ppm per year caused by fossil fuel
combustion, cement manufacture and land use changes.

                    
                                                129. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 5:14 am

Enviro seems unaware of these facts.

"Volcanoes are also creative forces. The Earth's first oceans and atmosphere
formed from the gases given off by volcanoes. In turn, oceans and an
atmosphere created the environment that made life possible on our planet.
Volcanoes have also shaped the Earth's landscape. Many of our mountains,
islands, and plains have been built by volcanic eruptions."  
http://www.ussartf.org/volcanoes.htm

"Outgassing  
Outgassing of volcanoes and mid-ocean ridges is the largest source of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, releasing carbon dioxide from deep within the Earth
that had been trapped there since the planet's creation. CO2 is released from
subduction zones through metamorphism of carbonate rocks subducting with the
ocean crust. Not all of this CO2 enters the atmosphere. Some of it dissolves
in the oceans and some remains in biomass of organisms."  
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Carbon_cycle

                    
                                                130. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 2:47 pm

I know those facts. But what is relevant is the YEARLY AVERAGE of CO2 from
volcanoes vs the YEARLY AVERAGE of CO2 from buring fossil fuels. I repeat
"Thus, not only does volcanic CO2 not dwarf that of human activity, it
actually comprises less than 1 percent of that value." Please do not "arm
wave" - just provide facts (in this case, actual numbers) that support your
position.

                    
                                                131. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 3:04 am

            * Professor Steven G. Horwitz, writing in late September 2008, in a piece entitled An Open Letter to my Friends on the Left.  
I know, my friends, that you are concerned about corporate power. So am I. So
are many of my free-market economist colleagues. We simply believe, and we
think history is on our side, that the best check against corporate power is
the competitive marketplace and the power of the consumer dollar (framed, of
course, by legal prohibitions on force and fraud). Competition plays mean,
nasty corporations off against each other in a contest to serve us. Yes, they
still have power, but its negative effects are lessened. It is when
corporations can use the state to rig the rules in their favor that the
negative effects of their power become magnified, precisely because it has the
force of the state behind it. The current mess shows this as well as anything
ever has, once you realize just what a large role the state played. If you
really want to reduce the power of corporations, don't give them access to the
state by expanding the state's regulatory powers.

                        
                                                    132. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                        

February 28, 2012 at 10:10 pm

Corporations do really well they pollute freely. Do you want your water
poisoned? Do you want pesticides in your food? Do you want safe drugs? Some
regulation is obviously needed.

                    
                                                133. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) kate says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 4:49 pm

Global Warming Has Nothing to Do With Pollution. Global Warming Has Nothing to
Do With Pollution.Global Warming Has Nothing to Do With Pollution.Global
Warming Has Nothing to Do With Pollution.Global Warming Has Nothing to Do With
Pollution.Global Warming Has Nothing to Do With Pollution.

The Fraud has Misappropriated Uncountable Money Resources to a problem that
Does Not Exist. Meanwhile my rivers and lakes are nearly Unusable!!!!

But go ahead, let more be squandered!!!!!

                    
                                                134. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 9:38 pm

If you think of CO2 as a pollutant, global warming IS caused by pollution.

                    
                                                135. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 3, 2012 at 7:14 pm

Kate -

Please read the followiing from
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/

Why the Global Warming Skeptics Are Wrong March 22, 2012 William D. Nordhaus

The sixteen scientists next attack the idea of CO2 as a pollutant. They write:
“The fact is that CO2 is not a pollutant.” By this they presumably mean that
CO2 is not by itself toxic to humans or other organisms within the range of
concentrations that we are likely to encounter, and indeed higher CO2
concentrations may be beneficial.

However, this is not the meaning of pollution under US law or in standard
economics. The US Clean Air Act defined an air pollutant as “any air pollution
agent or combination of such agents, including any physical, chemical,
biological, radioactive…substance or matter which is emitted into or otherwise
enters the ambient air.” In a 2007 decision on this question, the Supreme
Court ruled clearly on the question: “Carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
and hydrofluorocarbons are without a doubt ‘physical [and]
chemical…substance[s] which [are] emitted into…the ambient air.’ …Greenhouse
gases fit well within the Clean Air Act’s capacious definition of ‘air
pollutant.’”6

In economics, a pollutant is a form of negative externality—that is, a
byproduct of economic activity that causes damages to innocent bystanders. The
question here is whether emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases will
cause net damages, now and in the future. This question has been studied
extensively. The most recent thorough survey by the leading scholar in this
field, Richard Tol, finds a wide range of damages, particularly if warming is
greater than 2 degrees Centigrade.7 Major areas of concern are sea-level rise,
more intense hurricanes, losses of species and ecosystems, acidification of
the oceans, as well as threats to the natural and cultural heritage of the
planet.

In short, the contention that CO2 is not a pollutant is a rhetorical device
and is not supported by US law or by economic theory or studies.

                    
                                                136. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5300f3b5c131e601a53b8f06a4bc269b?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Kate says:
                    

February 28, 2012 at 11:01 pm

Enviro - you are not familiar with the points below. You will be more
comfortable just staying over at huff po where everyone else repeats your
stuff. You can't back anything up. All you do is deflect…….and that fossil
fuel industry line is so tired and worn. Actually almost every oil/gas corp is
counting on you and yours to make more money by removing the competition. Go
ahead, help them out.

http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/pseudo-critical-thinking-in-the-
educational-establishment/504

It might be helpful to remember that all critical thinking abilities have
three parts: a process, an object, and a standard. Here are various critical
thinking abilities which can serve as examples. As you read them see if you
can identify the intellectual standard in each.

the ability to evaluate information for its relevance  
the ability to accurately identify assumptions  
the ability to construct plausible inferences  
the ability to identify relevant points of view  
the ability to distinguish significant from insignificant information

As I found out, on studying the science, climatologists have been misleading
us. This includes the long list you sent us to from huff po. They all have
hopes for money (from your pocket.)

This is the fight that will define the twenty-first century as either a time
when mankind advances due to honest enterprise, quality science, and technical
achievement…or we are subjugated by government micro-regulation from
manipulative control freaks based on false and slanted data from grant
recipients with no scruples.

I'm done here. When you just keep quoting huff po and scepticalscience you
tell me everything I need to know. Your intellectual laziness isn't any fun at
all.

                    
                                                137. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 8:29 pm

Too bad you beleive science fiction rather than science fact. I keep trying so
show you facts and all you do is wave your arms and say I'm wrong, never
providing me w any scientific facts to back your arm waving. Do you know of a
Web site that purports to debunk the science on SketicalScience.com? I suppose
you think the "science" in Michael Crighton's "State of Fear" was legit.

                    
                                                138. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

February 29, 2012 at 5:01 pm

That's great link! Too bad you're not following their advice. I provide links
to facts to support my ideas. You just huff and puff and ignore the facts. The
following cartoon shows where the moneyed interests are:

http://thinkprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/climateinfographic.jpg

                    
                                                139. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 1, 2012 at 6:30 am

Let's look at CO2 and temperature historically:

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Carboniferous……….14…………………………800  
Permian………………16…………………………900  
Triassic………………17………………………..1750  
Jurassic………………16.5……………………..1950  
Cretaceous………….18………………………..1700  
Paleogene……………18…………………………500  
Carboniferous……….14…………………………800……………..14…………………………280

## The first thing one notices is how little correlation CO2 has with
temperature

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Carboniferous……………14…………………………800  
Neogene………………….14…………………………280

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Cretaceous…………….18………………………1700  
Paleogene………………18……………………….500

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Permian…………………16………………………..900  
Jurassic…………………16.5…………………….1950

Coincidentally every lab experiment every done trying to correlate "warming"
with CO2 has failed! If you can show me some empirical test results I would be
glad to look at them - NOTE not computer models or explanations - test
results. Everyone is well aware of IR radiation on CO2 and that CO2 infused
atmospheres cool slower but to date there has not been one reproducible
experiment that links CO2 to warming in the atmosphere - a rather inconvenient
fact wouldn't you say?

Although numbers vary greatly the average global warming projection says that
the earth's temperature will rise 3.5C by 2100. (Of course all of the models
exclude the last ten years because that drives the numbers way down, but will
ignore that.) This assumes that the CO2 will be around 755 ppm. Using the
EXACT same model we can go back historically and match what the temperatures
should have been - that is if the MODEL is correct and that CO2 is the driving
force of temperature.

Backdating a model is a common technique to checks is accuracy if we backdate
the IPCC average model for AGW these are the results

………………………..Model Temp C……… .ACTUAL Temp C…………Error

Carboniferous………………17.6…………………….14…………………..21%  
Permian……………………..17.9…………………….16…………………..11%  
Triassic………………………25………………………17…………………..32%  
Jurassic………………………26.7……………………16.5…………………38%  
Cretaceous………………….24.3……………………18……………………26%  
Paleogene……………………14.1……………………18……………………28%  
Neogene………………………13.1…………………..14…………………….7%

This is an embarrassment to any scientist to use a model that can't be back
tested and then rely on it for future predictions. This model averaged 5
degrees Celsius of error.

Face it Enviro, if you and the other delusional people that push anthropogenic
global warming don't have carbon dioxide you have nothing and the chance for
the control factor, the revenue factor is gone and then maybe science can get
back to important work.  
"The desire to save humanity is always a false front for the urge to rule it"
-- H L Mencken

                    
                                                140. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 2:05 pm

Look at the relationship between temperature and CO2 in the last 450,000 years
- see FIGURE 3 in http://www.columbia.edu/~mhs119/Storms/

FIGURE 3. Temperature change, atmospheric carbon dioxide amount,  
and sea level as a function of time for the past 425,000 years.  
The horizontal axis shows time in thousands of years before present.  
Time zero ["present" refers to the date 1750, just before the  
industrial revolution. (Figure from Hansen et al., "Target Atmospheric  
CO2" See sources for chapter 8. For the original data, see sources for  
chapter 3.)

Looks to me lke CO2 and Temperature correlate VERY well.

Where do you get "there has not been one reproducible experiment that links
CO2 to warming in the atmosphere"? EVERY scientists KNOWS that CO2 IS linked
to warming - it's simply physics!

See  
http://ecocentric.blogs.time.com/2010/10/14/climate-why-co2-is-the-control-
knob-for-global-climate-change/

which summarizes

http://www.sciencemag.org/content/330/6002/356.abstract

A

                    
                                                141. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 4, 2012 at 12:57 am

Doug -

I suggest you look at the following link and review the video

http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/03/01/a-co2-warning-etched-in-stone-
and-sedimen/

                    
                                                142. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 8:41 pm

It looks like the insurnace industry believes the climate change "hoax", so
the number of "conspirators" continues to grow (see
http://www.insurancenetworking.com/news/insurance-climate-change-risk-
ceres-30007-1.html)

Climate Change: Insurers Confirm Growing Risks, Costs  
Stakeholders from the insurance industry met with members of the U.S. Senate
to acknowledge the role global warming plays in extreme weather-related
losses, and to issue a call for action.

Insurance Networking News, March 2, 2012

Pat Speer

The politics of global warming have typically involved much debate as to the
role climate change plays in growing weather-related risk. Yesterday, however,
at a Capital Hill a press conference on the cost of climate change, debate was
not on the agenda. Pointing to a year of history-making, $1 billion-plus
natural disasters, representatives of Tier 1 insurance companies took a
definitive stance with members of the U.S. Senate to confirm that costs to
taxpayers and businesses from extreme weather will continue to soar because of
climate change.

Representatives from The Reinsurance Association of America, Swiss Re and
Willis Re and Ceres, a nonprofit organization that leads a national coalition
of investors, environmental organizations and other public interest groups
working with companies to address a variety of sustainability challenges,
joined Sens. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.) yesterday
to discuss the growing financial impact of global warming.

“From our industry’s perspective, the footprints of climate change are around
us and the trend of increasing damage to property and threat to lives is
clear,” said Franklin Nutter, president of the Reinsurance Association of
America. “We need a national policy related to climate and weather.”

etc.

                    
                                                143. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 2, 2012 at 10:44 pm

Enviro

Regarding

'Water flows downhill, and the extra rain will eventually find its way back to
the sea. When it does, global sea level will rise again. ‘We’re heating up the
planet, and in the end that means more sea level rise’

Do any of the geniuses predicting world calamity know what equilibrium is?

Maybe there is a condition where water flows uphill from a condition called
evaporation and on warmer planet there will be more water in the atmosphere
causing the sea level to balance itself.

Houston used to think the Gulf of Mexico was rising but they found out they
were sinking because they were pumping the ground water that was holding them
up. They used GPS satellites to determine they were sinking instead of the
Gulf rising and stopped pumping water from underneath the city.

                    
                                                144. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 4, 2012 at 7:04 pm

There is an equilibrium of water on the Earth – some is lost to space and some
comes from asteroids, but basically the amount does not change. The water is
on land (liquid), in glaciers (solid), and in the ocean (liquid). As ocean
water warms, sea level rises. As glaciers melt, the sea level rises. And
glaciers (including Antarctica) have been melting faster than imagined 10
years ago. Sea levels have been rising an average of about 3.2 mm / year for
at least 20 years. I don’t think any respected climate scientist expects the
DECADAL average will change much in the next five years or so (at least not
significantly in a negative direction).

if on a “warmer planet there will be more water in the atmosphere causing the
sea level to balance itself.” then we’d really be in trouble – think of all
the additional flooding that would cause! There WILL be more water in the
atmosphere, bit it will certainly not lead to the sea level to stop rising (it
will only lead to more rainfail and more flooding).

Do you have any links to respected sites that show anything other than a
continued rise in sea level?

                    
                                                145. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 3, 2012 at 7:01 pm

Another article that I suggest you read:

Why the Global Warming Skeptics Are Wrong March 22, 2012 William D. Nordhaus

http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/

                    
                                                146. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 4, 2012 at 1:02 am

You might also look at the Web site for Shell:

http://www.shell.com/home/content/environment_society/environment/climate_change/

Global population growth and economic development may double energy demand by
2050. All energy sources will be needed, with fossil fuels meeting the bulk of
people’s needs. At the same time CO2 emissions must be reduced to avoid
serious climate change. To manage CO2 emissions, governments and industry will
need to work together. As Shell increases its gas and oil production to help
meet growing demand, we believe the best way to help secure a sustainable
energy future is by focusing on four main areas: natural gas, biofuels, carbon
capture and storage, and energy efficiency in our operations.

                    
                                                147. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 12:32 pm

"How is it that Svensmark et al. could produce a graph like this one showing a
clear correlation between cosmic rays and climate whereas RealClimate manage
to produce one showing the exact opposite?"  
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2011/08/the-cerncloud-results-
are-surprisingly-interesting/

Sorry folks, cosmic rays really are in charge  
http://calderup.wordpress.com/2012/03/03/climate-physics-101/

I will answer that question, it is because Nigel Calder deals in real science
and Real climate deals in untruths and conjecture and is therefore unusable as
far as understanding anything about the climate.

I just saw on Australian broadcast that this year is the best production year
ever in all of Australia for agriculture.  
What about your climate change, enviro?

                    
                                                148. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 2:59 pm

Look at http://epa.gov/climatechange/science/recenttc.html (see below)

There does appear to be a correlation between cosmic rays and mid-troposheric
temperatures in the way they "move" together. But how do you account for the
cosmic ray flux being almost constant but both the "ground" and mid-
troposheric temperatures increasing? What is casusing the temperatures to
increase?

* * *

Tropospheric Temperature Change

Measurements of the Earth’s temperature taken by weather balloons (also known
as radiosondes) and satellites from the surface to 5-8 miles into the
atmosphere - the layer called the troposphere - also reveal warming trends.
According to NOAA's National Climatic Data Center:  
For the period 1958-2006, temperatures measured by weather balloons warmed at
a rate of 0.22°F per decade near the surface and 0.27°F per decade in the mid-
troposphere. The 2006 global mid-troposphere temperatures were 1.01°F above
the 1971-2000 average, the third warmest on record.  
For the period beginning in 1979, when satellite measurements of troposphere
temperatures began, various satellite data sets for the mid-troposphere showed
similar rates of warming — ranging from 0.09°F per decade to 0.34°F per
decade, depending on the method of analysis.

                    
                                                149. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 12:49 pm

Enviro said this: "Where do you get “there has not been one reproducible
experiment that links CO2 to warming in the atmosphere”? EVERY scientists
KNOWS that CO2 IS linked to warming – it’s simply physics!" Did you show what
information I asked for? NO and you can not. That these SCIENTEST do not agree
with you is obvious.

“The dysfunctional nature of the climate sciences is nothing short of a
scandal. Science is too important for our society to be misused in the way it
has been done within the Climate Science Community.” The global warming
establishment “has actively suppressed research results presented by
researchers that do not comply with the dogma of the IPCC.” -- Swedish
Climatologist Dr. Hans Jelbring, of the Paleogeophysics & Geodynamics Unit at
Stockholm University.

“Global warming is the central tenet of this new belief system in much the
same way that the Resurrection is the central tenet of Christianity. Al Gore
has taken a role corresponding to that of St Paul in proselytizing the new
faith…My skepticism about AGW arises from the fact that as a physicist who has
worked in closely related areas, I know how poor the underlying science is. In
effect the scientific method has been abandoned in this field.” -- Atmospheric
Physicist Dr. John Reid, who worked with Australia's CSIRO's (Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization) Division of Oceanography and
worked in surface gravity waves (ocean waves) research.

I know that Dr. Robert B. Laughlin has a much better understanding of this
topic than you could ever hope to acquire from where ever you get your
delusional information.

“Please remain calm: The Earth will heal itself -- Climate is beyond our power
to control…Earth doesn't care about governments or their legislation. You
can't find much actual global warming in present-day weather observations.
Climate change is a matter of geologic time, something that the earth
routinely does on its own without asking anyone's permission or explaining
itself.” -- Nobel Prize-Winning Stanford University Physicist Dr. Robert B.
Laughlin, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1998, and was formerly a
research scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

I know that these people are more knowledgeable regarding this subject that a
fiction writer such as yourself is; therefore, it is people like this that I
get my information from.

Bert Rutan knows so much more about this topic than you ever will. This may be
one of the only thing that "time" has ever been right about.

“Those who call themselves 'Green planet advocates' should be arguing for a
CO2- fertilized atmosphere, not a CO2-starved atmosphere…Diversity increases
when the planet was warm AND had high CO2 atmospheric content…Al Gore's
personal behavior supports a green planet - his enormous energy use with his 4
homes and his bizjet, does indeed help make the planet greener. Kudos, Al for
doing your part to save the planet.” -- Renowned engineer and aviation/space
pioneer Burt Rutan, who was named "100 most influential people in the world,
2004" by Time Magazine and Newsweek called him "the man responsible for more
innovations in modern aviation than any living engineer."

                    
                                                150. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 3:31 pm

For "EVERY scientists KNOWS that CO2 IS linked to warming – it’s simply
physics!" look at this link:  
http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-physics-yes-co2-does-
create-warming/

The debate should be about the probabilities of various amounts of warming,
the amount of risks that we’re willing to take, and the probable costs of both
inaction and action.

Re” The Earth will heal itself —“ sure it will! And re “Diversity increases
when the planet was warm AND had high CO2 atmospheric content…”. Of course it
does! But so what? Do you want your grandchildren living on a planet where the
temperature is ten degrees higher and the seas 40 feet higher? How many people
will that kind of planet support?

                    
                                                151. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 7, 2012 at 8:45 am

This is the main nugget of logic that I got from the site you referred me to:  
"Jeff, I think that you believe that CO2 causes warming because you want to
believe that. Your belief is faith-based, because it certainly isn’t fact-
based – not as you have presented it  
This post is disappointing, I was hoping you could do better than this."  
http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-physics-yes-co2-does-
create-warming/

                    
                                                152. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 7:53 pm

Where is your curiosity? Can you "Google"? Can you think for yourself? Why are
you swayed by non-experts?

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenhouse_effect

http://www.aip.org/history/climate/co2.htm

http://climate.nasa.gov/causes/: "Carbon dioxide (CO2). A minor but very
important component of the atmosphere, carbon dioxide is released through
natural processes such as respiration and volcano eruptions and through human
activities such as deforestation, land use changes, and burning fossil fuels.
Humans have increased atmospheric CO2 concentration by a third since the
Industrial Revolution began. This is the most important long-lived "forcing"
of climate change. "

Can you find a link to a Web page for a reputable scienfic organization that
refutes the science in http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-
physics-yes-co2-does-create-warming/?

What additional proof do you need?

                    
                                                153. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 7, 2012 at 9:04 am

Your projection of the type of planet that people will find them selves on in
the future is based on what? IPCC models that have all been wrong, Some report
in "Time Magazine" or how about some nonsense that The AP's good old Seth
Borenstein who totally editorialize their "science" reporting with such
nonsense as this:  
"Nature is pummeling the United States this year with extremes. Unprecedented
triple-digit heat and devastating drought. Deadly tornadoes leveling towns.
Massive rivers overflowing. A billion-dollar blizzard. And now, unusual
hurricane-caused flooding in Vermont."

In June, 1934 the entire country had triple digit heat. We didn’t come
anywhere close to that this summer.  
Severe drought in 1934 covered 80% of the country, compared with 25% in 2011

Flooding in 1927 was worse. Are these reporters like Seth Borenstein too lazy
or too dumb to do any research?  
What kind of life do you think planet earth's people will have if there was no
fossil fuels used? Do you not keep up this issue enough to know that in the
past four years the sea level has Dropped:

"Al Gore Reaches A Tipping Point  
Not his weight …..  
Sea level has been falling for four years. Arctic sea ice is normal. Antarctic
sea ice is normal. Temperatures are below the 30 year mean, and haven’t risen
for 15 years.  
So now they move on to ocean acidification ….  
http://www.real-science.com/al-gore-reaches-tipping-point

"Time Magazine IQ Dropping At The Highest Rate In The Last 300 Million Years

Researchers already know that the seas are becoming more acidic, thanks
largely to the increase in the atmospheric concentration of carbon. (Much of
the carbon in the air is absorbed by the oceans—think of the fizz in a soda
can—which over time makes them more acidic.) Over the last hundred years, the
ocean pH—which measures the relative acidity of a liquid—has fallen by 0.1
unit to 8.1 That may not sound like much, but according to a new study
published in Science, it’s all but unprecedented.  
Ocean Acidification Is Now Almost Certainly Occurring Faster Than It Has for
at Least 300 Million Years | Ecocentric | TIME.com  
What utter stupidity. Ocean pH varies by a much larger amount than that from
month to month, and is regularly lower than 7.8. Monterrey Bay shows no trend
in pH

Alarmists appear to be incapable of ever telling the truth about anything."  
http://www.real-science.com/time-magazine-iq-dropping-highest-rate-300

"Greenland Almost Completely Locked In By Ice"  
N_daily_extent.png (420×500)  
Only a tiny section of SW Greenland remains navigable.  
http://www.real-science.com/greenland-completely-locked-ice>

                    
                                                154. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 5:59 pm

Doug -

You are being misled by misinformation and disinformation. Not one of your
contentions meets a "relevancy" test. At what point will you start thinking
for yourself and start distrusting your sources? Googling is really easy!

“Your projection of the type of planet that people will find themselves on in
the future is based on what” – It’s based on the fact that rising levels of
CO2 will increase the temperature of the earth (by how much is a good topic
for debating – see this on the MIT Web site -
http://globalchange.mit.edu/resources/gamble/ The Greenhouse Gamble™ wheels
were developed by the MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
Change to better convey uncertainty in climate change prediction. The
roulette-style spinning wheels depict the estimated probability, or
likelihood, of potential temperature change (global average surface
temperature) over the next 100 years. The face of each wheel is divided into
colored slices, with the size of each slice representing the estimated
probability of the temperature change in the year 2100 falling within that
range.  
The Greenhouse Gamble wheel on the left is the "no policy" or reference case,
in which it is assumed no action is taken to try to curb the global emissions
of greenhouse gases. The median value of the "no policy" wheel, or the
temperature at which there is a 50% chance of falling above or below that
level (even odds) is 5.2 °C.  
The Greenhouse Gamble wheel on the right is the "with policy" case, which
assumes that policies are enacted to limit cumulative emissions of greenhouse
gases over the century to 4.2 trillion metric tons, measured in
CO2-equivalent. The median warming level (even odds) is 2.3 °C.) RELEVANT
information, please!

"Sea level has been falling for four years". So what? Sea levels have been
rising an average of about 3.2 mm / year for at least 20 years. I don’t think
any respected climate scientist expects the DECADAL average will change much
in the next five years or so (at least not significantly in a negative
direction). Do you have any links to respected sites that show anything other
than a continued rise in sea level? RELEVANT information, please!

"Arctic sea ice is normal." So what? Of course it’s “normal” this time of year
– it’s WINTER. There are three major “facts” to consider for Arctic sea ice –
minimum extent in the SUMMER, volume of ice in the SUMMER, and amount of
multi-year ice. All of these numbers are decreasing (see
http://nsidc.org/cryosphere/sotc/sea_ice.html, plus try Googling for more
info). RELEVANT information, please!

"Antarctic sea ice is normal". So what? See
http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/grace20120208bot.html “Greenland,
Antarctica and Peripheral Glaciers and Ice Caps:  
Average yearly change in mass, in centimeters of water, during 2003-2010, as
measured by NASA’s Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) satellites,
for just Greenland and Antarctica and their peripheral glaciers and ice caps.
There are enormous ice loss rates over substantial regions of those two ice
sheets. Blue represents ice mass loss, while red represents ice mass gain.
RELEVANT information, please!

"Temperatures are below the 30 year mean". So what? Of course there is
somewhere on earth where this is true. Can you provide a link that supports
your contention for the planet as a whole? RELEVANT information, please!

"Temperatures haven’t risen for 15 years". So what”. “That statement, to put
it bluntly, is dead wrong. It relies on blatantly misinterpreting long term
trends, instead wearing blinders and only looking at year-to-year variations
in temperature.” Relevant facts: (1) temperatures variation is only relevant
over relatively long periods of time – like 30 years of so, (2) nine of the
ten hottest years on record all occurred since the year 2000.” (3) Over 90% of
the warming has been going into the oceans, and (4) the earth is still in an
“energy imbalance mode” where we are absorbing significantly more energy than
we are emitting. See also
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/ RELEVANT information, please!

“Greenland Almost Completely Locked In By Ice” – so what? Greenland ice sheets
melting faster than predicted  
http://www.theworld.org/2011/05/greenland-ice-sheets-melting/. Also see
“Antarctica” above -
http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/grace20120208bot.html RELEVANT
information, please!

"Ocean pH varies by a much larger amount than that from month to month, and is
regularly lower than 7.8. Monterrey Bay shows no trend in pH". So what? How
about reading some articles on the affects of the pH change:  
"This study has some good news and some bad news for corals," said coauthor
Adina Paytan, a research professor in the Institute of Marine Sciences at UC
Santa Cruz. "The good news is that some species of corals are able to calcify
and grow at very low pH. The bad news is that these are not the ones that
build the framework of the coral reefs. So if this is an indication of what
will happen with future ocean acidification, the reefs will not be as we know
them today." (http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/11/111128132700.htm)
RELEVANT information, please!

                    
                                                155. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 5:09 am

Who ever said that CO2 separated out of the air at lower elevations and just
"stayed there"? Don't you realize that it is in a constant cycle with ocean
water? Also I think that you should know that the air will always have these
percentages of specific gases in it at sea level. I know from experience that
at 18,000 feet at Thorung La Pass (5,4165 M=17,769 FT) on the Annapurna trek
the amount of O2 is 52% of what one finds at sea level and the amount of CO2,
from the CRC 85th edition 2004-2005 handbook on physics and chemistry is
practically zero .

This applies to your ocean temperature and the acidity of the oceans, Enviro .  
It would be simple and probably nice if the earth's climate and ocean actions
could be explained with something as simple as a trace gas, carbon dioxide,
that makes up .035-8% of the atmosphere and 15.1% of the ocean's makeup but
only simple people could believe such a thing. They should know just how
dynamic and complex the climate is and all of the factors that affect it
before making such a flawed judgment. Here are some sites to look into, if you
care to. The biggest flows out of the atmosphere are photosynthesis on land
and CO2 uptake by cold ocean water. These are about 30 times and 40 times
respectively the flow of carbon into the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning.
What follows also addresses the utterly insane allegation that CO2 is
increasing the acidity of the oceans.

"The pycnocline (meaning rapid change of density) separates the surface layer
of the ocean from the deep ocean. Deep ocean water has a temperature of about
3 degrees Celsius and a salinity measuring about 34-35 psu." (What does all of
this do to the ocean's pH? Where and what depth are your pH observations taken
from?)  
http://www.windows2universe.org/earth/Water/deep_ocean.html

"The interaction between water temperature and salinity effects density and
density determines thermohaline circulation, or the global conveyor belt. The
global conveyor belt is a global-scale circulation process that occurs over a
century-long time scale. Water sinks in the North Atlantic, traveling south
around Africa, rising in the Indian Ocean or further on in the Pacific, then
returning toward the Atlantic on the surface only to sink again in the North
Atlantic starting the cycle again." (Again, your narrow time span makes your
worries groundless if you are looking at 20-30 years and who & where and at
what depths were these readings taken regarding PH? Also NASA seems to want to
compress this circulation time span into centuries when most believe it is at
least a thousand year cycle)  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” [The
Global Conveyer Belt has suddenly stopped for several speculated reason in the
past and caused dramatic and rapid climate changes always to the cold side;
therefore, warm is preferable to cold any day]  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water temperature increases, the increased mobility of gas molecules make
them escape from the water, thereby reducing the amount of gas dissolved.
[Could this be why warming forces the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere by
hundreds years & not what the alarmist want one to believe that it is the CO2
that is causing the warming?]  
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/oceano/seawater.htm

"It is thought that the carbon dioxide in the sea exists in equilibrium with
that of exposed rock and bottom sediment containing limestone CaCO3 (or sea
shells for that matter). In other words, that the element calcium exists in
equilibrium with CO3. But the concentration of Ca (411ppm) is 10.4 mmol/l and
that of all CO2 species (90ppm) 2.05 mmol/l, of which CO3 is about 6%, thus
0.12 mmol/l. Thus the sea has a vast oversupply of calcium. It is difficult
therefore to accept that decalcification could be a problem as CO3 increases.
To the contrary, it should be of benefit to calcifying organisms. Thus the
more CO2, the more limestone is deposited. This has also been borne out by
measurements (Budyko 1977)." [maybe, just maybe as with so many things in
nature, this is a self-regulating factor that has been taking care of the
ocean's pH without humans having one thing to do with it]  
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/issues/global/acid.htm

You and your "scientist" views on pH is pointless since where is the base line
since the pH scale didn't exist before the concept of p[H] was first
introduced by Danish chemist Søren Peder Lauritz Sørensen at the Carlsberg
Laboratory in 1909?

                    
                                                156. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 12:55 pm

SPECIAL REPORT: More Than 1000 International Scientists Dissent Over Man-Made
Global Warming Claims - Challenge UN IPCC & Gore  
Climate Depot Exclusive: 321-page 'Consensus Buster' Report set to further
chill UN Climate Summit in Cancun

The more than 300 additional scientists added to this report since March 2009
(21 months ago), represents an average of nearly four skeptical scientists a
week speaking out publicly. The well over 1,000 dissenting scientists are
almost 20 times the number of UN scientists (52) who authored the media-hyped
IPCC 2007 Summary for Policymakers.

http://www.climatedepot.com/a/9035/SPECIAL-REPORT-More-
Than-1000-International-Scientists-Dissent-Over-ManMade-Global-Warming-Claims-
Challenge-UN-IPCC-Gore

                    
                                                157. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 3:44 pm

So if all these scientists think there is not a problem, why is it that almost
all statements from leading scientific organzations, the Saudi Oil minister,
and Shell Oil state that climate change is a problem and that action needs to
be taken? Why is there not even ONE leading scientific organzation that has
issued a statement saying that we don't need to worry? How many scientists
denied that cigarette smoke was not a problem well after it had been
scientifically established?

                    
                                                158. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 7, 2012 at 8:30 am

Enviro needs to deal with these questions before moving on to the Saudi oil
minister, who has as much scientific background on this subject as Al Gore;
therefore, some one we all need to listen to, right Envio.  
- mention Al Gores tobacco farm.

            * ask why RK Pachauri is still a director of GloriOil.

            * bring up how Shell and BP founded CRU in 1972.

            * ask for the mathematical derivation of CO2 forcing.

Any answers, Enviro?

"To be sure, Al-Naimi's "over-arching message," as he put it, was to reassure
his audience that "Saudi Arabia will continue to be a stable supplier of crude
oil to world markets for many decades."  
He left no one in his audience in doubt that oil is a necessity of modern
life. "The fact remains that oil will continue to play a major role in the
overall energy mix for many decades," he said. "It is clear that a petroleum-
free transportation system is decades away. And if you look at the vast range
of products derived from crude oil, everything from lubricants to asphalt,
medicines to plastics, it is clear petroleum is here to stay."  
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/02/01/ali_al_naimi_speech/

What kind of a wandering, delusional mind would now want to interject smoking
into this discussion?

                    
                                                159. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 3:55 pm

Again "Why is there not even ONE leading scientific organzation that has
issued a statement saying that we don’t need to worry about climate change? "

Re Shell -"To be sure, Al-Naimi’s “over-arching message,” as he put it, was to
reassure his audience that “Saudi Arabia will continue to be a stable supplier
of crude oil to world markets for many decades " - so what? What does that
have to do with "the price of tea in China"? He also said "Global warming
'among humanity's most pressing concerns'", which is what we are discussing
here. Do you disagree with him?

As "for the mathematical derivation of CO2 forcing" - please read
http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-physics-yes-co2-does-
create-warming/ (I've provided the link before - why are you ignoring it?)

I mentioned "How many scientists denied that cigarette smoke was not a problem
well after it had been scientifically established?" becuase the same "denial
machine" is at work on climate change - please read "The Merchants of Doubt"

When asking questions, please ask RELAVENT questions, like those dealing with
the science of climate change.

                    
                                                160. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 5:20 am

Enviro: I had LOOKED into the link that you supplied and I allow another
person that examined it answer, again, for me. What part of this do you not
understand? Answer: anything that does not coincide with my delusional views
of anthropogenic global warming.

"Brego said  
April 19, 2010 at 10:49 pm  
Once again Jeff, you insist upon making the same mistakes and are refusing to
recognize that the troposphere contains great abundances of water in all three
of it’s phases; vapor, liquid and ice. The absorption spectrum for the three
phases of water are very different. The comparative absorption spectral
diagram that you posted is irrelevant because it also fails to take this into
consideration.  
Once again, the absorption spectrum for liquid water in the atmosphere:  
http://i42.tinypic.com/54aes8.jpg  
Note the location of the strongest absorption peak of liquid water and it’s
unfortunate coincidence with the absorption peak for CO2, where liquid water
absorbs 300+ times more intensely than CO2, not to mention water’s much
greater abundance in the troposphere:  
http://i44.tinypic.com/24zayi1.jpg  
And what’s up with your figure 4, with an unknown provenance? I think I
recognize that as a diagram the kid two blocks over from me put together for
giggles, and yet you quote it as gospel? Why? Because you think that it
confirms your preconceived notions?  
Jeff, I think that you believe that CO2 causes warming because you want to
believe that. Your belief is faith-based, because it certainly isn’t fact-
based – not as you have presented it  
This post is disappointing, I was hoping you could do better than this."  
http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-physics-yes-co2-does-
create-warming/

Enviro: Look at these sties provided above to get a true and, for that reason,
different perspective of what you think you know about this topic.

                    
                                                161. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 4:17 am

Enviro: These folks below do not seem to hold your views on anthropogenic
global warming and I do believe that they know much more about it than you
ever will, given your irrational mind set.

Warming fears are the “worst scientific scandal in the history…When people  
come to know what the truth is, they will feel deceived by science and  
scientists.” - UN IPCC Japanese Scientist Dr. Kiminori Itoh, an award-winning  
PhD environmental physical chemist.

“The models and forecasts of the UN IPCC "are incorrect because they only  
are based on mathematical models and presented results at scenarios that do  
not include, for example, solar activity.” - Victor Manuel Velasco Herrera, a  
researcher at the Institute of Geophysics of the National Autonomous  
University of Mexico

“Even doubling or tripling the amount of carbon dioxide will virtually have  
little impact, as water vapour and water condensed on particles as clouds  
dominate the worldwide scene and always will.” – . Geoffrey G. Duffy, a  
professor in the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering of the  
University of Auckland, NZ.

“For how many years must the planet cool before we begin to understand  
that the planet is not warming? For how many years must cooling go on?" -  
Geologist Dr. David Gee the chairman of the science committee of the 2008  
International Geological Congress who has authored 130 plus peer reviewed  
papers, and is currently at Uppsala University in Sweden.

“Creating an ideology pegged to carbon dioxide is a dangerous nonsense…  
The present alarm on climate change is an instrument of social control, a  
pretext for major businesses and political battle. It became an ideology,  
which is concerning.” - Environmental Scientist Professor Delgado Domingos  
of Portugal, the founder of the Numerical Weather Forecast group, has more  
than 150 published articles.

“CO2 emissions make absolutely no difference one way or another….Every  
scientist knows this, but it doesn’t pay to say so…Global warming, as a  
political vehicle, keeps Europeans in the driver’s seat and developing nations  
walking barefoot.” - Dr. Takeda Kunihiko, vice-chancellor of the Institute of

Science and Technology Research at Chubu University in Japan

                    
                                                162. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 3:42 pm

So what? These people may know a lot more than I do, but they don't know more
than most climate scientists. I'm really amazed to see so much ignorance in
people who claim to be scientists - some of those statements disregard the
consensus views on climate change. I'll stick with NAS and MIT.

                    
                                                163. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 12:56 pm

I would hope Enviro, that you can put this together with the link regarding
how CO2 becomes less and less to the point of being nonexistent at altitude in
a column of air.

Now another FACT for you to consider. CO2 is one and one half times heavier
than "air". This point was sadly proven on Aug, 21, 1986 when Lake Nyor in
Cameroon released about 1.6 million tons of CO2 that spilled over the lip of
the lake and down into a valley and killed 1,700 people within 16 miles of the
lake. "Carbon dioxide, being about 1.5 times as dense as air, caused the cloud
to "hug" the ground and descend down the valleys where various villages were
located. The mass was about 50 metres (164 ft) thick and it travelled downward
at a rate of 20–50 kilometres (12–31 mi) per hour. For roughly 23 kilometres
(14 mi) the cloud remained condensed and dangerous, suffocating many of the
people sleeping in Nyos,Kam,Cha,andSubum.

"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L…

                    
                                                164. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 3:07 pm

What's your point? What happened to the CO2 at Lake Nyor? Did it stay on the
ground for a several weeks or did it mix in the atmosphere? Do you have any
links to sites that show that CO2 is not well-mixed int the atmosphere?

                    
                                                165. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 7, 2012 at 8:14 am

I will explain my point to you in a way that even you might be able
understand. Air is made up of molecules. They are so light they float around
you without sinking to the ground. There are basically two groups of molecules
in the air, nitrogen and oxygen. The nitrogen takes up a huge portion of the
air: 78%! That is, about 3/4 of the molecules causing the atmospheric pressure
are tiny nitrogen molecules. Oxygen makes up 21% of the air. Combined,
nitrogen and oxygen make up 99% of what is going into your nose, throat, and
lungs at sea level. (Sea level is the key here, Enviro. You can find out for
your self that at 18,000′ there is only about 53% of the 02 available that is
at sea level. The link I presented you with, that you didn't understand,
explains what happens to CO2 in a column of air at various altitudes) All the
other gases make up only 1% of the atmosphere and most of that is argon.

One would hope that Enviro understands this fact: The atmosphere is made up of
78.08% nitrogen, 20.95% oxygen, ( 99.03% of the atmosphere is made up of these
two gases) .93% argon and .0001% neon, helium and krypton for constant
components and .4% water vapor that constitutes 95% of what cause the green
house affect and we had best not forget CO2 at .036% and the rest is made up
of trace gases such as CH4,SO2,03 and NO, and NO2.? These trace gases are very
important, H2O being the most important because it contributes 95% to the
green house effect, and with out these gases the surface of the earth would
too cool/cold to support life as we know it.

Relatively soon after carbon dioxide is released by man near ground level, it
is removed from the atmosphere. Since carbon dioxide is heavier than air,
carbon dioxide released by man near ground level sinks in air relatively
quickly rather than rising up to the upper atmosphere to become a so-called
greenhouse gas in the upper atmosphere. Since you could not on your own figure
out what happened to the CO2 at Lake Nyor, don't you assume that it mixed with
the other gasses that make up the atmosphere and was in turn used by plants
that are the basis for all life on earth. I gave this example about Lake Nyor
to point out that CO2 is one and one half times heavier that "air" and you
seem to not be able to grasp that FACT. Now a question for you: What have you
ever been able to trap with a gas? Especially a gas that makes up .036% of the
atmosphere and is 1 & 1/2 times heavier than that atmosphere.

                    
                                                166. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 3:38 pm

Doug -

Please use your common sense! Re , if "Relatively soon after carbon dioxide is
released by man near ground level, it is removed from the atmosphere" - why is
the CO2 concentration now at 392 ppm and rising 2-3 ppm/year? CO2 has a
"residency" time of over 100 years. Look at any diagram of the carbon cycle
(e.g., http://genomicscience.energy.gov/). You will see that about 40% of man-
made emissions stay in the atmosphere.

And did you look at http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-
physics-yes-co2-does-create-warming/, which shows how "a gas that makes up
.036% of the atmosphere and is 1 & 1/2 times heavier than that atmosphere." is
responsible for not only making our planet livable for humans but will also be
the main reason our planet will get warmer as more CO2 enters the atmosphere?

Please, please, please, stop regurgitating irrelevant facts and show me a link
to a statement by a climate scientist that contradicts my above two points.

                    
                                                167. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 5:52 am

Enviro tells me this: "And did you look at
http://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/19/radiative-physics-yes-co2-does-
create-warming/, which shows how “a gas that makes up .036% of the atmosphere
and is 1 & 1/2 times heavier than that atmosphere.” is responsible for not
only making our planet livable for humans but will also be the main reason our
planet will get warmer as more CO2 enters the atmosphere?  
Please, please, please, stop regurgitating irrelevant facts and show me a link
to a statement by a climate scientist that contradicts my above two points."

My Lord, Enviro, how many times and different ways do I have to show you that
I did look into the completely irrelevant site that you wasted my time looking
into. You, above, did say one thing correct and that, while what I have stated
is not irrelevant, they are FACTS. I issue these other Facts for your
consideration and await you to make up something to answer the question.

                    
                                                168. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 6:06 am

Enviro-  
Please use your common sense, use some logic, use some kind of a thought
process to keep you from going over the edge on this scam that you seem to
have bought into.

Enviro is obsessed with the supposed increase of 280 ppm to 392ppm of CO2 and
I hope that this information will help Enviro to sleep better at nights.  
This, I hope, will put this into some kind of a perspective that makes one
understand just how insignificant this increase is.  
A part per million is like 1 drop of ink in a large  
kitchen sink.  
A large kitchen sink is about 13-14 gallons. There  
are 100 drops in one teaspoon, and 768 teaspoons  
per gallon.  
Some other things that are one part per million are…  
One drop in the fuel tank of a mid-sized car  
One inch in 16 miles  
About one minute in two years  
One car in a line of bumper-to-bumper traffic from  
Cleveland to San Francisco.  
One penny in $10,000.  
I know that you understand that these 112 additional ppm are spread out over
this 16 miles in different one inch segments and wouldn't it be a task to be
told to sort out the 392 pennies from the number that it would take to make up
$10,000.  
At 392 parts per million CO2 is a minor constituent of earth's atmosphere-
less than 4/100ths of 1% of all gases present. Compared to former geologic
times, earth's current atmosphere is CO2- impoverished.

                    
                                                169. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 1:54 pm

Enviro:

In most places where the water was reported to be rising, the fact was the
cities have been sinking due to excessive ground water extraction. It can be
proven with GPS monitoring.

http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2012-02/28/content_14707197.htm

Alarmed by the grave results of a geological survey that 46 cities in China
are sinking due to the excessive pumping of groundwater, the central
government recently kicked off construction of two surface subsidence
monitoring networks focusing on the Yangtze River Delta and the North China
plain, respectively.

http://www.greatdreams.com/cities.htm

Journal: Mexico City Sinking Into Depleted Aquifer

http://ag.arizona.edu/azwater/arroyo/062land.html

Subsidence and earth fissures are geological events that are accelerated by
man through a long-term extraction of groundwater, and they represent a
disruption of a natural equilibrium. Underlying groundwater is pumped and the
land settles and subsides. Under certain circumstances fissures then develop.

http://www.defence.pk/forums/bangladesh-defence/151849-groundwater-loss-puts-
city-risk.html

Dhaka is sinking over half an inch a year on average because of excessive
extraction of groundwater and inadequate recharging of the vacuum it creates
below the surface, found a recent study.

                    
                                                170. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 6, 2012 at 9:14 pm

What's your point? Look again at http://news.discovery.com/earth/rain-falls-
sea-falls-111006.html to see where all the extra water on land is - it's not
confined to a few locations. Can you provide a link to a statement by a
respected climate scientist that explains why he/she does not expect sea
levels to continue to rise?

                    
                                                171. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 4:41 pm

Enviro:

What science organization is there that doesn't get government funding for
spreading the climate doomsday message?

                    
                                                172. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 9, 2012 at 7:23 pm

How about these:

The American Association for the Advancement of Science  
The American Chemical Society  
The American Geophysical Union  
The American Institute of Physics  
The Geological Society of America  
The American Medical Association

The following cartoon shows where the moneyed interests are:  
http://thinkprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/climateinfographic.jpg

How about a link to ANY scientific organization that denies the that climate
change is a problem that needs to be addressed? (The only one that I could
find that was ambivalent on climate change is the American Association of
Petroleum Geologists/Division of Professional Affairs: "In the last century,
growth in human population has increased energy use. This has contributed
additional carbon dioxide (CO2) and other gases to the atmosphere. Although
the AAPG membership is divided on the degree of influence that anthropogenic
CO2 has on recent and potential global temperature increases, AAPG believes
that expansion of scientific climate research into the basic controls on
climate is important. " - and they have a vested interest in "business as
usual"!)

                    
                                                173. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 1:29 pm

• Enviro; Please try to tell the truth, just once in awhile, please  
• AAAS.ORG The American Association for the Advancement of Science  
Where to Search for Funding  
Are you seeking funding for research or training in a particular area? Now
that GrantsNet has been retired, our staff has compiled a list of other places
you can search for information on funding programs. Unfortunately, most of
them require a subscription for access.  
• Grants.gov - Grants.gov lists all current discretionary funding
opportunities from 26 agencies of the United States government, including the
National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, the Department
of Energy, and many others -- in other words, all the most important public
funders of research in the United States.  
• The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Extramural Research - The
largest funder of biomedical research in the world, NIH funds research in just
about every area that's remotely related to human health and disease. This
page includes extensive information about NIH grants, as well as a place to
search NIH funding programs. NIH also has an advanced search page, which
offers a wide range of search options.  
• The National Science Foundation (NSF) - An independent federal agency, the
U.S. National Science Foundation funds approximately 20 percent of all
federally supported basic research conducted at America's colleges and
universities. This is the place to search for NSF funding programs.  
• GRC - Run by the American Association of State Colleges and Universities
(AASCU), the Grant Resource Center includes a database "customized to smaller
institutions, and staff assistance," according to one user. A paid
institutional membership is required for access.  
• IRIS - The Illinois Research Information Service is free for the University
of Illinois (UI) community. Outside the UI system, a paid institutional
subscription is needed for access.  
• SPIN - Run by InfoEd International, SPIN (the Sponsored Programs Information
Network) claims to be the most widely used funding opportunity database in the
world. An institutional subscription is required for access.  
• COS Funding Opportunities. Community of Science claims the "largest, most
comprehensive database of available funding," with 700 member institutions.
Individuals can register free, but this won't get you access to the funding
database.  
• ResearchResearch - Based in London, ResearchResearch provides an
international option for people seeking research-funding programs. A paid
subscription is required for access.  
http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/funding

                    
                                                174. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:39 pm

So they get some government funding - so what? Unlike organizations funded by
the fossil fuel lobby, they can write articles that reflect the science.

                    
                                                175. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 1:44 pm

• Enviro; Please try to tell the truth, just once in awhile, please because
you have exactly no credibility if you can not tell the truth about something
as innocuous as this subject, shame on you.

American Geophysical Union - AGU Congressional Science Fellowship  
https://researchfunding.duke.edu/detail.asp?OppID=11651

Federal Grants (Grants.gov)  
Grants.gov allows organizations to electronically find and apply for more than
$400 billion in Federal grants. Grants.gov is THE single access point for over
1000 grant programs offered by all Federal grant-making agencies.  
https://researchfunding.duke.edu/Databases.asp

                    
                                                176. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:40 pm

So they get some government funding – so what? Unlike organizations funded by
the fossil fuel lobby, they can write articles that reflect the science.

How about a link to ANY scientific organization that denies the that climate
change is a problem that needs to be addressed?

                    
                                                177. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 2:04 pm

I wonder Enviro, if this surprises you? I'm not going to look into the other
organizations on "you" list because they do not interest me and none of them
interested you enough to find out the truth about them, same as the other
nonsense that you have wasted our time with.

The Geological Society of America  
GSA/ExxonMobil Awards  
• Field Camp Scholar Award for undergraduate students to attend camp (apply by
16 March).  
• Field Camp Excellence Award to help fund your geology field camp (apply by
16 March).  
• Bighorn Basin Field Award for undergrads, graduate students, and faculty
(apply by 2 April).  
http://www.geosociety.org/

GSA has worked hard to sustain this high level of support and has been able to
do  
so by actively seeking funds from multiple sources. These include substantial
contributions from the National Science Foundation, generous gifts from
individual members,and the active participation of GSA’s Divisions. The
committee has tinkered  
with the grant conditions over the years, striving to provide meaningful
support to as  
many projects as possible. For example, in 2005, we reluctantly moved to a
policy of  
only awarding one grant per student per graduate degree, but that helped put
us in  
position to increase maximum awards from US$3,500 to US$4,000 this year.

Press Release

Oceans Acidifying Faster Today Than in Past 300 Million Years  
Released March 1, 2012  
Press Release  
http://www.nsf.gov/index.jsp

No bias here, is there Enviro?

                    
                                                178. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:45 pm

You can only claim "bias" if there is a reasonable argument for another
explanation. Otherwise you must assume that they are reporting facts. Can you
provide a link to a reputable "ocean scientist" which offers another
explanation?

                    
                                                179. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 2:16 pm

Carbon Capture and Storage—an Emerging Solution?  
[5 March 2012]  
Projects show the promise—and challenges—of capturing carbon emissions and
storing them far underground to temper global warming, researchers told a AAAS
audience.  
http://www.aaas.org/

Does this sound to you like an independent organization with no federal
funding? Who in their right mind is going to waste resources to sequester CO2?
This carbon has been sequestered for millions of years in the form of coal,
petroleum, natural gas shale, etc. and even you should be able to understand
that carbon was at one time in the atmosphere or ocean in the form of CO2 and
yet some how the earth survived very well. When things get tough on earth for
all living organisms is when it gets COLD. Could that be why today 90% of the
life forms on earth are in the temperate zones?

                    
                                                180. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 2:18 pm

I forgot that the CO2 is also sequestered in limestone all over the world

                    
                                                181. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:52 pm

Yes. Limestone is part of the geological carbon cycle, which acts over tens of
thousands of years to keep the temperature within a ranage that supports life.
Not much of an effect over centurries, execpt a negaive one since it's used to
create cement.

                    
                                                182. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:49 pm

I agree- sequestering CO2 does not make sense (too expensive).

But  
(1) there was less sunlight in past, so extra CO2 was needed to make the
planet habitable  
(2)The earth did survive at higher temperatures (with more CO2 that we have
today) - but that means higher sea level and less habital land - not an earth
that I would want to endow to future generations

                    
                                                183. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 11, 2012 at 7:25 am

The Climate Change Scare Machine Chart  
The believers of man-made-weather-disasters are wetting themselves with
excitement. It painful to watch grown men drool.  
Poor things, they were really wounded by Climategate, and they’ve been
waiting, praying that some day someone would level the playing field and show
that skeptics were just as petty, shameless, and money-grubbing as their team
turned out to be (not to mention hypocritical, deceptive and incompetent). In
their dreams.  
Instead the hyped non-denier-gate shows just how incredibly successful the
Heartland Institute is. Look at the numbers. The skeptics have managed to turn
the propaganda around against a tide of money, and it is really some
achievement.  
…  
Entity  
USD

Greenpeace  
$300m  
2010 Annual Report  
WWF  
$700m  
” ($524m Euro)  
Pew Charitable Trust  
$360m  
2010 Annual Report  
Sierra Club  
$56m  
2010 Annual Report  
NSW climate change fund (just one random govt example)  
$750m  
NSW Gov (A$700m)  
UK university climate fund (just another random govt example)  
$360m  
UK Gov (£234 m)  
Heartland Institute  
$7m  
(actually $6.4m)  
US government funding for climate science and technology  
$7,000m  
“Climate Money” 2009  
US government funding for “climate related appropriations”  
$1,300m  
USAID 2010  
Annual turnover in global carbon markets  
$120,000m  
2010 Point Carbon  
Annual investment in renewable energy  
$243,000m  
2010 BNEF  
US government funding for skeptical scientists  
$ 0

                    
                                                184. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 5:01 pm

It takes money to do understand the science behind climate change. It also
takes money to counter the mis-information and dis-information campaigns
funded by the fossil fuel lobby. Again, this cartoon says it all:

http://thinkprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/climateinfographic.jpg

                    
                                                185. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 4:32 am

Enviro: You are obviously free to believe what ever you want regarding this
topic of anthropogenic global warming but please do not expect rational,
logical people to believe that a trace gas, CO2, that makes up .036% of the
total atmosphere and is 1 &1/2 times heavier than that atmosphere, is
responsible for something as complex as what the climate of the earth does.
You can apply all of your distorted reasoning that you have done above but
come up with some basic and believable FACTS.  
It seems that you have no answer as to why the earth entered into an Ice and
then began to warm about 12,000 years ago with out any anthropogenic influence
on either occurrence, about like the Medieval warm period that was followed by
the little ice age. Explain how CO2 and human activity had any thing what so
ever to do with any of what I have just mentioned. You can not do so; but, go
ahead and make up some more stories to tell hoping that some one will believe
them. Also continue to recommend sites that are getting government funding to
perpetuate this hoax that you seem to believe in with all of the blind
devotion of a cultist and that is what has become for many, a new religion.

I know that Dr. Robert B. Laughlin has a much better understanding of this
topic than you could ever hope to acquire from where ever you get your
delusional information.

“Please remain calm: The Earth will heal itself -- Climate is beyond our power
to control…Earth doesn't care about governments or their legislation. You
can't find much actual global warming in present-day weather observations.
Climate change is a matter of geologic time, something that the earth
routinely does on its own without asking anyone's permission or explaining
itself.” -- Nobel Prize-Winning Stanford University Physicist Dr. Robert B.
Laughlin, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1998, and was formerly a
research scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

I do not think that you want to agree with Dr. Robert B. Laughlin but he has
far better credentials to back up his statement than what you possess. Have a
nice fun filled day worrying about something that most of the rest of the
world has no time nor energy to concern themselves with.

                    
                                                186. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 3:50 pm

I prefer to belive what all the scientfic organizations and MIT believe.

I definitely agree with "The Earth will heal itself — Earth doesn’t care about
governments or their legislation. Climate change is a matter of geologic time,
something that the earth routinely does on its own without asking anyone’s
permission or explaining itself.” '

The following is just mis-information and not relevant - RELEVNT facts please!

"Climate is beyond our power to control…" - but CO2 emissions WILL influence
the climate - RELEVNT facts please!

" You can’t find much actual global warming in present-day weather
observations - " - confuses WEATHER and CLIMATE. If the earth is not warming,
how come eight of the ten hottest years (or something like that) have occurred
since 2000? - RELEVNT facts please!

                    
                                                187. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 10:30 am

Envino: Is this the same MIT you are talking about?  
Mr. Lindzen is professor of meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.  
"For more than 30 years there have been attempts to resolve the paradox with
greenhouse gases. Some have suggested CO2—but the amount needed was thousands
of times greater than present levels and incompatible with geological
evidence. Methane also proved unlikely. It turns out that increased thin
cirrus cloud coverage in the tropics readily resolves the paradox—but only if
the clouds constitute a negative feedback. In present terms this means that
they would diminish rather than enhance the impact of CO2."

http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703939404574567423917025400.html

                    
                                                188. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:55 pm

Many of Lindzen's stands on aspects of climate change have been thorougly
debunked, particularly his latest - see
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/

I imagine most of the people at MIT are embarassed by much of what he writes.

I'll stick with the consensus of the major scientific organizations, NOAA, the
The MIT Global Change Joint Program, etc.

                    
                                                189. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 14, 2012 at 8:05 am

Enviro: I present this below to just let you know that I do read some of the
garbage that you recommend and this was pure trash.  
"Icebergs in Iceland’s Jökulsárlón lagoon, which is constantly growing as the
Vatnajökull glacier—Europe’s largest—melts; photograph by Olaf Otto Becker
from his book Under the Nordic Light: A Journey Through Time, Iceland,
1999–2011, which has just been published by Hatje Cantz"  
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/

"Nordhaus is one of the main economists working on climate change models. As
he states "Mankind is playing dice with the natural environment through a
multitude of interventions-injecting into the atmosphere trace gases like the
greenhouse gases or ozone-depleting chemicals, engineering massive land-use
changes such as deforestation, depleting multitudes of species in their
natural habitats even while creating transgenic ones in the laboratory, and
accumulating sufficient nuclear weapons to destroy human civilizations."  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Nordhaus  
"The author is Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale University. He has
received support for research on the economics of climate change during the
last decade from the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy,
and the Glaser Foundation. Other than research associated with these and any
future grants, the author declares no conflict of interest." ↩  
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-
skeptics-are-wrong/

Isn't that something, he gets all of this funding from these known alarmist
agencies and groups but can, with a straight face, say that: "Other than
research associated with these and any future grants, the author declares no
conflict of interest." Enviro, this clown is as delusional as you are and it
for sure proves nothing about the veracity of Dr.Richard Lindzen, professor of
atmospheric sciences at MIT.

You can try to come up with some irrelevant comment like: "I imagine most of
the people at MIT are embarassed by much of what he writes." but this below
tells you that the earth's climate is always changing or the glaciers would
still be down to Minnesota. I wonder if that would make the agw alarmist fools
happy then.

"The Arctic Ocean is warming up, icebergs are growing scarcer and in some
places the seals are finding the water too hot, according to a report to the
Commerce Department yesterday from Consul Ifft, at Bergen, Norway. Reports
from fishermen, seal hunters and explorers, he declared, all point to a
radical change in climate conditions and hitherto unheard-of temperatures in
the Arctic zone. Exploration expeditions report that scarcely any ice has been
met with as far north as 81 degrees 29 minutes. Soundings to a depth of 3,100
meters showed the gulf stream still very warm. Great masses of ice have been
replaced by moraines of earth and stones, the report continued, while at many
points well known glaciers have entirely disappeared. Very few seals and no
white fish are found in the eastern Arctic, while vast shoals of herring and
smelts, which have never before ventured so far north, are being encountered
in the old seal fishing grounds."

who reported this ? the IPCC, the Meteorological Office…. No, that was the US
Weather Bureau in 1922.

"The source report of the Washington Post article on changes in the arctic has
been found in the Monthly Weather Review for November 1922. It is much more
detailed than the Washington Post (Associated Press) article. It seems the AP
heavily relied on the report from Norway Consulate George Ifft, which is shown
below. See the original MWR article below and click the newsprint copy for a
complete article or see the link to the original PDF below:"  
http://www.sott.net/articles/show/200389-Flashback-1922-Extra-Extra-Read-all-
about-it-Arctic-Ocean-Getting-Warm-Seals-Perish-Glaciers-and-Icebergs-Melt-

TEMPERATURES RISING IN  
ARCTIC REGION  
LOS ANGELES, Friday. Saturday 31 May 1947  
Dr. Hans Ahlman, a noted Swedish geophysicist, claimed that a mysteri- ous
warming is manifesting itself in the Arctic and if the major ice cap at
Greenland should be reduced, the oceanic surfaces will rise to "catas- trophic
proportions," inundating people living in lowlands along the shores.  
Dr. Ahlman urged the establish- ment of an international agency to study
conditions on a global basis. Temperatures had risen 10 degrees since 1900.
The navigable season along Western Spitzbergen now last- ed eight months
instead of three.  
http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/2716276>

So much for your crying about the ice disappearing in the arctic.

                    
                                                190. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 14, 2012 at 8:56 am

Enviro: In my way of thinking, Dr. Lendzen has a better background to make
comments on CO2 and the climate than what your hero, William D. Nordhaus, has,
but I'm sure you do not see it that way and want to go with the economist view
over the dynamical meteorologist interpretation of what is actually happening
to the earth's climate. How can this economist feel that he has the right to
disqualify others views on this debate?

Lindzen, Richard S.  
Alfred P. Sloan Professor of Meteorology, Department of Earth, Atmospheric and
Planetary Sciences  
Professor Lindzen is a dynamical meteorologist with interests in the broad
topics of climate, planetary waves, monsoon meteorology, planetary
atmospheres, and hydrodynamic instability. His research involves studies of
the role of the tropics in mid-latitude weather and global heat transport, the
moisture budget and its role in global change, the origins of ice ages,
seasonal effects in atmospheric transport, stratospheric waves, and the
observational determination of climate sensitivity. He has made major
contributions to the development of the current theory for the Hadley
Circulation, which dominates the atmospheric transport of heat and momentum
from the tropics to higher latitudes, and has advanced the understanding of
the role of small scale gravity waves in producing the reversal of global
temperature gradients at the mesopause, and provided accepted explanations for
atmospheric tides and the quasi-biennial oscillation of the tropical
stratosphere. He pioneered the study of how ozone photochemistry, radiative
transfer and dynamics interact with each other. He is currently studying what
determines the pole to equator temperature difference, the nonlinear
equilibration of baroclinic instability and the contribution of such
instabilities to global heat transport. He has also been developing a new
approach to air-sea interaction in the tropics, and is actively involved in
parameterizing the role of cumulus convection in heating and drying the
atmosphere and in generating upper level cirrus clouds. He has developed
models for the Earth's climate with specific concern for the stability of the
ice caps, the sensitivity to increases in CO2, the origin of the 100,000 year
cycle in glaciation, and the maintenance of regional variations in climate.
Prof. Lindzen is a recipient of the AMS's Meisinger, and Charney Awards, the
AGU's Macelwane Medal, and the Leo Huss Walin Prize. He is a member of the
National Academy of Sciences, and the Norwegian Academy of Sciences and
Letters, and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the
American Association for the Advancement of Sciences, the American Geophysical
Union and the American Meteorological Society. He is a corresponding member of
the NAS Committee on Human Rights, and has been a member of the NRC Board on
Atmospheric Sciences and Climate and the Council of the AMS. He has also been
a consultant to the Global Modeling and Simulation Group at NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center, and a Distinguished Visiting Scientist at California
Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (Ph.D., '64, S.M., '61,
A.B., '60, Harvard University)  
http://www-eaps.mit.edu/faculty/lindzen.htm>

Biosketch of William D. Nordhaus  
William D. Nordhaus is Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. He was born in Albuquerque, New Mexico (which is part
of the United States). He completed his undergraduate work at Yale University
in 1963 and received his Ph.D. in Economics in 1967 from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. He has been on the faculty of Yale
University since 1967 and has been Full Professor of Economics since 1973 and
also is Professor in Yale’s School of Forestry and Environmental Studies.
Professor Nordhaus lives in downtown New Haven with his wife Barbara, who
works at the Yale Child Study Center.  
He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a Fellow of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is on the research staff of the
National Bureau of Economic Research and has been a member and senior advisor
of the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, Washington, D.C. since 1972.
Professor Nordhaus is current or past editor of several scientific journals
and has served on the Executive Committees of the American Economic
Association and the Eastern Economic Association. He serves on the
Congressional Budget Office Panel of Economic Experts and was the first
Chairman of the Advisory Committee for the Bureau of Economic Analysis. He was
the first Chairman of the newly formed American Economic Association Committee
on Federal Statistics. In 2004, he was awarded the prize of “Distinguished
Fellow” by the American Economic Association.  
From 1977 to 1979, he was a Member of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers. From 1986 to 1988, he served as the Provost of Yale University. He
has served on several committees of the National Academy of Sciences including
the Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy Systems, the Panel on Policy
Implications of Greenhouse Warming, the Committee on National Statistics, the
Committee on Data and Research on Illegal Drugs, and the Committee on the
Implications for Science and Society of Abrupt Climate Change. He recently
chaired a Panel of the National Academy of Sciences which produced a report,
Nature's Numbers, that recommended approaches to integrate environmental and
other non-market activity into the national economic accounts. More recently,
he has directed the Yale Project on Non-Market Accounting, supported by the
Glaser Foundation.  
He is the author of many books, among them Invention, Growth and Welfare, Is
Growth Obsolete?, The Efficient Use of Energy Resources, Reforming Federal
Regulation, Managing the Global Commons, Warming the World, and (joint with
Paul Samuelson) the classic textbook, Economics, whose nineteenth edition will
be published in 2009. His research has focused on economic growth and natural
resources, the economics of climate change, as well as the resource
constraints on economic growth. Since the 1970s, he has developed economic
approaches to global warming, including the construction of integrated
economic and scientific models (the DICE and RICE models) to determine the
efficient path for coping with climate change, with the latest vintage,
DICE-2007, published in A Question of Balance (Yale University Press, 2008).
Professor Nordhaus has also studied wage and price behavior, health economics,
augmented national accounting, the political business cycle, productivity, and
the “new economy.” His 1996 study of the economic history of lighting back to
Babylonian times found that the measurement of long-term economic growth has
been significantly underestimated. He returned to Mesopotamian economics with
a study, published in 2002 before the war, of the costs of the U.S. war in
Iraq, projecting a cost as high as $2 trillion. Recently, he has undertaken
the “G-Econ project,” which provides the first comprehensive measures of
economic activity at a geophysical scale."  
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/homepage/biosketch.htm

Jimmy Carter served as president from Jan. 20, 1977, to Jan. 20, 1981. From
1977 to 1979, Nordhaus was a Member of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers. If I remember right, the economy under Carter went totally to hell
and Nordhaus must have helped to get it in the doldrums: therefore, he is no
better at being an economist than he is now picking who is right or wrong
about the climate.

                    
                                                191. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 4:35 am

IS BELIEF IN AGW A CULT?

Our Global Warming cultists deny they are well, cultists.  
Okay, let’s examine record:

They worship a pantheon of gods, starting with Mother Gaia. They even opened  
their latest congregation at Canned Corn by offering a prayer to one of the  
local Deities. Remember, these are the same people who claim to have science  
on their side (H/T Andrew Bolt).

They have a Prophet in the form of Al Gore - the Goracle, who has many  
mansions and travels the world in a big jet, spreading their Gospel – “Do as  
I say, not as I do”.

They have a Holy Book – the IPCC Report, which is infallible, even when it  
is proved wrong. Don’t mention melting Himalayan glaciers to a Believer. It  
sends them into a religious frenzy.

They have a Devil called CO2, which they hate with all the passionate,  
religious fervor they can muster. This devil, CO2, is responsible for all the  
evil in the world, and will cause the gods to rain down any manner of  
plagues – droughts, floods, locusts, acne etc. - if all of humanity does not  
rise up at once to banish it.

They are driven by an all-consuming urge to erect tall monuments to their  
gods, in the form of windmills. These don’t actually do very much at all,  
except imbue the Faithful with a sense of religious righteousness for having  
been erected.

Nonetheless, construction of these useless religious artifacts has meant the  
diversion of vast amounts of finance, materials and labor from being  
employed elsewhere – for instance to build REAL power stations.

This means many people are now going to die from exposure to the elements.  
Consider them human sacrifices to the gods. Just as is practiced by other  
pagan cults.

They have Holy Water in the form of biofuel. If only enough people used this  
sacred elixir, the devil CO2 would be cast out and the world would be saved.

One way or another, biofuel is manufactured at the expense of food. This  
means many people will now starve. More pagan cult human sacrifices.

They have holy places where they go to gain enlightenment from their  
Priests. Principal amongst these sacred sites is RealClimate, but there are  
many others.

They believe in the dispensation of sin through monetary penance. One can  
gain forgiveness for the sin of invoking the Devil CO2 by buying a  
dispensation in the form of a carbon credit. They are incensed that the  
heathen masses are somewhat reluctant to take up this practice.

They quest endlessly for a “sign in the heavens” - their Holy Grail – the  
mythical “hotspot” in the troposphere over the equator.

They speak in tongues, chanting irrational religious utterings – such as –  
“global warming causes global cooling causes global warming causes global  
cooling” and still expect to be taken seriously.

So, in summary:  
They have Gods, a Prophet, priests and sacred sites, an infallible Holy  
Book, a Devil, a Holy Grail and a Quest. They preach of impending doom by  
plagues if they are not believed and followed.

They divert scarce resources to the construction of useless religious  
monuments and the creation of sacred Holy Water. They practice human  
sacrifice, they believe in the dispensation of sin through pecuniary  
penance, and they chant meaningless dogma.

Sure the heck sounds like a cult to me.

Time to go to work.

                    
                                                192. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 6:15 am

If what you are saying is true about CO2 causing this "catastrophic" rise in
world temperature, then why do these world high temperature records still
stand?  
What follows are world record high temperatures: World (Africa) El Azizia,
Libya; Sept. 13, 1922, (136F):  
North America (U.S.), Death Valley, Calif.; July 10, 1913 (134F);  
Asia; Tirat Tsvi, Israel, June 21, 1942, (129F):  
Australia ,Cloncurry, Queensland; Jan. 16, 1889 (128F):  
Europe, Seville, Spain,Aug. 4, 1881 (122F):  
South America, Rivadavia, Argentina; Dec. 11, 1905 (120F):  
Canada,Midale and Yellow Grass, Saskatchewan, Canada; July 5, 1937 (113F):  
Oceania;Tuguegarao, Philippines, April 29, 1912 (108F):  
Persian Gulf (sea-surface): Aug. 5, 1924 (96F):  
Antarctica; Vanda Station, Scott Coast, Jan. 5, 1974 (59F):  
South Pole, Dec. 27, 1978, (7.5F).  
Highest average annual mean temperature (world): Dallol, Ethiopia (Oct. 1960
Dec. 1966), 94° F.  
Longest hot spell (world): Marble Bar, W. Australia, 100° F (or above) for 162
consecutive days, Oct. 30, 1923 to Apr. 7, 1924. Notice anything regarding the
dates of these records? Anyone heard of the dust bowl & wasn't that in the 30s  
http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0001375.html

The above information can be confirmed here also:  
http://www.worldfactsandfigures.com/weather_extremes.php>

How does this stack up with your agw and have you seen what kind of a winter
Europe and Alaska is having and take a look at the suffering taking place now
in Mongolia, where I have been.  
Last Updated: Wednesday January 05 2011 17:09 GMT  
Several ships and more than 1,000 crew got stuck in arctic ice off the coast
of Russia after the sea froze over!  
Rescuers have used a huge icebreaker to free two of the ships from the Sea of
Okhotsk, but a smaller icebreaker also got stuck in the ice for several hours.  
Rescuer Captain Antokhin said: "The ice is very serious, frozen in layers,
covered in snow and hard to pass through. It sticks onto the ship."  
http://cdnedge.bbc.co.uk/cbbcnews/hi/newsid_9340000/newsid_9341000/9341080.stm  
Three other ships that are still stuck have been there since 30 December!

Something more current for you to try to discount.  
"ANCHORAGE, Alaska (AP) — A Russian tanker hauling much-needed fuel across the
ice-choked Bering Sea has arrived at Alaska's western coastline and was
waiting for daylight Friday morning near the town of Nome."  
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/01/13/renda-fuel-tanker-nome-
arrival_n_1203886.html?ref=green&ncid=edlinkusaolp00000008

"Mongolian herders see their animals destroyed as freezing winter temperatures
grip the country"  
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/picturegalleries/worldnews/7449122/Mongolian-
herders-see-their-animals-destroyed-as-freezing-winter-temperatures-grip-the-
country.html?image=4

Would you call it a “cold snap” when people have to cut tunnels through 15
feet of snow to get out of their homes? “Eastern Europe has been pummeled by a
record-breaking cold snap,” says this otherwise great AP article.  
Look at these headlines. Are these the result of a “cold snap”?  
○ Serbia cuts power in desperate bid to prevent collapse of national grid  
The country’s entire electric distribution system could collapse…  
○ Hundreds of barns collapse in Italy  
At least one million farm animals in danger of running out of food.  
○ Villages buried under 4-5 meters of snow – Video  
“23.000 people are isolated, how many people and animals have died we don’t
know since nobody can reach there.”  
○ Italian villages trapped in more than 9 feet of snow  
With the death toll already at 43, another blast of freezing weather…  
○ Danube freezes over – One of the greatest rivers in Europe  
Danube wholly or partially blocked in six countries.  
○ Most winter grain destroyed in southern and eastern Ukraine  
With temperatures 12 to 17C below average, the situation in Ukraine has became
serious.  
○ European death toll rises to 480 – and counting  
150 cattle killed when roofs collapse. “It seems more like a war in Europe.”  
○ Code red for agriculture in Tuscany  
“Blizzard comes and farmers tremble” – Loss rates up to 50%.  
○ Turkey quake survivors fighting the snow  
Walking 300 feet through the snow to reach the nearest toilets.  
No, this is no mere cold snap. There’s a tragedy unfolding in Europe, and the
world needs to know.  
http://iceagenow.info/2012/02/tragedy-unfolding-europe-u-s-media-ignore-it/

I'm sure this is all news to you and you could care less about anyone but your
self.

                    
                                                193. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:36 pm

CO2 has not yet caused a “catastrophic” rise in world temperature, but, given
current emissions rates, it will before the end if the century.

You are confusing "weather" with "climate". Most climate scientists predict
that the weather will get more variable, with some cold extremes but with many
more hot extremes. How do you account for the fact that 8 of 10 of the overall
warmest years in the last 150 years have been since 2000? Individual weather
events are not relevant. RELEVANT facts please!

                    
                                                194. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 5:56 am

Enviro: It appears from what you write, that it is you who doesn't know the
difference between weather and climate. I have followed your type enough to
know that if it is a warm event, then it is a sure sign of climate change;
but, when it is a cold event, to include three record breaking winters, then
it is classified as "weather" by your way of "thinking".  
"cli·mate  
1. The meteorological conditions, including temperature, precipitation, and wind, that characteristically prevail in a particular region.  
2. A region of the earth having particular meteorological conditions: lives in a cold climate.  
3. A prevailing condition or set of attitudes in human affairs: a climate of unrest."  
http://www.thefreedictionary.com/climate>

"weath·er  
1. The state of the atmosphere at a given time and place, with respect to variables such as temperature, moisture, wind velocity, and barometric pressure.  
2.  
a. Adverse or destructive atmospheric conditions, such as high winds or heavy
rain: encountered weather five miles out to sea.  
b. The unpleasant or destructive effects of such atmospheric conditions:
protected the house from the weather."  
http://www.thefreedictionary.com/weather>

"Weather Definition  
Weather is the day-to-day conditions of a particular place.  
For example: It was raining today at school. Yesterday it was sunny at home.

What is Climate?  
Climate is often spoken about at the same time as weather, but it is something
quite different. The climate is the common, average weather conditions at a
particular place over a long period of time (for example, more than 30 years).
We learn about different climates around the world. Deserts have a hot and dry
climate while the Antarctic has a very cold and dry climate."  
http://www.econet.org.uk/weather/whatis.html>

                    
                                                195. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:47 pm

Again, you gave examples of WEATHER events. One cold year here or one warm
year there is weather. By 13 of the warmist years since 1988 all occuring in
the last 15 years is climate. And each of the last 3 decades being warmer than
the previous is climate (according to the definition above)

                    
                                                196. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 3:20 pm

Record Lows - 2008  
Record Low Temperatures in the United States

RECORD OCTOBER COLD IN ANCHORAGE  
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK  
RESIDENTS IN ANCHORAGE WILL AGREE THIS OCTOBER WAS A BIT COLDER THAN  
USUAL. NOT ONLY WAS THE MONTH COLDER THAN NORMAL BUT THE AVERAGE  
TEMPERATURE OF 29.6 DEGREES PLACED OCTOBER WITHIN THE TOP TEN  
COLDEST OUT OF SOME 90 YEARS OF CLIMATE RECORDS FOR THE CITY.  
http://www.iceagenow.com/Record_Lows_2008.htm

                    
                                                197. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 6:19 am

Are you that sure about your warming, Enviro?

Rural US Sites Show No Temperature Increase Since 1900  
Using data downloaded from NASA GISS and picking rural sites near, but not too
near, to urban sites, a comparison has been made of the temperature trend over
time of the rural sites compared to those of the urban sites. 28 pairs of
sites across the U.S. were compared. The paired rural site is from 31 to 91 km
from the urban site in each pair. The result is that urban and rural sites
were similar in 1900, with the urban sites slightly higher. The urban sites
have shown an increase in temperatures since then. The rural sites show no
such temperature increase and appear to be generally unchanging with only ups
and downs localized in time. Over a 111 year time span, the urban sites
temperatures have risen to be about 1.5C warmer than the rural sites. So, the
much touted rising temperatures in the U.S. are due to the urban heat island
effect and not due to a global warming such as has been proposed to be caused
by human emissions of CO2 due to the combustion of fossil fuels.  
http://objectivistindividualist.blogspot.com/2009/12/rural-us-sites-show-no-
temperature.html

Perhaps the key point discovered by Smith was that by 1990, NOAA had deleted
from its data sets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers in service around
the globe.  
Now, 75% represents quite a drop in sampling population, particularly
considering that these stations provide the readings used to compile both the
Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN) and United States Historical
Climatology Network (USHCN) data sets.  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html  
Yet as disturbing as the number of dropped stations was, it is the nature of
NOAA’s “selection bias” that Smith found infinitely more troubling.  
It seems that stations placed in historically cooler, rural areas of higher
latitude and elevation were scrapped from the data series in favor of more
urban locales at lower latitudes and elevations. Consequently, post-1990
readings have been biased to the warm side not only by selective geographic
location, but also by the anthropogenic heating influence of a phenomenon
known as the Urban Heat Island Effect (UHI).  
For example, Canada’s reporting stations dropped from 496 in 1989 to 44 in
1991, with the percentage of stations at lower elevations tripling while the
numbers of those at higher elevations dropped to one. That’s right: As Smith
wrote in his blog, they left “one thermometer for everything north of LAT 65.”
And that one resides in a place called Eureka, which has been described as
“The Garden Spot of the Arctic” due to its unusually moderate summers.  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html

Global satellite data is analyzed for temperature trends for the period
January 1979through June 2009. Beginning and ending segments show a cooling
trend, while the middle segment evinces a warming trend. The past 12to 13years
show cooling using both satellite data sets, with lower confidence limits that
do not exclude a negative trend until 16years. It is shown that several
published studies have predicted cooling in this time frame. One of these
models is extrapolated from its 2000 calibration end date and shows a good
match to the satellite data, with a projection of continued cooling for
several more decades.  
http://www.ncasi.org/publications/Detail.aspx?id=3230

                    
                                                198. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:40 pm

Absolutely sure of the warming trend - the 13 warmest years in the last 150
years have all occurred since 1997 - that's quite a trend!

"Global warming is real, according to a major study released today. Despite
issues raised by climate change skeptics, the Berkeley Earth Surface
Temperature study finds reliable evidence of a rise in the average world land
temperature of approximately 1° C since the mid-1950s." Just Google "Berkeley
Earth Surface Temperature" and you will find that the study was done (and paid
for) by skeptics! (I think thhe 1 degree C is a bit high, but you get the
point)

                    
                                                199. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 14, 2012 at 9:27 am

Enviro: Could this link; and, please do open it and watch the YouTube
presentation, have something to do with anyone involved in your “Berkeley
Earth Surface Temperature”?

Climategate 'hide the decline' explained by Berkeley professor Richard A.
Muller  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8BQpciw8suk

                    
                                                200. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 4:28 am

Enviro says:  
March 13, 2012 at 7:40 pm  
Absolutely sure of the warming trend – the 13 warmest years in the last 150
years have all occurred since 1997 – that’s quite a trend!

Enviro: A question for you, why don't you use your real name? Are you afraid
that some one that you know will know just how out of touch with reality you
really are? Anyway you say: "Absolutely sure of the warming trend – the 13
warmest years in the last 150 years have all occurred since 1997 – that’s
quite a trend!" to which I reply that if you think you are sure of this then
what ever else you think you know is probably based on the same type of lies
that this statement originated from.

I had provided you with information about all of the reporting stations that
had been dropped and where they are located but you can not put two and two
together and that is very sad indeed. If you can not understand the written
word then try to get it told to you by people that know what is going on
regarding your favorite scam, AGW.

Open this link and see/hear the explanation for the total BS that you
presented above.

"Breaking News! Climategate comes to the United States! Meet the two men who
have dug through several layers of computer codes to uncover manipulation of
the world temperature data to support the claims of global warming. This is a
major climate scandal involving United States government agencies."

John Coleman, KUSI Meteorologist  
http://www.sott.net/articles/show/201362-Cooked-US-government-s-central-role-
in-fudging-the-data-behind-global-warming-

Notice the key word here, Enviro, Meteorologist ?

Something else that you should look at and get back to me on. It is well laid
out with comparisons of charts.  
"NASA’s James Hansen is the United States’ leading scientific alarmist about
global warming. He believes global warming is accelerating. Apparently it’s
his revisions of the data that are causing the acceleration.

This document examines the historical revision in the global temperature
change as defined by Hansen over the decades. Hansen’s global temperature
graphs are examined from 1981 to 2007.

Most of his publications are referenced here:
http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/authors/jhansen.html

http://www.appinsys.com/GlobalWarming/Hansen_GlobalTemp.htm

“The coldest temperature ever recorded in the Northern Hemisphere is -90F.”  
-92F is forecast for tonight.  
http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2011/01/14/weather-underground-forecasting-
all-time-record-cold-for-the-northern-hemisphere-tonight/

Summit, Greenland  
1:17 AM WGT on March 15, 2012 (GMT -0300)  
http://www.wunderground.com/cgi-
bin/findweather/getForecast?query=72.58000183,-38.45000076

Now

Cloudy  
Temperature  
-45 °C  
Feels Like -45 °C  
Wind(km/h)  
10  
Sunrise / Set  
5:55 AM  
5:31 PM  
Moon  
Waning Gibbous  
More Astronomy  
Tonight

-47 °C  
Mostly Cloudy  
Thursday

-42 °C  
Partly Cloudy  
Thursday Night

-41 °C  
Overcast  
Friday

-36 | -36 °C  
Mostly Cloudy  
Saturday

-33 | -42 °C  
Clear  
Sunday

-36 | -43 °C  
Mostly Cloudy

http://www.wunderground.com/cgi-
bin/findweather/getForecast?query=72.58000183,-38.45000076

Do you still think that Greenland is melting into the sea?

                    
                                                201. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 2:45 pm

Here's an interesting link:

Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years  
National Academy of Sciences (Note: these scientists are NOT paid for their
work for the NAS)

This report concludes that large-scale surface temperature  
reconstructions are important tools in our understanding of global climate
change that  
allows us to say, with a high level of confidence, that global mean surface
temperature  
was higher during the last few decades of the 20th century than during any
comparable  
period during the preceding four centuries. Less confidence can be placed in
large-scale  
surface temperature reconstructions for the period from A.D. 900 to 1600,
although  
available proxy evidence indicates that temperatures at many, but not all,
individual  
locations were higher during the past 25 years than during any period of
comparable  
length since A.D. 900.

                    
                                                202. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 10, 2012 at 3:01 pm

Another interesting link about the 97% of climate scientists supporting the
tenets of anthropogenic climate change (ACC) : (published 2009)

http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2010/06/04/1003187107.full.pdf+html

Expert credibility in climate change  
Although preliminary estimates from published literature and expert surveys
suggest striking agreement among climate scientists on the tenets of
anthropogenic climate change (ACC), the American public expresses substantial
doubt about both the anthropogenic cause and the level of scientific agreement
underpinning ACC. A broad analysis of the climate scientist community itself,
the distribution of credibility of dissenting researchers relative to agreeing
researchers, and the level of agreement among top climate experts has not been
conducted and would inform future ACC discussions. Here, we use an extensive
dataset of 1,372 climate researchers and their publication and citation data
to show that (i) 97–98% of the climate researchers most actively publishing in
the field support the tenets of ACC outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, and (ii) the relative climate expertise and scientific
prominence of the researchers unconvinced of ACC are substantially below that
of the convinced researchers.

                    
                                                203. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 3:03 pm

"In questions of science, the authority of a thousand is not worth the humble
reasoning of a single individual". -Galileo  
In this instance, there is more than one scientist that questions this
anthropogenic theory.

                    
                                                204. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:17 pm

So what? Are you 100% sure the these scientists are right? What if they are
wong?

                    
                                                205. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 4:14 am

Global Warming Petition Project  
31,487 American scientists have signed this petition,  
including 9,029 with PhDs  
http://www.petitionproject.org/

Enviro: You have probably never heard of one of the signers of this Petition,
Edward Teller, but he is considered to have been a very sharp person who
probably would not have signed on to this if it was something that he did not
believe in.

                    
                                                206. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:16 pm

So he is a sharp person. So what? He can still be wrong. I’ll stick w the
IPCC, NAS, NSF, the vast majority of scientific organizations, etc.

                    
                                                207. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 3:59 pm

Doug -

I AM obsessed with the increase of 280 ppm to 392ppm - I'll stick with the
RELEVANT FACTS about why CO2 causes the earth to be both habital and warrming.
Rather than spew extraneous information, can you point to any credible climate
scientist who does not think that CO2 causes the earth to be both habital and
warrming?

                    
                                                208. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 5:41 am

Enviro: Some more folks who do not share your delusional views about AGW  
“I am a skeptic…Global warming has become a new religion.” - Nobel Prize  
Winner for Physics, Ivar Giaever.

“Since I am no longer affiliated with any organization nor receiving any  
funding, I can speak quite frankly….As a scientist I remain skeptical.” -  
Atmospheric Scientist Dr. Joanne Simpson, the first woman in the world to  
receive a PhD in meteorology and formerly of NASA who has authored more  
than 190 studies and has been called “among the most preeminent scientists of  
the last 100 years.”

"Warming fears are the “worst scientific scandal in the history…When people  
come to know what the truth is, they will feel deceived by science and  
scientists.” - UN IPCC Japanese Scientist Dr. Kiminori Itoh, an award-winning  
PhD environmental physical chemist.

“The IPCC has actually become a closed circuit; it doesn’t listen to others.
It  
doesn’t have open minds… I am really amazed that the Nobel Peace Prize  
has been given on scientifically incorrect conclusions by people who are not  
geologists,” - Indian geologist Dr. Arun D. Ahluwalia at Punjab University and  
a board member of the UN-supported International Year of the Planet.

“The models and forecasts of the UN IPCC "are incorrect because they only  
are based on mathematical models and presented results at scenarios that do  
not include, for example, solar activity.” - Victor Manuel Velasco Herrera, a  
researcher at the Institute of Geophysics of the National Autonomous  
University of Mexico

“It is a blatant lie put forth in the media that makes it seem there is only a  
fringe of scientists who don’t buy into anthropogenic global warming.” - U.S  
Government Atmospheric Scientist Stanley B. Goldenberg of the Hurricane  
Research Division of NOAA.

“Even doubling or tripling the amount of carbon dioxide will virtually have  
little impact, as water vapour and water condensed on particles as clouds  
dominate the worldwide scene and always will.” – . Geoffrey G. Duffy, a  
professor in the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering of the  
University of Auckland, NZ.

“After reading [UN IPCC chairman] Pachauri's asinine comment  
[comparing skeptics to] Flat Earthers, it's hard to remain quiet.” - Climate  
statistician Dr. William M. Briggs, who specializes in the statistics of
forecast  
evaluation, serves on the American Meteorological Society's Probability and  
Statistics Committee and is an Associate Editor of Monthly Weather Review.

“For how many years must the planet cool before we begin to understand  
that the planet is not warming? For how many years must cooling go on?" -  
Geologist Dr. David Gee the chairman of the science committee of the 2008  
International Geological Congress who has authored 130 plus peer reviewed  
papers, and is currently at Uppsala University in Sweden.

“Gore prompted me to start delving into the science again and I quickly  
found myself solidly in the skeptic camp…Climate models can at best be  
useful for explaining climate changes after the fact.” - Meteorologist Hajo  
Smit of Holland, who reversed his belief in man-made warming to become a  
skeptic, is a former member of the Dutch UN IPCC committee.

“Many [scientists] are now searching for a way to back out quietly (from  
promoting warming fears), without having their professional careers  
ruined.” - Atmospheric physicist James A. Peden, formerly of the Space  
Research and Coordination Center in Pittsburgh.

“Creating an ideology pegged to carbon dioxide is a dangerous nonsense…  
The present alarm on climate change is an instrument of social control, a  
pretext for major businesses and political battle. It became an ideology,  
which is concerning.” - Environmental Scientist Professor Delgado Domingos  
of Portugal, the founder of the Numerical Weather Forecast group, has more  
than 150 published articles.

“CO2 emissions make absolutely no difference one way or another….Every  
scientist knows this, but it doesn’t pay to say so…Global warming, as a  
political vehicle, keeps Europeans in the driver’s seat and developing nations  
walking barefoot.” - Dr. Takeda Kunihiko, vice-chancellor of the Institute of  
Science and Technology Research at Chubu University in Japan.

“The [global warming] scaremongering has its justification in the fact that it  
is something that generates funds.” - Award-winning Paleontologist Dr.  
Eduardo Tonni, of the Committee for Scientific Research in Buenos Aires and  
head of the Paleontology Department at the University of La Plata

                    
                                                209. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:51 pm

I'm sure that you can keep quoting ignorant scientists. I'll stick with the
consensus of the major scientific organizations, NOAA, the The MIT Global
Change Joint Program, etc.

                    
                                                210. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 2:47 am

Enviro said: "I’m sure that you can keep quoting ignorant scientists. I’ll
stick with the consensus of the major scientific organizations, NOAA, the The
MIT Global Change Joint Program, etc."

Enviro feels that they can call the list of scientist that I provided
"ignorant". At least they are scientist, unlike the spokesman for this scam,
Al Gore, who studied law at Vanderbilt Law School and for sure didn't finish
his divinity training there either. The head of the IPCC, Rajendra Pachauri,
is an economist. “It is well known that many, if not most, of its members are
not scientists at all, 80 percent of the IPCC membership has absolutely no
dealing with the climate as part of their academic studies.” Another
interesting point regarding this scam is why it has become a left-right issue.
What ever happened to the days gone by when science was apolitical and stood
on the merits of the research and that meant that the debate was never over.
This is one of the key components of the scientific process that, at one time
before Al Gore became involved, challenges were welcomed to tests the
hypotheses "A tentative explanation for an observation, phenomenon, or
scientific problem that can be tested by further investigation."

This is the education that Steve Running used to gain his share of the Nobel
Peace Prize with Al Gore and then they criticize some one like Dr. John
Christy because he shows how flawed their contentions are. This may be a shock
to some that worship at this cathedral of their religion, global warming, but
Al Gore has no scientific credentials and Steve Running, who holds a “B.S. in
Botany; Oregon State University, Corvallis, 1972, M.S. in Forest Management;
Oregon State University, Corvallis, 1973 and a Ph.D. in Forest Ecophysiology;
{what ever that is}, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 1979.  
"Plant ecophysiology is an experimental science that seeks to describe the
physiological mechanisms underlying ecological observations." At least he has
been exposed to science but is a long ways from being a climatologist, but
then again, how much difference do credentials make when the head of the IPCC
is an economist?

Then we have Dr. John Christy:  
“Ph.D., Atmospheric Sciences, University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, 1987
M.S., Atmospheric Sciences, , University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, 1984;
B.A., Mathematics, California State University, Fresno, 1969” and also, as I
had mentioned before, "Richard Siegmund Lindzen who is a Harvard-trained
atmospheric physicist and Alfred P. Sloan Professor of Meteorology at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Lindzen is known for his work in the
dynamics of the middle atmosphere, atmospheric tides and ozone photochemistry.
He has published more than 200 books and scientific papers. He has been a
critic of some anthropogenic global warming theories and the alleged political
pressures on climate scientists" I tend to listen to Dr. Christy, Dr Spencer
and Dr. Lindzen before paying much attention to Gore, Running or James Hansen.

                    
                                                211. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:05 pm

Al Gore has been great at publicizing the climate change problem, but when
dealing with facts it’s always best to look at the work of actual climate
scientists. Of course, when you do, you will see that he is mostly has his
facts right.

                    
                                                212. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 6:26 am

Enviro: When will you start with "the RELEVANT FACTS about why CO2 causes the
earth to be both habital and warrming"? Do so soon because I am about tired of
this. I generally enter into these types of discussions hoping to learn
something and I see no opportunity for that to occur from this discussion with
you. It is obvious that from what I showed you, that you do not see just how
irrelevant CO2 is in the total atmosphere, especially since it is 1 & 1/2
times heaver than the rest of the atmosphere.

                    
                                                213. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:32 pm

IRRELEVANT FACT - CO2 is 1 & 1/2 times heaver than the rest of the atmosphere.

RELEVANT FACT - CO2 is well-mixed in the atmosphere
(http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/aggi/) Can you provide a link that disputes this
fact?

RELEVANT FACT - CO2 is one of the major drivers of keeping the Earth's
temperature habitable. CO2 selectively absorbs radiated energy from the earth,
thus warming the
planet.(http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/co2/story/Carbon+Educational+Tools) Can you
provide a link that disputes this fact?

Can you provide a link to a climate scientist who thinks that CO2 is
irrelevant?

                    
                                                214. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 4:58 pm

Doug -

Re "My Lord, Enviro, how many times and different ways do I have to show you
that I did look into the completely irrelevant site that you wasted my time
looking into. You, above, did say one thing correct and that, while what I
have stated is not irrelevant, they are FACTS. I issue these other Facts for
your consideration and await you to make up something to answer the question."

I've pointed you to Web sites that shows that CO2 selectively absorbs radiated
energy from the earth, thus warming the planet. Do you have a link to either a
site that disputes this or has a different explanation?

                    
                                                215. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 5:05 pm

Doug -

Regarding CO2 and the earth's temperature - you seem to prefer negative
comments of non-experts. Can you privide a link to any climate scientist who
disputes the role of CO2 in warming the earth?

                    
                                                216. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 10:22 am

Enviro says:  
March 12, 2012 at 5:05 pm

Doug –

Regarding CO2 and the earth’s temperature – you seem to prefer negative
comments of non-experts. Can you privide a link to any climate scientist who
disputes the role of CO2 in warming the earth?

Enviro: Go through this list and maybe that will keep you busy for the rest of
your life.

CLEVELAND - "The science is settled!" That's the slogan used by the pro-Global
Warming crowd. but is it really? Below is a list of 800 papers by respected
and awarded scientists that question or contradict the Man-Made Global Warming
Theory (AGW). The science is NOT settled… This list was compiled by Andrew
over at PopularTechnology.net. This is worth sifting through!  
Read more: http://www.newsnet5.com/dpp/weather/weather_news/800-reasons-to-be-
a-man-made-global-warming-skeptic#ixzz1ozSTAnOv

http://www.newsnet5.com/dpp/weather/weather_news/800-reasons-to-be-a-man-made-
global-warming-skeptic

                    
                                                217. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 8:09 pm

I prefer peer-reviewed articles. But the real problem is that "it's
particluarly hard to make predictions, especially about the future". Unless
you can guarantee that the earth will not warm because of CO2 emissions, and
if many scientists think it will, it is only prudent to take reasonable steps
to reduce CO2. Becuase if they are right, by the time we know for sure, it
will be too late to prevent really bad climate changes

                    
                                                218. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 2:26 am

Enviro: I doubt that you have ever read a peer reviewed article in your life,
but that is not the issue here. Are you saying that all of 800 papers by
respected and awarded scientists that question or contradict the Man-Made
Global Warming Theory were not peer-reviewed. You need to read Donna
Laframboise’s book: "The Delinquent Teenager Who Was Mistaken for the World’s
Top Climate Expert".  
The book is entirely about the IPCC process: "for example, several of the lead
authors of the IPCC reports lacked experience, qualifications and appear to be
chosen for their connections to WWF, EDF, Greenpeace and other environmental
NGO’s – all of which is exposed in this book including names, dates and full
references. Furthermore, the book confirms that over 5,000 references
(including some of the strongest high impact claims of the IPCC showing
evidence of the dangerousness of man-made Global Warming) are to “grey
literature” – i.e. to reports that were NEVER verified by peer review – all
this despite assurances from the head of the IPCC that the IPCC ONLY use peer-
reviewed science in their “climate bible” report. Worse the book also provides
conclusive evidence that some influential people within the IPCC were well
aware of deficiencies and yet took no action to correct inadequacies in these
processes (the book includes explicit examples where IPCC authors elevated
their concerns about the poor quality and misrepresentation of the scientific
consensus by the IPCC process …but these concerns were simply swept aside!"  
So, Enviro, just HOW RELEVANT is anything that the IPCC puts out about
anything? Remember the doped up WWF fools claiming that by 2030 all of the
glaciers in the Himalayan mountains will be gone? I have been to Nepal three
times and never saw any glaciers disappearing; but, then again, I wasn't
smoking anything.

                    
                                                219. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 5:41 pm

Doug -

I'll stick w the IPCC, NAS, NSF, the vast majority of scientific
organizations, etc. One of the these days you will respect organizations like
the IPCC that recognize their errors (unlike the majority of the "deniers") -
the Himalaya glaciers were expected to be melted by 2300 - and a typo changed
that to 2030. Out of thousands of items, the "deniers" have only found a few
that were wrong, and in each case admitted the mistakes. Not bad!

                    
                                                220. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f001ec1122ace615f2cbafefeccfdc64?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 6:15 pm

Enviro

The lethal dose for CO2 is 100000 ppm with warning signs at 5000 ppm.

Going from 280 ppm to 392ppm is trivial in the grand scheme of things. Extra
CO2 will enhance plant life and help to fight world hunger. It actually would
be a good environment to hand off to the next generation.

Most of the perceived measurement of sea level rising has been found that big
cities are sinking from over pumping ground water.

Earth is not a stagnant system that you are going to set with a thermostat.

                    
                                                221. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 8:16 pm

Going from 280 ppm to 392ppm may seem trivial, but going to 450ppm may be
enough to raise sea levels over 40 feet (over centuries) (no guaranee that it
will, but no guarantee that it won't)

"Most of the perceived measurement of sea level rising has been found that big
cities are sinking from over pumping ground water." - a very mis-informed
statement. - see comments above

                    
                                                222. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 8:15 pm

Doug -

re "Enviro: Look at these sties provided above to get a true and, for that
reason, different perspective of what you think you know about this topic." -
Those sites don't contribute to the "debate". If you're going to disagree w
NASA, NOAA, NSF, and MIT, you'll need some better arguments. RELEVANT FACTS
PLEASE!

Re the referenced links:  
http://i42.tinypic.com/54aes8.jpg - Good graph - but CO2 is what drives the
H20 - how about a simililar link for CO2

http://i44.tinypic.com/24zayi1.jpg - cool graph but the scale is too small to
see the relevant info - another example of fooling the viewer into thinking
there is not a problem

Can you provide a single link to a reputable organization which refutes the
facts on the following Web page:  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/globalwarming.html#q1

I keep asking your for links to relevant facts, and I have yet to see one.
I'll keep repeating this line until I see some.

                    
                                                223. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 12, 2012 at 11:21 pm

Doug -

Wanted to add, re http://i44.tinypic.com/24zayi1.jpg

(1) "Also, while we have good atmospheric measurements of other key greenhouse
gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, we have poor measurements of global
water vapor, so it is not certain by how much atmospheric concentrations have
risen in recent decades or centuries, though satellite measurements, combined
with balloon data and some in-situ ground measurements indicate generally
positive trends in global water vapor."
(http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/gases.html)- so you should probably
discount most of the graph - YOUR IMAGE IS MISLEADING

(2) The graph shows CO2 almost flat, when in reality it's steadily
increasing:http://celebrating200years.noaa.gov/datasets/mauna/image3b.html  
- YOUR IMAGE IS MISLEADING

At what point will you start disregading "info" from misleading sites?

                    
                                                224. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 5:33 am

"Greenhouse gases absorb this energy, thereby allowing less heat to escape
back to space, and 'trapping' it in the lower atmosphere. Many greenhouse
gases occur naturally in the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, methane,
water vapor, and nitrous oxide, while others are synthetic."

Again Enviro, I ask you how you are going g to "trap" something with a gas,
CO2, that makes up .036% of the atmosphere and is 1.5 times heavier than the
rest of the atmosphere:  
(ppm of CO2 with altitude and mass of CO2 in atmosphere to 8520 metres beyond
which there is practically no CO2  
http://greenparty.ca/blogs/169/2009-01-03/ppm-co2-altitude-and-mass-
co2-atmosphere-8520-metres-beyond-which-there-practic )  
I remind you that:  
A part per million is like 1 drop of ink in a large  
kitchen sink.  
A large kitchen sink is about 13-14 gallons. There  
are 100 drops in one teaspoon, and 768 teaspoons  
per gallon.  
Some other things that are one part per million are…  
One drop in the fuel tank of a mid-sized car  
One inch in 16 miles  
About one minute in two years  
One car in a line of bumper-to-bumper traffic from  
Cleveland to San Francisco.  
One penny in $10,000.

Prior to the industrial revolution, concentrations were fairly stable at
280ppm. Today, they are around 370ppm, an increase of well over 30 percent.
The atmospheric concentration has a marked seasonal oscillation that is mostly
due to the greater extent of landmass in the northern hemisphere (NH) and its
vegetation. A greater drawdown of CO2 occurs in the NH spring and summer as
plants convert CO2 to plant material through photosynthesis. It is then
released again in the fall and winter as the plants decompose.  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/gases.html

They did manage to get one thing right and probably are unaware of the fact
that CO2 is essential for life on earth since all life revolves around plants.

It is the result of heat absorption by certain gases in the atmosphere (called
greenhouse gases because they effectively 'trap' heat in the lower atmosphere)
and re-radiation downward of some of that heat. Water vapor is the most
abundant greenhouse gas, followed by carbon dioxide and other trace gases.
Without a natural greenhouse effect, the temperature of the Earth would be
about zero degrees F (-18°C) instead of its present 57°F (14°C).  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/globalwarming.html#q1

This simple graph of the Mauna Loa Carbon Dioxide Record documents a 0.53
percent or two parts per million per year increase in atmospheric carbon
dioxide since 1958. This gas alone is responsible for 63 percent of the
warming attributable to all greenhouse gases according to NOAA's Earth System
Research Lab.  
http://celebrating200years.noaa.gov/datasets/mauna/image3b.html

They have one thing right, simple! The rest is pure, unadulterated & unproven
nonsense.

If they do not want to understand that water vapor makes up 95% of what
constitutes the green house effect, then consider that the coldest nights of
the year occur when there is, guess what, no cloud cover to hold the radiated
heat in. This is why the deserts, that have almost no humidity and clear
nights, can be 130 degrees F during the day time and drop to freezing at
night. Seems simple to understand.

Open this link and see what the real story is regarding CO2. Sun angle is also
a factor which is why we have seasons. This would apply to the arctic and
Antarctic which are veritable deserts because of very little precipitation. I
spend many years in the Arctic and the humidity is very low to the point that
nose bleeds are common.  
http://www.geocraft.com/WVFossils/greenhouse_data.html

Enviro seems to think that I'm going to believe everything that the United
States Government tells me. I believed them once when they told me that I
needed to go to Vietnam to stop the spread of Communism and that was the last
time I believed basically anything that they have told me and I for sure am
not going to believe a charlatan like James Hansen who has never told the
truth about anything.

                    
                                                225. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:31 pm

Doug -

You must really enjoy being misled!!! When I find one really bad assumption, I
don't bother looking for more and just discount the entire calculation. The
web page http://www.geocraft.com/WVFossils/greenhouse_data.html stipulates
that only 3% of the CO2 is manmade. This is off by an order of magnitude -
it's more like 30% ! Please provide links with credible data!

Again: CO2 is transparent visible light but absorbs and retransmits infrared
radiation; given enough – and there is enough – it will warm the planet; the
Earth would be about 60 degrees F colder than it is now if there were no CO2
in the atmosphere. Water vapor only stays in the atmosphere because CO2 keeps
it warm – a positive feedback. This is NOT a theory - is a simple matter of
physics which has been known for over 150 years

                    
                                                226. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 12:29 pm

EN: Where do you come up with this kind of nonsense? Al Gore wouldn't even
make a claim like you did.

                    
                                                227. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:55 pm

Not only would Al Gore agree with me, but the vast majority of climate
scientists would!

How many sites do I need to give you? Can't you reason for yourself?

http://www.c2es.org/facts-figures/basics/greenhouse-effect  
http://nova.stanford.edu/projects/mod-x/id-green.html

                    
                                                228. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 5:16 am

Enviro: What follows are the thought of some real scientist and the know much
more about this topic that you will ever hope to know. If you knew anything
about the topic you would not be writing the nonsense that you do.

Selected Highlights of the Updated 2010 Report featuring over 1,000
international scientists dissenting from man-made climate fears:  
“We're not scientifically there yet. Despite what you may have heard in the
media, there is nothing like a consensus of scientific opinion that this is a
problem. Because there is natural variability in the weather, you cannot
statistically know for another 150 years.” -- UN IPCC's Tom Tripp, a member of
the UN IPCC since 2004 and listed as one of the lead authors and serves as the
Director of Technical Services & Development for U.S. Magnesium.

“Any reasonable scientific analysis must conclude the basic theory wrong!!” --
NASA Scientist Dr. Leonard Weinstein who worked 35 years at the NASA Langley
Research Center and finished his career there as a Senior Research Scientist.
Weinstein is presently a Senior Research Fellow at the National Institute of
Aerospace.

“In essence, the jig is up. The whole thing is a fraud. And even the
fraudsters that fudged data are admitting to temperature history that they
used to say didn't happen…Perhaps what has doomed the Climategate fraudsters
the most was their brazenness in fudging the data” -- Dr. Christopher J.
Kobus, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Oakland University,
specializes in alternative energy, thermal transport phenomena, two-phase flow
and fluid and thermal energy systems.

“The energy mankind generates is so small compared to that overall energy
budget that it simply cannot affect the climate…The planet's climate is doing
its own thing, but we cannot pinpoint significant trends in changes to it
because it dates back millions of years while the study of it began only
recently. We are children of the Sun; we simply lack data to draw the proper
conclusions.” -- Russian Scientist Dr. Anatoly Levitin, the head of
geomagnetic variations laboratory at the Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism,
Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

“Hundreds of billion dollars have been wasted with the attempt of imposing a
Anthropogenic Global Warming (AGW) theory that is not supported by physical
world evidences…AGW has been forcefully imposed by means of a barrage of scare
stories and indoctrination that begins in the elementary school textbooks.” --
Brazilian Geologist Geraldo Luís Lino, who authored the 2009 book “The Global
Warming Fraud: How a Natural Phenomenon Was Converted into a False World
Emergency.”

"I am an environmentalist,” but “I must disagree with Mr. Gore” -- Chemistry
Professor Dr. Mary Mumper, the chair of the Chemistry Department at Frostburg
State University in Maryland, during her presentation titled “Anthropogenic
Carbon Dioxide and Global Warming, the Skeptic's View.”

“I am ashamed of what climate science has become today.” The science
“community is relying on an inadequate model to blame CO2 and innocent
citizens for global warming in order to generate funding and to gain
attention. If this is what 'science' has become today, I, as a scientist, am
ashamed.” -- Research Chemist William C. Gilbert published a study in August
2010 in the journal Energy & Environment titled “The thermodynamic
relationship between surface temperature and water vapor concentration in the
troposphere” and he published a paper in August 2009 titled “Atmospheric
Temperature Distribution in a Gravitational Field.” [Update December 9, 2010]

“The dysfunctional nature of the climate sciences is nothing short of a
scandal. Science is too important for our society to be misused in the way it
has been done within the Climate Science Community.” The global warming
establishment “has actively suppressed research results presented by
researchers that do not comply with the dogma of the IPCC.” -- Swedish
Climatologist Dr. Hans Jelbring, of the Paleogeophysics & Geodynamics Unit at
Stockholm University. [Updated December 9, 2010. Corrects Jelbring's quote.]

“Those who call themselves 'Green planet advocates' should be arguing for a
CO2- fertilized atmosphere, not a CO2-starved atmosphere…Diversity increases
when the planet was warm AND had high CO2 atmospheric content…Al Gore's
personal behavior supports a green planet - his enormous energy use with his 4
homes and his bizjet, does indeed help make the planet greener. Kudos, Al for
doing your part to save the planet.” -- Renowned engineer and aviation/space
pioneer Burt Rutan, who was named "100 most influential people in the world,
2004" by Time Magazine and Newsweek called him "the man responsible for more
innovations in modern aviation than any living engineer."

“Global warming is the central tenet of this new belief system in much the
same way that the Resurrection is the central tenet of Christianity. Al Gore
has taken a role corresponding to that of St Paul in proselytizing the new
faith…My skepticism about AGW arises from the fact that as a physicist who has
worked in closely related areas, I know how poor the underlying science is. In
effect the scientific method has been abandoned in this field.” -- Atmospheric
Physicist Dr. John Reid, who worked with Australia's CSIRO's (Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization) Division of Oceanography and
worked in surface gravity waves (ocean waves) research.

“We maintain there is no reason whatsoever to worry about man-made climate
change, because there is no evidence whatsoever that such a thing is
happening.” -- Greek Earth scientists Antonis Christofides and Nikos Mamassis
of the National Technical University of Athens' Department of Water Resources
and Environmental Engineering.

“There are clear cycles during which both temperature and salinity rise and
fall. These cycles are related to solar activity…In my opinion and that of our
institute, the problems connected to the current stage of warming are being
exaggerated. What we are dealing with is not a global warming of the
atmosphere or of the oceans.” -- Biologist Pavel Makarevich of the Biological
Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

“Because the greenhouse effect is temporary rather than permanent, predictions
of significant global warming in the 21st century by IPCC are not supported by
the data.” -- Hebrew University Professor Dr. Michael Beenstock an honorary
fellow with Institute for Economic Affairs who published a study challenging
man-made global warming claims titled “Polynomial Cointegration Tests of the
Anthropogenic Theory of Global Warming.”

“The whole idea of anthropogenic global warming is completely unfounded. There
appears to have been money gained by Michael Mann, Al Gore and UN IPCC's
Rajendra Pachauri as a consequence of this deception, so it's fraud.” -- South
African astrophysicist Hilton Ratcliffe, a member of the Astronomical Society
of Southern Africa (ASSA) and the Astronomical Society of the Pacific and a
Fellow of the British Institute of Physics.

                    
                                                229. ![Rick Pantaleo](//blogs.voanews.com/science-world/files/2015/05/Rick-Pantaleo_avatar_1432138236-67x67.jpeg) Rick Pantaleo says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 7:39 pm

Hello All,

I am really enjoying this back and forth regarding this issue. It seems that a
lot of thought and research goes into the various responses. I thought that I
would perhaps throw a little fuel on the fire of debate to mention that this
has become a part of the 2012 US Presidential Election campaign. Former US
Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA), is running for the Republican nomination as
President. Senator Santorum recently spoke to those attending the Gulf Coast
Energy Summit in Biloxi, Mississippi, on Monday and said, at least according
to news sources regarding Climate Change — that it's a liberal myth. Here's a
link to the article. http://www.littleurl.net/531083 - You might not only find
the article interesting, but the discussion in the "comments" area too. Thanks
so much for all the great feedback on this!

Regards,

Rick Pantaleo

                    
                                                230. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 15, 2012 at 1:57 am

Rick Pantaleo: I thank you for the link and , as you might imagine, I agree
with Rick Santorum's assessment of this anthropogenic global warming hoax.
Until I began to study AGW several years ago, I was ambivalent regarding it;
but, after open-minded study of the issue, one can not imagine that CO2 is the
driving force of the earth's climate.

The fact that enacting laws to combat something that is not a problem will
have devastating consequences for the U.S.. The Cap and Trade nonsense
proposed by very liberal members of both the House and Senate would have done
nothing more than make a few people very rich. All of the billions of dollars
that this current administration has squandered on "green projects" has been
money wasted. One only needs to look at how it has all worked out for Spain to
see that it will only further force a country that no longer produces much of
anything, the U.S., into becoming a third world nation.

"In May 2010 the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office issued a report
entitled “How Policies to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions Could Affect
Employment.” The CBO report shows that emissions reduction programs would
cause job losses in coal mining, oil and gas extraction, gas utilities, and
petroleum refining. It concluded that “job losses in the industries that
shrink would lower employment more than job gains in other industries would
increase employment, thereby raising the overall unemployment rate.”

"In contrast, radical environmentalism has a blind devotion to the promotion
of a radical agenda that ignores the interests and property rights of people.
Global warming became the litmus test of this movement."  
http://www.redstate.com/rjsantorum/2012/03/10/blown-and-tossed-by-the-winds-
of-political-correctness/

There is no question of this movement being a cult.

                    
                                                231. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:12 pm

Just because a scientist says that "one cannot imagine that CO2 is the driving
force of the earth’s climate." does not mean that it's not. He's letting his
biases get in the way of actual facts (CO2 is transparent visible light but
absorbs and retransmits infrared radiation; given enough – and there is enough
– it will warm the planet; the Earth would be about 60 degrees F colder than
it is now if there were no CO2 in the atmosphere. This is NOT a theory - is a
simple matter of physics which has been known for over 150 years)

                    
                                                232. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 10:35 am

EN. Show one experiment carried out that makes what you claim above about a
trace gas, CO2, that makes up a scant .036% of the atmosphere and is 1 &1/2
times heavier than the rest of the atmosphere the driver of something as
complex as the earth's climate. You can not do so so quit with the BS. There
may be intelligent design after all because since CO2 is 1 &1/2 times heavier
than the rest of the atmosphere it seems that the life forms that relies on it
are on the surface of the earth. What bag did you pull your "Earth would be
about 60 degrees F colder than it is now if there were no CO2 in the
atmosphere."? Some more of your "trapping" something with a gas nonsense is
not a valid answer, as anyone knows that can use logic.

                    
                                                233. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 3:48 am

Rick Pantaleo: I did check out the comments and they are amazing and brought
these quotes to mind that I now share with you:

"The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so
certain of themselves, but wiser people so full of doubts." - Bertrand Russel

Pertains to Global warming:  
As Bertrand Russell said: “The fact that an opinion has been widely held is no
evidence whatever that it is not utterly absurd; indeed in view of the
silliness of the majority of mankind, a widespread belief is more likely to be
foolish than sensible.”

People think they are thinking when all they are doing is rearranging their
prejudices

Describes the IPCC Panel quite well:  
"In questions of science, the authority of a thousand is not worth the humble
reasoning of a single individual". -Galileo

As Galileo said, if God did not want us to use our intelligence, why did he
give it to us?

"To argue with a person who has renounced the use of reason is like
administering medicine to the dead." -- Thomas Paine

The intellectual Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (AD 121-180) must have foreseen
Global Warm-ism. He said: "The object in life is not to be on the side of the
majority, but to escape finding oneself in the ranks of the insane."

                    
                                                234. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 8:06 pm

Envrio

While most people agree the earth is over one billion years old, you want to
cherry pick the last 150 years as proof that earth is warming.

That is hilarious.

                    
                                                235. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 13, 2012 at 9:08 pm

I only used 150 years since that's when the best temp records are - not exacly
cherry picking! Most climate scientists think that the previous 15 years are
the warmest 15-year period in the last 900 (if not 2000) years.

It was certainly warmer in the Earth's past- but I don't think you'd be happy
living near the North Pole with billions of other people!

                    
                                                236. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b521db85648a3e9bd710784e8afdbcc?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Icarus62 says:
                    

March 14, 2012 at 1:12 am

The 'Mediaeval Warm Period' and the 'Little Ice Age' are proof enough that
significant climate change can happen in the space of 150 years… or do you
dispute them too?

                    
                                                237. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 7:01 pm

The Medieval Warm Period was not a global phenomenon. Warmer conditions were
concentrated in certain regions. Some regions were even colder than during the
Little Ice Age. To claim the Medieval Warm Period was warmer than today is to
narrowly focus on a few regions that showed unusual warmth. However, when we
look at the broader picture, we see that the Medieval Warm Period was a
regional phenomenon with other regions showing strong cooling. What is more,
temperatures during the Medieval Period were less than today.

Yes, there can be significant changes in 150 years. The important "idea" is
that the Earth's temperature had been relatively constant (actually declining
bit) for thousands of years before 1850 (or so). Since 1850 the temperature
has increased about .8 degrees C. The difference this time is that there is
more CO2 in the atmosphere. This additional CO2 will cause the temperature to
increase. Are you 100% certain that the increased CO2 will not cause problems?

                    
                                                238. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 11:59 am

EN: Just why is warm bad? (I changed this some that came from the link that
follows; therefore, it is not a direct quote.)

Near the beginning of the current interglacial, global temperatures rose
considerably about 10,000 years ago to begin a period of time referred to as
the Holocene. Mean annual temperatures in the Midwestern United States were
about 2 °C warmer than those of the past few decades summer temperatures in
Europe were 2 °C warmer , as they also were in New Guinea & In the Russian Far
East, temperatures are also reported to have been from 2 °C to as much as 4-6
°C higher than they are today. The Sahara, for example, was actually moist at
this time and contained many lakes, as the summer monsoon migrated northward
by some 600 kilometers, helping to create the extensive groundwater deposits
of that region and giving life to ecosystems that supported crocodiles,
giraffes, elephants and gazelles. (EV: Ever read about the cave drawings in
the Sahara that shows savanna animals?) Increased monsoon moisture also
extended across Saudi Arabia, Mesopotamia, and the Rajastan Desert of India ,
drastically altering and enhancing the productivity of those lands as well.
Indeed, because of the perception that these many biospheric changes were of a
positive nature, this much warmer period than the present is often referred to
as the Holocene Climatic Optimum. And it was during this particular warm
interval that the world experienced perhaps the greatest of all anthropogenic
advancements - "the rise of human civilization, based on the development of
agriculture ."  
http://www.co2science.org/subject/other/clim_hist_tenthousand.php

                    
                                                239. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:09 pm

Since when do we know for certain what GLOBAL temperatures were 10,000 years
ago? Scientists have had a hard time trying to go back just 1000 years. Let's
stick to recent years where the science is more certain!

                    
                                                240. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 26, 2012 at 4:50 pm

More than 2 degrees C above pre-industrial temps is probably bad because of
the expected WEATHER changes - more drougts, floods, sea level rise, etc, and
problems with animals and plants adapting to the unparalled changes in
temperatures.. There are costs of action and costs of inaction. Why not buy
some "insurance" and ttake steps to reduce CO2 now?

                    
                                                241. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 12:24 pm

EV: I have selected a few excerpts from a very good paper put together by
someone that knows much about what they explain, Thomas Gale Moor. Stanford is
always considered to be one of the best sources for most information. One can
only wonder at where you came up with erroneous piece of "information". "The
Medieval Warm Period was not a global phenomenon. Warmer conditions were
concentrated in certain regions. Some regions were even colder than during the
Little Ice Age." What are you saying, that it was colder in Greenland when the
Vikings established colonies there and farmed and raised livestock during this
period?

"What is well known is that climate changes. The world has shifted from
periods that were considerably warmer -- during the Mesozoic era when the
dinosaurs thrived the earth appears to have been about 18deg. Fahrenheit
warmer than now -- to spells that were substantially colder, such as the Ice
Ages when huge glaciers submerged much of the Northern Hemisphere.[6] One
paleoclimatologist estimated that, during the Precambrian period, the polar
regions were about 36deg.F colder than they are in the contemporary world.[7]
During the last interglacial, about 130,000 years ago or about when modern man
was first exploring the globe, the average temperature in Europe was at least
2deg. to 5deg.F warmer than at present.[8] Hippopotamuses, lions, rhinoceroses
and elephants roamed the English countryside. Areas watered today by the
monsoons in Africa and east Asia enjoyed even more rainfall then. Indeed
during the last 12,000 years, that is since the end of the last glacial
period, the globe has alternated between times substantially warmer and epochs
that were noticeably cooler."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"During the Holocene, very rapid changes of climate occurred. According to
dendroclimatology [tree ring analysis applied to climatology], they often
lasted about 20 to 30 years, or [were] even as brief as 2 to 3 years."[18]
Other climate historians have found that a rapid cooling in the late glacial
period -- about 11,000 years ago -took about 100 to 150 years to complete and
realized about 5deg.F variation in temperature within 100 years, more than is
being forecast for the next century.[19]  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"Although changes in the earth's orbital position may easily have played a
role in warming the earth after the last Ice Age, the effect was world-wide
rather than concentrated in northern latitudes. Ice retreated in the Southern
as well as in the Northern Hemisphere. Moreover, in the subsequent warming,
from around 7,000 to 4,000 years ago, the climate around the world appears to
have improved. Although the evidence for warming in the Southern Hemisphere is
weaker, even if higher temperatures had been localized in one hemisphere or
one continent, the effect on human beings would still tell us about the
benefits or costs of climatic change."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"Carbon dioxide concentrations may have been up to sixteen times higher about
60 million years ago without producing runaway greenhouse effects.[28] Other
periods experienced two to four times current levels of CO2 with some warming.
Scientists have been unable to determine whether the warming preceded or
followed the rises in carbon dioxide. For virtually all of the period from
around 125 million to about 75,000 years ago, CO2 levels were markedly higher
than now."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"Around 9,000 to 5,000 years ago the earth was much warmer than today; perhaps
4deg.F hotter, about the average of the various predictions for global warming
after a doubling of CO2.[59] Although the climate cooled a bit after 3000
B.C., it stayed relatively warmer than the modern world until sometime after
1000 B.C., when chilly temperatures became more common. During this Climatic
Optimum epoch, Europe enjoyed mild winters and warm summers with a storm belt
far to the north. Not only was the country less subject to severe storms, but
the skies were less cloudy and the days sunnier."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"The Southern Hemisphere seems to have flourished as well during the warm
millennia after the most recent Ice Age. Professor Lamb reports that the
southern temperate zone enjoyed both warmer weather and more moisture than it
does currently.[68] Scholars have found that Australia was consistently wetter
than today in both the tropical and temperate regions.[69] Since the end of
that epoch, the great deserts of Australia have expanded and the climate has
become both cooler and drier. Apparently most of the other great desert
regions of the world enjoyed more rainfall during the Climatic Optimum than
they do now."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"From the end of the Optimum period of sustained warmth until around 800 A.D.
to 900 A.D., what we know of the world's climate and, in particular, the
European varied between periods of warmth and cold. Based on the height of the
upper tree lines in middle latitudes' mountains, the temperature record
following the peak warm period around 5000 B.C. demonstrates a more or less
steady decline right up to the 20th century.[86] As mentioned above, tree ring
data for New Zealand indicate that after temperatures reached a maximum around
6000 to 8000 B.C., the climate cooled in that part of the world."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

"Written records confirm that the warmer climate brought drier and
consequently healthier conditions to much of Europe. Robert Bartlett, citing
H.E. Hallam in Settlement and Society, quotes the people of Holland who
invaded Lincolnshire in 1189 that "because their own marsh had dried up, they
converted them into good and fertile ploughland."[118] Moreover, prior to the
twelfth century German settlers on the east side of the Elbe frequently named
their towns with mar, which meant marsh, but later colonists did not use that
suffix. Bartlett's explanation is that the term had gone out of use, but an
alternative one is that the warmer climate had dried up the marshes.[119]  
With a more pleasant climate people spent longer periods outdoors; food
supplies were more reliable. Even the homes of the peasants would have become
warmer and less damp. The draining or drying up of marshes and wetlands
reduced the breeding grounds for mosquitoes that brought malaria. In all the
infant and childhood mortality rate must have fallen spawning an explosion in
population."  
http://www.stanford.edu/~moore/Boon_To_Man.html

                    
                                                242. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 7:20 pm

Really good info - but RELEVANT facts PLEASE.

            1. The BASIC science is clear - if CO2 increases, the Earth will warm 
            2. The speed at which CO2 is increasing in the atmosphere is unprecidented 
            3. The Antarctic ice sheet probably starting forming when CO2 levels were around 600ppm 
            4. What do you think will happen to the Antarctic ice sheet if the CO2 in the atmosphere exceeds 600PPM for a century or two?

http://www.yalescientific.org/2012/03/antarctic-glaciation-linked-to-ancient-
co2-levels/

Scientists have long proposed a link between climate change and CO2
atmospheric levels. A recent paper published in Science by Yale Geology and
Geophysics Professor Mark Pagani strengthens the argument that CO2 levels and
temperature are closely related. Pagani and his collaborators demonstrated
that the rapid glaciation of Antarctica near the Eocene/Oligocene boundary,
which occurred approximately 34 millions year ago, correlated with atmospheric
CO2 levels falling by approximately 40%. More importantly, their findings
corroborated a model of glaciation proposed by fellow paleoclimatologist
Robert DeConto; that model emphasizes the rapid decline of CO2 as the primary
factor for the continental glaciation.

The massive freezing 34 million years ago was one of the most severe climate
reorganizations in Earth’s history. In a span of 80,000 years, Antarctica
transformed from a warm, ice-free continent to a frozen, glaciated land
resembling what it is today. In order to determine ancient CO2 levels, Pagani
and his team analyzed the isotope composition of carbon from deep-sea cores
sampled from around the world. “Deep sea temperature can be calculated from a
chemical signature that is embedded in alkenones, a class of organic molecules
produced by photosynthetic organisms at the surface of the sea,” explained
Pagani. Ultimately, he believes that this study provides even more reason to
be concerned that current CO2 levels are the highest that they have been in
over 5 million years.

The team found the tipping point in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels for
cooling that initiates ice sheet formation is about 600 parts per million.
Prior to the levels dropping this low, it was too warm for the ice sheet to
form. At the Earth’s current level of around 390 parts per million, the
environment is such that an ice sheet remains, but carbon dioxide levels and
temperatures are increasing. The world will likely reach levels between 550
and 1,000 parts per million by 2100. Melting an ice sheet is a different
process than its initiation, and it is not known what level would cause the
ice sheet to melt away completely, Huber said.

                    
                                                243. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 14, 2012 at 12:54 pm

Enviro: It would be a great learning experience for you to watch these two
YouTube presentations. They explain what actually controls the earth's climate
and it is not a trace gas, CO2, that makes up .036% of the atmosphere and is
one and one half times heavier than "air". If you alarmist do not have that,
CO2, then what do you have to try to control and tax humanity with? I will,
when I close this out and I am beginning to weary of this nonsenses that you
put forth that you act like sane and rational people are suppose to believe,
present you with the reasons why there are some that want to use this
anthropogenic hoax to gain the control and also to make huge sums of money
using it. The welfare of the earth or its inhabitants is not their concern,
only the control and the wealth to be gained by a few is the main aim and why
some sheep who are not in on the rewards would support it is a clear sign of,
not so much of ignorance, but of stupidity.

"Jasper Kirkby is head of the CLOUD Experiment at the CERN Laboratories in
Geneva, Switzerland. This lecture is part of Simon Fraser University’s 2011
global warming seminar series “Global Warming: A Science Perspective”.

The “warmists” of the IPCC rely on computer simulations of the climate of the
earth. They put in what is known, and for what is unknown, they put in
approximations or, less politely, guesses. There’s just a lot that is unknown
about climate.  
“This is an exact inversion of the scientific method, which says that evidence
always trumps theory. The IPCC is throwing away the evidence for a solar-
magnetic driver of climate because it isn’t satisfied with the theories that
have been proposed to account for it. This is the definition of anti-science:
putting theory (or ideology, or anything) over evidence. Evidence has to be
the trump card, or it’s not science. The IPCC is engaged in pure,
definitional, anti-science, precisely inverting the scientific method.” IPCC
Reviewer Alex Rawls  
The “deniers” not only deny that global warming is a problem, they deny that
it is happening. The “Skeptics“ think that global warming is probably a
natural process, for the earth is always warming and cooling, but they depend
on evidence, and there is just a lot that we don’t know. The largest and most
important of the “greenhouse gasses ” is water vapor, or clouds. We know they
have a big effect on climate, but we don’t know much about what and how.
That’s why they call them skeptics."  
http://americanelephant.wordpress.com/2012/03/01/jasper-kirkby-the-head-of-
the-cloud-experiment/

These are some very smart people, Enviro, and the best part of it is that
they, unlike Hansen, Gore and many others in your camp, they are HONEST.  
Jasper Kirkby: The CLOUD experiment at CERN  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=63AbaX1dE7I#at=2744

Henrik Svensmark on Global Warming (part 1)  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1qGOUIRac0&feature=related

                    
                                                244. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 8:20 pm

The CLOUD experiment at CERN is very interesting - thanks for the link! The
cosmic ray/temp correlation was also interesting – but showed that there was
little overall change over the time periods. My biggest "take aways" from the
video are (1) due to the changes in the sun, the earth should be cooling, and
(2) that they are very unsure of their data. Which is a point I'd like to
make. Based on physics, if the CO2 in the atmosphere were doubled
instantaneously, the temperature would increase about 3 degrees C if OTHER
FORCINGS (other than water vapor) WERE HELD CONSTANT (this is the definition
of “climate sensitivity”) But of courses “other forcings” won’t be constant.
Therefore the most important debate we need to have is about what the “climate
sensitivity” is. If it’s low, we’re probably OK. And if it’s really high,
we’re screwed. Since it’s impossible to know accurately, we need to agree on a
“probability distribution function” that describes the probability that the
climate sensitivity is a specific value. We also need to agree on how much
risk we’re willing to take that the we might be wrong (which is what insurance
if for, and doing some things to reduce CO2 is like insurance)

                    
                                                245. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 3:10 pm

Could part of the confusion that Enviro manifest have to do with no one
denying that there is a green house effect or there would not be life on earth
as we know it but that effect is caused by water vapor which makes up 95% of
the green house effect. I see nothing in the reports that I have looked at
that even mention CO2 like Enviro wants to believe is part of the equation
that CERN is discovering about the earth's climate.

"The first results from the lab's CLOUD ("Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets")
experiment published in Nature today confirm that cosmic rays spur the
formation of clouds through ion-induced nucleation. Current thinking posits
that half of the Earth's clouds are formed through nucleation. The paper is
entitled Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia and galactic cosmic rays in
atmospheric aerosol nucleation.  
This has significant implications for climate science because water vapour and
clouds play a large role in determining global temperatures. Tiny changes in
overall cloud cover can result in relatively large temperature changes."

"When Dr Kirkby first described the theory in 1998, he suggested cosmic rays
"will probably be able to account for somewhere between a half and the whole
of the increase in the Earth's temperature that we have seen in the last
century."  
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/08/25/cern_cloud_cosmic_ray_first_results/

                    
                                                246. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 3:46 pm

Sorry to hear that you are so confused by simple science.

Let me review your logic:  
1. Sunspots affect cosmic rays hitting the earth  
2. The fewer the sunspots, the more cosmic rays (current situation)  
3. Cosmic rays influence clouds  
4. The more cosmic rays, the more clouds  
5. The more clouds, the more cooling  
6. The earth should be cooling (like what happened during the Maunder minimum)

So what has not only negated the expected cooling but also caused the warming?

                    
                                                247. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 8:38 pm

I think you have the "honest" part backwards. I'd really like to see a
breakdown on which scientists mislead, misinform, are unwilling to acknowledge
errors in publications, etc.. In this list I'd put Lindzen (based on hs WSJ
articles and personal experience with a presentation that he gave that
contained a lot of misleading information, as I disovered later), Lomborg (see
"The Lomborg Conspiracy"), Patrick Michaels, etc. It seems that only "deniers"
are on the list.

Why do you think that Hansen and Gore are not honest? What facts have they
distorted? Do they cherry pick data?

                    
                                                248. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 1:51 am

Enviro: Try to come up with some more of your conjecture to answer this
assertion; so far about everything that you have presented has been
preposterous, but keep trying and maybe you will, by chance, come up with
something that is valid.

"In contrast to this Who’s Who of the scientific world, the list of top
global-warming scientists falls far short. No scientist has been awarded a
Nobel Prize in a science field for his work on global warming because no piece
of science in the field has achieved a major scientific breakthrough. This
despite the global-warming issue’s dominance of the scientific world for more
than two decades, garnering the lion’s share of scientific funding and an
inordinate amount of coverage in scientific publications. The only Nobel Prize
conferred on global-warming advocates came from the political wing of the
Nobel Prize establishment, which awarded them a prize for peace in consolation
for their failure to merit a prize for science."  
http://opinion.financialpost.com/2011/09/16/lawrence-solomon-warmed-right-
over/

As you know, the Nobel Peace Prize is a political award and not a scientific
award because it is presented in Oslo, where I have been as well as to
Stockholm and the City Hall that awards the SCIENCE prizes.  
I saw where Irena Sendler had recently died. She had helped to save thousands
of Jewish children from certain death during the Nazi occupation of Warsaw
during WWII, and obviously risked her own life to do so & was beaten severely
by the Gestapo but didn't give up any secrets. You wonder what this has to do
with anything and it is this, she had been considered for the Nobel Peace
Prize along with Al Gore and his cronies when they won said prize. But one
must remember that Jimmy Carter won it in 2002 and Yassar Arafat also shared
the "prize" in 1994 and now we have Obama wining it . I think that due to the
recent past recipients of the prize, the prestige of it has diminished to the
point that it about like buying the Sunday New York Times and finding that the
comics are still included. In other words the Swedes should take back control
of this before it is tarnished further by the Norwegians who seem to have lost
touch of what the prize was intended to honor.

                    
                                                249. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:23 pm

So? If the AWG crowd is correct, doing someting that can reaily have an effect
on future warming will certainly be saving countless lives.

                    
                                                250. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 5:46 pm

Doug -

Re "Lindzen, Richard S." - many of his stands on climate change are disupted
by most climate scientists. But the real issue is that do you think Lindzen is
100% correct? What if he is wrong?

                    
                                                251. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 2:25 pm

Yes, I know that he is 100% correct and it is you that is 100% in the dark
regarding this whole issue. The list that I supplied shows that what the
people say shows that humans and the earth is not their concern. It is control
and money that drives them and that is evil, to say the least.

                    
                                                252. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:45 pm

You are so naive as to think that anyone could be 100% correct on climate
change. As I've said, I personally attended a meeting where he dished out mis-
information on purpose - not someone I'd trust. "control and money" drives the
fossil fuel disinformation campaign, not the worldwide scientific
organizations. Here's the relevant cartoon again:

http://thinkprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/climateinfographic.jpg

                    
                                                253. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 5:50 pm

Re - "Climategate ‘hide the decline’" - when are you ever going to start
thinking for yourself?

In what is probably the most notorious of the CRU emails, dated 16/11/1999,
Jones wrote:

I’ve just completed Mike’s Nature trick of adding in the real temps to each
series for the last 20 years (ie from 1981 onwards) and from 1961 for Keith’s
to hide the decline.

This email is often quoted by commentators with little or no understanding of
what it refers to, so it is worth taking some time to explain the context.
Jones was discussing a graph for the cover of an obscure 1999 World
Meteorological Organisation (WMO) report, which depicted both instrumental
temperature data and reconstructed temperatures based on tree rings. The
“decline” refers to the fact that some tree ring series (though not all)
diverge from instrumental records in recent decades, for reasons that are not
fully understood (although there are grounds for believing it is only a recent
phenomenon). The “trick” was a way of presenting the data in this one
particular graph, namely to truncate the tree ring data at the point when it
diverged.

Anyway, contrarians take the use of the words “trick” and “hide the decline”
as evidence that this was done to deceive, and this was the allegation that
the inquiry examined. More generally, the contrarians claim that the
divergence problem “may not have been properly taken into account when
expressing the uncertainty associated with reconstructions”.

Contrarians have also accused CRU researchers (in particular their leading
expert on tree ring reconstructions, Keith Briffa) of cherry-picking tree ring
series that would produce a favoured result, namely that the late 20th century
was warmer than the Medieval Warm Period. They allege that Briffa’s selection
of an obscure tree ring chronology from the Yamal peninsula in Siberia “had an
undue influence on all of the lines appearing in Chapter 6 of the 4th IPCC
Report” (AR4); and that CRU withheld access to the Yamal data. And they use
all these alleged flaws in CRU’s work to claim that less confidence should be
placed in the conclusions of that AR4 chapter (specifically, the conclusion
that current temperatures are likely the warmest in 13 centuries).

Regarding the “hide the decline” email, Jones has explained that when he used
the word “trick”, he simply meant “a mathematical approach brought to bear to
solve a problem”. The inquiry made the following criticism of the resulting
graph (its emphasis):

[T]he figure supplied for the WMO Report was misleading. We do not find that
it is misleading to curtail reconstructions at some point per se, or to splice
data, but we believe that both of these procedures should have been made plain
— ideally in the figure but certainly clearly described in either the caption
or the text. [1.3.2]

But this was one isolated instance that occurred more than a decade ago. The
Review did not find anything wrong with the overall picture painted about
divergence (or uncertainties generally) in the literature and in IPCC reports.
The Review notes that the WMO report in question “does not have the status or
importance of the IPCC reports”, and concludes that divergence “is not hidden”
and “the subject is openly and extensively discussed in the literature,
including CRU papers.” [1.3.2]

                    
                                                254. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 1:31 am

Enviro: "When you read some of those files – including 1079 emails and 72
documents – you realise just why the boffins at CRU might have preferred to
keep them confidential. As Andrew Bolt puts it, this scandal could well be
"the greatest in modern science". These alleged emails – supposedly exchanged
by some of the most prominent scientists pushing AGW theory – suggest:  
Conspiracy, collusion in exaggerating warming data, possibly illegal
destruction of embarrassing information, organised resistance to disclosure,
manipulation of data, private admissions of flaws in their public claims and
much more.  
One of the alleged emails has a gentle gloat over the death in 2004 of John L
Daly (one of the first climate change sceptics, founder of the Still Waiting
For Greenhouse site), commenting:  
"In an odd way this is cheering news."  
http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jamesdelingpole/100017393/climategate-the-
final-nail-in-the-coffin-of-anthropogenic-global-warming/

Strange way of expressing grief over some one that you may not agree with,
don't you think Enviro? I have no idea what the message is that you are trying
to put forth with this stupid post regarding it such as this little nugget of
BS: "Regarding the “hide the decline” email, Jones has explained that when he
used the word “trick”, he simply meant “a mathematical approach brought to
bear to solve a problem”. The inquiry made the following criticism of the
resulting graph (its emphasis)" Aren’t you intelligent enough to realize that
it was the release of these emails by the Russians that derailed the phony
little climate get together in Copenhagen? It was not the bitter cold weather
in both Europe or the US at the time but these emails and now you want to try
to explain them in some irrational way, Good Load.

Do you recall that after Obama, using all of that jet fuel going to and
returning from this farce, had to take a car back to the Whitehouse because of
the blizzard that kept the chopper, that uses fossil fuel, from flying?

                    
                                                255. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:55 pm

So what? Climate scientists are only human. And CRU scientists have been
vindicated many times over:

An independent report into the leak of hundreds of e-mails from one of the
world's leading climate research centers on Wednesday largely vindicated the
scientists involved, saying they acted honestly and that their research was
reliable.

The Department of Commerce has released an Inspector General’s report on the
involvement of its scientists (e.g., scientists in NOAA) in “ClimateGate”–and
once again, it’s a vindication: “In our review of the CRU emails, we did not
find any evidence that NOAA inappropriately manipulated data comprising the
GHCN-M dataset [maintained by the National Climatic Data Center] or failed to
adhere to appropriate peer review procedures.”

And their results still stand. Which is the most important fact.

                    
                                                256. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 2:15 am

Enviro: Read this in the Daily Mail and explain why you posted the garbage you
did about Climategate.  
"Yes, emails came from here - but we didn't do it, say Russians  
Tomsk: Emails were sent from this Siberian town  
Russian secret service agents admitted yesterday that the hacked ‘Warmergate’
emails were uploaded on a Siberian internet server, but strenuously denied a
clandestine state-sponsored operation to wreck the Copenhagen summit."

Some of the most controversial leaked emails concern attempts by Jones and his
colleagues to avoid disclosure of the CRU’s temperature database - its vast
library of readings from more than 1,000 weather stations around the world,
the ultimate resource that records how temperatures have changed.

In one email from 2005, Jones warned Mann not to leave such data lying around
on searchable websites, because ‘you never know who is trawling them’.  
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1235395/SPECIAL-INVESTIGATION-Climate-
change-emails-row-deepens-Russians-admit-DID-send-them.html#ixzz1UuOjrdU9

                    
                                                257. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:11 pm

So what?

The “Hockey Stick” has been validated over and over again. It was affirmed in
a major review by the National Academy of Scientists (in media-speak, the
highest scientific “court” in the land) . The Hockey Stick has been replicated
and strengthened by numerous independent studies. It turns out that there are
“hockey sticks” for sea level rise, ocean acidification, ocean temps, ice
melting, etc.

                    
                                                258. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 10:46 am

EN: What follows that the University of East Anglia's Climate Research Unit
(aka CRU) were doing sounds as dishonest as most of what you post to this
thread.

"Attempts to disguise the inconvenient truth of the Medieval Warm Period
(MWP):  
……Phil and I have recently submitted a paper using about a dozen NH records
that fit this category, and many of which are available nearly 2K back–I think
that trying to adopt a timeframe of 2K, rather than the usual 1K, addresses a
good earlier point that Peck made w/ regard to the memo, that it would be nice
to try to “contain” the putative “MWP”, even if we don’t yet have a
hemispheric mean reconstruction available that far back…"  
http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jamesdelingpole/100017393/climategate-the-
final-nail-in-the-coffin-of-anthropogenic-global-warming/

                    
                                                259. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:05 pm

Do some more research - the latest thinking is that the MWP was local, not
gobal.

I don't think I've made a single dishonest post. I stick to RELEVANT facts.
Many of yours are irrelevant or bogus.

Even if the above quote is accurate and not out of context, there is
overwhelming HONEST data that shows that there MAY be serious consequence to
climate change.

                    
                                                260. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:00 pm

Re "So much for your crying about the ice disappearing in the arctic." -
please see

Sure, climate is variable and parts of the artic have melted before. So what?
Most climate scientsts think that the melting is unprecedented in the

Oldest Arctic Sea Ice is Disappearing  
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=77270

A just published scientific paper, (Kinnard [2011]) shows that the present
rate of melt in the Arctic summer is unprecedented in the last 1,450 years.
(which is far back as sea ice extent can reasonbly be determined)
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v479/n7374/full/nature10581.html

                    
                                                261. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 2:44 am

EN: Do you understand anything? Did you not open the post I presented about
the Arctic in the 1920s? "The source report of the Washington Post article on
changes in the arctic has been found in the Monthly Weather Review for
November 1922."  
http://www.sott.net/articles/show/200389-Flashback-1922-Extra-Extra-Read-all-
about-it-Arctic-Ocean-Getting-Warm-Seals-Perish-Glaciers-and-Icebergs-Melt-

Evidently that goes right over your head or you are just incapable of
understanding anything that interferes with your extremely narrow view of this
subject and by your posting a bunch of political nonsense, you show that you
can't even focus on what that subject is.

"The bitter winter afflicting much of the Northern Hemisphere is only the
start of a global trend towards cooler weather that is likely to last for 20
or 30 years, say some of the world’s most eminent climate scientists.  
Their predictions – based on an analysis of natural cycles in water
temperatures in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans – challenge some of the global
warming orthodoxy’s most deeply cherished beliefs, such as the claim that the
North Pole will be free of ice in  
summer by 2013.  
According to the US National Snow and Ice Data Centre in Colorado, Arctic
summer sea ice has increased by 409,000 square miles, or 26 per cent, since
2007 – and even the most committed global warming activists do not dispute
this."  
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1242011/DAVID-ROSE-The-mini-
ice-age-starts-here.html

Here is another one that MAY interest you and cause you to fabricate some
other fairy tale to explain it.

"The photo Al Gore and the global warming wackos don’t want you to see" (Are
you one of them, Enviro?)  
by editor on May 4, 2009

"Al Gore is not going to like this photo. Not at all. It’s a 1958 shot of the
U.S.S. Skate, the first submarine to surface at the North Pole. In case you
missed the significance of that sentence, let us hammer it home.  
It’s 1958. That’s the North Pole. There’s no ice. Gore and his global warming
brethren have repeatedly told us that the ice has never been as thin in the
arctic as it is today, but this photo tells another story. It’s pretty clear
that in 1958 the arctic was…well…pretty clear.  
Not only did the the Skate surface in virtually ice-free water at the North
Pole, but the weather was mild enough that crewmen went out to chip a bit of
ice off the sub’s hull."  
http://www.ihatethemedia.com/photo-north-pole-submarine

                    
                                                262. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 6:16 pm

No cherry-picking!!! RELEVANT facts please!!!!!!

These is the RELEVANT facts:

Oldest Arctic Sea Ice is Disappearing  
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=77270

A just published scientific paper, (Kinnard [2011]) shows that the present
rate of melt in the Arctic summer is unprecedented in the last 1,450 years.
(which is far back as sea ice extent can reasonbly be determined)
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v479/n7374/full/nature10581.html

                    
                                                263. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:44 pm

Doug -

Re "Do you still think that Greenland is melting into the sea?" . So they have
a record cold day in Greenland. So what? Everything I read show that Greenland
is losing ice at an accelerating rate. Again you are confusing WEATHER with
CLIMATE

                    
                                                264. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 1:19 pm

EN. So much for your fear of the Greenland ice sheet sliding into the ocean,
it did not do so during the Medieval Warm Period so why it do so now? Do not
accuse me of being confused when you do not know enough about this subject of
agw to even be that, you are just wrong. You anthropogenic alarmist have a lot
of trouble with the Medieval Warm Period and the proven Little Ice age because
all of it all happened with no anthropogenic influence, what so ever.  
Can you explain how the last ice age started and then began to end about
12,000 years ago with no human cause? This was and is the reason that Mann is
having such a time explaining his Hockey Stick hoax that Gore helped him push
because he didn't show the known warm and cold periods in recent global
climatic history and that makes them out to be dishonest.

"What was learned  
The eight researchers reporat you can not explain, is it?that the average
Greenland snow temperature over the past 4000 years was -30.7°C, while the
current decadal (2001-2010) surface temperature at the Greenland Summit is
-29.9°C, which they say is as warm as it was there in the 1930s-1940s. And
they add that "there was another similarly warm period (-29.7°C) in the 1140s
(Medieval Warm Period), indicating that the present decade is not outside the
envelope of variability of the last 1000 years." And, even more telling, prior
to the last millennium they report "there were 72 decades warmer than the
present one, in which mean temperatures were 1.0 to 1.5°C warmer." In fact,
they found that "during two intervals (~1300 BP and ~3360 BP) centennial
average temperatures were nearly 1.0°C warmer (-28.9°C) than the present
decade."  
What it means  
Clearly, there is nothing unusual, unnatural or unprecedented about
Greenland's recent relative warmth, as it is clear that much warmer
temperatures have been experienced there over many prior prolonged periods
without any help from anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Hence, there is
no valid reason to believe that mankind's burning of coal, gas and oil has
had, or is having, any measureable impact on the climate of that part of the
world, or any other part of the planet."  
http://www.co2science.org/articles/V15/N11/C3.php

                    
                                                265. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 4:08 pm

You are so confused! No one expects Greenland to "slide into the ocean"
anytime soon (where "soon" is "human time") - perhaps in 300-1000 years.

The “Medieval Warm Period” was “local”, not “global” – please review the
latest research.

The “Hockey Stick” has been validated over and over again. It was affirmed in
a major review by the National Academy of Scientists (in media-speak, the
highest scientific “court” in the land) . The Hockey Stick has been replicated
and strengthened by numerous independent studies. It turns out that there are
“hockey sticks” for sea level rise, ocean acidification, ocean temps, ice
melting, permafrost melting, etc.  
The latest theories on the causes of the ice ages have to do with the orbit of
the earth. It's amazing how just a small different in the intensity of
sunlight hitting North America can have such a tremendous impact!

And please don’t reference anything on the CO2 Science Web site – I took a
quick look earlier this morning and there science is REALLY bad and very one-
sided.

                    
                                                266. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 8:47 am

You tell me this after directing me to "Time Magazine" that will be lucky if
they can get the one dollar that Sidney Harman paid for "NewsweeK" when he got
the rag from Washington Post Company. "Time" would not find a buyer at any
price and it does show that some of the far left rags are worth nothing
because no one reads them.

                    
                                                267. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:23 pm

Don't "shoot the messanger" if you don't like what they have to say. Just look
for RELEVANT facts. The “Hockey Stick” has been validated over and over again
- what's your problem with accepting the facts? The “Medieval Warm Period” was
“local”, not “global” – what's your problem with accepting the facts?

                    
                                                268. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:49 pm

Doug -

Re "Notice the key word here, Enviro, Meteorologist ?" - Again you are
confusing WEATHER with CLIMATE

re your link http://www.sott.net/articles/show/201362-Cooked-US-government-s-
central-role-in-fudging-the-data-behind-global-warming- could not find the
original article, but did find this:Joseph D'Aleo and his Technically Flawed
Report (Page 1) http://climatewtf.blogspot.com/2010/01/joseph-daleo-and-his-
technically-flawed.html

                    
                                                269. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 6:52 pm

Re "Record Low Temperatures in the United States" - no one ever said that we'd
not see any more record lows with climate change. What's important is the
trend between record lows and record highs

Record high temperatures far outpace record lows across U.S.  
https://www2.ucar.edu/atmosnews/news/1036/record-high-temperatures-far-
outpace-record-lows-across-us

                    
                                                270. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 8:25 pm

Re weather -

On Wednesday, March 14th, 577 temperature records were broken in a single day,
400 of them new record highs around the country.

One day of such statisics is weather. Years of having more record highs than
lows is climate.

                    
                                                271. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 10:32 pm

This looked interesting:

Most observers would say Ann Coulter is pretty extreme as conservatives go. In
the wake of Fukushima, she said radiation is “good for you.” She has said she
would tell a gay son that “he was adopted” and then ask him for redecorating
tips. She pushes the well-debunked myth Obama attended a radical Islamic
madrassa.

So when she says the conservative movement has “a problem with con men and
charlatans,” you know things have gotten way out of hand. Yet here she is at a
local Republican party dinner in Florida, answering a question about the
prospect of a brokered convention:  
And just a more corporate problem is I think our party and particularly our
movement, the conservative movement, does have more of a problem with con men
and charlatans than the Democratic Party…. The incentives seem to be set up to
allow people … as long as you have a band of a few million fanatical
followers, you can make money….  
Watch it:

Barry Bickmore, a geochemistry professor at Brigham Young University, who
describes himself as “an active Republican” who “was a County Delegate for the
Republican Party” from 2008-2010, agrees with Coulter:

This is nowhere more evident than in the climate policy debate. The Republican
Party is beset by “con men and charlatans” whose specialty is to convince
people that there is no climate change problem. And why do we believe them?
Because for people who think we should try to solve problems with as little
government regulation as possible, it’s always easier to deny there is a
problem at all….  
And so we desperately want to believe that big problems are overblown or
nonexistent. Whenever a group of people “desperately wants to believe”
something, there will always be someone willing to tell them what they want to
hear, whether the opportunists are charlatans or simply nutjobs.

The question is whether the conservative movement can reject the charlatans
and embrace science in time to enable us to prevent catastrophic global
warming.

(the above from http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2012/03/15/445436/ann-coulter-
gop-conservative-movement-has-problem-with-con-men-and-charlatans)

                    
                                                272. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 10:35 pm

Another interesting read:

Washington Post stunner: “The GOPs climate-change denial may be its most
harmful delusion.”

Hiatt has today published an amazing op-ed, “On climate change, the GOP is
lost in never-never land,” that I’ll excerpt below:

The Republican self-deception that draws the most attention is the refusal to
believe that Barack Obama is American-born.

But there are Republican doctrinal fantasies that may be more dangerous: the
conviction that taxes can always go down, but never up, for example, and the
gathering consensus among Republican leaders that human-caused climate change
does not exist….

The climate change denialism is a newer part of the catechism. Just a few
years ago, leading Republicans “” John McCain, Sarah Palin, Mitt Romney, Newt
Gingrich and Tim Pawlenty among them “” not only accepted global warming as
real but supported some kind of market-based mechanism to raise the cost of
burning fossil fuels.

http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2011/04/18/207916/washington-post-hiatt-gop-
climate-change-denial/

                    
                                                273. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 16, 2012 at 11:37 pm

Enviro

When you take 150 years and divide it up into 54,750 slices (150 x 365) it is
common to have new spikes, both high and low, in those slices.

You make it sound like some calamity to report a new high in one of the 54,750
slices.

And your argument that we only have recorded weather for 150 years is
laughable. We have detailed accounts of the weather recorded in rocks, ice
samples, etc. Peak temperature recordings, both high and low, are essentially
noise. It is the overall climate change that needs to be examined.

                    
                                                274. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 7:02 pm

RE "Peak temperature recordings, both high and low, are essentially noise. It
is the overall climate change that needs to be examined." Right on!! One or
two year peaks CAN be ignored. But not 13 years of peak temperatures.

Since the mid 1970s, the average surface temperature has warmed about 1°F.  
The Earth’s surface is currently warming at a rate of about 0.29ºF/decade or
2.9°F/century.

Now that's CLIMATE!

                    
                                                275. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 12:17 pm

A great blog post this morning- "Weather and Climate" By the University at
Albany's Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences Dept.. I've posted an extract
below. I recomment reading the entire post at
http://blog.timesunion.com/weather/engaging-in-a-climate-change-
discourse/2086/#comment-3716

First of all I think it is important to always point out that climate change
science is not something new that has just emerged over the past few years or
decades. We have known for over 150 years … that greenhouse gases in our
atmosphere keep our planet warm through absorption of longwave radiation and
that increasing this concentration will further warm our planet. Hence the
thousands of climate scientists around the globe are not, as some will have
it, all engaged in a massive conspiracy, but climate change is instead based
on a theoretical framework that was established in the 19th century.

Therefore climate scientists who work and publish on aspects of climate change
do not disagree about the fact that humans are major contributors to climate
change and have the ability to both warm and cool our planet, by changing land
surface characteristics or the chemical composition of our atmosphere.

                    
                                                276. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 12:35 pm

"Hadley CRU has form in this regard. In September – I wrote the story up here
as "How the global warming industry is based on a massive lie" - CRU's
researchers were exposed as having "cherry-picked" data in order to support
their untrue claim that global temperatures had risen higher at the end of the
20th century than at any time in the last millenium. CRU was also the
organisation which – in contravention of all acceptable behaviour in the
international scientific community – spent years withholding data from
researchers it deemed unhelpful to its cause. This matters because CRU,
established in 1990 by the Met Office, is a government-funded body which is
supposed to be a model of rectitude. Its HadCrut record is one of the four
official sources of global temperature data used by the IPCC.  
http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jamesdelingpole/100017393/climategate-the-
final-nail-in-the-coffin-of-anthropogenic-global-warming/

                    
                                                277. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:50 pm

Why do you selectively believe nonesense on the Web?

The “Hockey Stick” has been validated over and over again. It was affirmed in
a major review by the National Academy of Scientists (in media-speak, the
highest scientific “court” in the land) . The Hockey Stick has been replicated
and strengthened by numerous independent studies. It turns out that there are
“hockey sticks” for sea level rise, ocean acidification, ocean temps, ice
melting.

                    
                                                278. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 9:07 am

Mann's hockey stick has never been validated. How can it be if it does not
show known periods of what the earth's climate experienced in the recent past,
recent because of the 4.5 billion years of the earth's existence, when there
was the Roman Warm period, The Medieval Warm period followed by the Little Ice
Age? Your selective memory and picking of flawed sources is amazing. You seem
to like Wikipedia, I do not, but here is something from that source to attempt
to give you a certain degree of validity to your misconceptions.

"The Medieval Warm Period (MWP), Medieval Climate Optimum, or Medieval
Climatic Anomaly was a time of warm climate in the North Atlantic region, that
may also have been related to other climate events around the world during
that time, including in China,[1] New Zealand,[2] and other countries lasting
from about AD 950 to 1250. It was followed by a cooler period in the North
Atlantic termed the Little Ice Age."  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medieval_Warm_Period>

                    
                                                279. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:31 pm

"picking of flawed sources "? The National Academy of Scientists is a "flawed
source"? Why aren't you willing to accept the facts?

Re "“The Medieval Warm Period (MWP), Medieval Climate Optimum, or Medieval
Climatic Anomaly was a time of warm climate in the North Atlantic region," -
glad you got your facts right! But some other parts of the world were cooler,
and the average GLOBAL temperatures then were not as high as they are now.

                    
                                                280. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 24, 2012 at 3:31 am

"But some other parts of the world were cooler, and the average GLOBAL
temperatures then were not as high as they are now." EV: Where do dream up
this type of nonsense? Do you think that for 300 years just Northern Europe
was blessed with this warm period and I say "blessed" because warm is better
than cold any day, if you are alive. I wonder why you can not understand that
simple FACT.

                    
                                                281. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 10:15 pm

Doug-

You might try looking at this video:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8e2GlooAPkM&feature=player_embedded

Michael Mann: The Hockey Stick Under Oath (8 minutes - hearings before the
House Energy and Commerce Committee, in July of 2006.)

                    
                                                282. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 12:51 pm

Montana's Annual Temp for 2008 was 41.9 F., .2 deg F cooler than the MT annual
1901 - 2000 Average of 42.14 deg F. Global CO2 levels keep rising, but temp
average is the same. Also, precipitation was also slightly above average for
MT. The alarmist model does not fit the data, but that doesn't matter to those
who want to take your money or. Here are some examples.

“We need to get some broad based support, to capture the public’s imagination…
So we have to offer up scary scenarios, make simplified, dramatic statements
and make little mention of any doubts… Each of us has to decide what the right
balance is between being effective and being honest.” - Stephen Schneider,
Stanford Professor of Climatology, lead author of many IPCC reports

“Unless we announce disasters no one will listen.” - Sir John Houghton, first
chairman of IPCC

“It doesn’t matter what is true, it only matters what people believe is true.”
- Paul Watson, co-founder of Greenpeace

“We’ve got to ride this global warming issue. Even if the theory of global
warming is wrong, we will be doing the right thing in terms of economic and
environmental policy.” - Timothy Wirth, President of the UN Foundation

“No matter if the science of global warming is all phony… climate change
provides the greatest opportunity to bring about justice and equality in the
world.” - Christine Stewart, fmr Canadian Minister of the Environment

“The only way to get our society to truly change is to frighten people with
the possibility of a catastrophe.” - emeritus professor Daniel Botkin

“We require a central organizing principle - one agreed to voluntarily. Minor
shifts in policy, moderate improvement in laws and regulations, rhetoric
offered in lieu of genuine change - these are all forms of appeasement,
designed to satisfy the public’s desire to believe that sacrifice, struggle
and a wrenching transformation of society will not be necessary.” - Al Gore,
Earth in the Balance

“Isn’t the only hope for the planet that the industrialized civilizations
collapse? Isn’t it our responsiblity to bring that about?” - Maurice Strong,
founder of the UN Environment Programme (This is the same SOB that is
partnered up with Al Gore, whose company, Generation Investment Management,
which is now worth over $200 million. Strong spends most of his time in China,
the worst polluter on the planet, (CO2 is not a pollutant but an essential
ingredient for life on earth). & he is doing what he can to make this
communist country the world's next superpower.)

“A massive campaign must be launched to de-develop the United States. De-
development means bringing our economic system into line with the realities of
ecology and the world resource situation.” - Paul Ehrlich, Professor of
Population Studies

“The only hope for the world is to make sure there is not another United
States. We can’t let other countries have the same number of cars, the amount
of industrialization, we have in the US. We have to stop these Third World
countries right where they are.” - Michael Oppenheimer, Environmental Defense
Fund

“Global Sustainability requires the deliberate quest of poverty, reduced
resource consumption and set levels of mortality control.” - Professor Maurice
King

“Complex technology of any sort is an assault on human dignity. It would be
little short of disastrous for us to discover a source of clean, cheap,
abundant energy, because of what we might do with it.” - Amory Lovins, Rocky
Mountain Institute

“The prospect of cheap fusion energy is the worst thing that could happen to
the planet.” - Jeremy Rifkin, Greenhouse Crisis Foundation

“Giving society cheap, abundant energy would be the equivalent of giving an
idiot child a machine gun.” - Prof Paul Ehrlich, Stanford University

“The big threat to the planet is people: there are too many, doing too well
economically and burning too much oil.” – Sir James Lovelock, BBC Interview

“My three main goals would be to reduce human population to about 100 million
worldwide, destroy the industrial infrastructure and see wilderness, with it’s
full complement of species, returning throughout the world.” -Dave Foreman,
co-founder of Earth First!

“A total population of 250-300 million people, a 95% decline from present
levels, would be ideal.” - Ted Turner, founder of CNN and major UN donor

“… the resultant ideal sustainable population is hence more than 500 million
but less than one billion.” - Club of Rome, Goals for Mankind

“If I were reincarnated I would wish to be returned to earth as a killer virus
to lower human population levels.” - Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, patron
of the World Wildlife Fund

“I suspect that eradicating small pox was wrong. It played an important part
in balancing ecosystems.” - John Davis, editor of Earth First! Journal

“The extinction of the human species may not only be inevitable but a good
thing.” - Christopher Manes, Earth First!

“Childbearing should be a punishable crime against society, unless the parents
hold a government license. All potential parents should be required to use
contraceptive chemicals, the government issuing antidotes to citizens chosen
for childbearing.” - David Brower, first Executive Director of the Sierra Club

Does this sound like these people have humanities best interest at heart or
even the planet's, for that matter, ENVIRO?

                    
                                                283. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:48 pm

Some of them are whackos - but so what? I know the majority of climate
scientists DO "have humanities best interest at heart" - that's why they are
trying to get the public to understand the POTENTIAL consequences of climate
change.

                    
                                                284. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 24, 2012 at 3:56 am

EV: You have forgotten the main aim of your wackos and any one that believes
in this hoax is that is the control factor and the money to be made from
taxing something that is essential for life on earth, CO2. Your flawed thought
process, if you have one, keeps you from seeing that a minor bureaucrat such
as Hansen makes over 1.2 million dollars a year off of this hoax and this
comes after he decried being "muzzled" by Bush while giving hundreds of public
address on the subject. This reinforces the reason to believe that he is
nothing more than an unprincipled liar, as is any one that puts forth that CO2
controls something as complex as the earth's climate if they have the
intelligence of a ST. Bernard puppy and know that it can not do so. Gore had
about two million dollars when he left office and now, because of CO2, is
worth in excess of one-hundred million and what has he done to serve humanity
to gain this kind of reward? Nothing. Remember, EV. this is the same charlatan
that claimed the ocean levels would be up to the steps of the Empire State
Building in a few years and then he feels comfortable spending some of his ill
gotten gain buying beach property in California. Sorry, EV, this kind of
hypocrisy  
makes me sick but it is something that you seem to admire and that tells much
about the type of person that you are.

                    
                                                285. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 3:32 pm

You really like to distort history! The "muzzling" of Hansen was unprecedented
- NASA staffers denied his request to do a National Public Radio interview
because they didn't want his message to get out. He certailny gave lots of
public addresses, but that's because he's very concerned about AGW.

I begin to wonder sometimes if there is someone controlling your mind - you
just seem incapable of accepting "inconvenient truths". No one is saying "CO2
controls something as complex as the earth’s climate ", but they are saying
"CO2 influences the earth’s climate". If you don't accept the science at
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83, please give me a
reason other than it doesn't make sense to you.

                    
                                                286. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 1:03 pm

More about Lindzen:

http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2012/03/misrepresentation-from-
lindzen/#more-11099

Richard Lindzen is a very special character in the climate debate – very
smart, high profile, and with a solid background in atmospheric dynamics. He
has, in times past, raised interesting critiques of the mainstream science.
None of them, however, have stood the test of time – but exploring the issues
was useful. More recently though, and especially in his more public outings,
he spends most of his time misrepresenting the science and is a master at
leading people to believe things that are not true without him ever saying
them explicitly.

(The article ends with)

Such a cavalier attitude to analysing and presenting data probably has some
lessons for how seriously one should take Lindzen’s comments. I anticipate
with interest Lindzen’s corrections of this in future presentations and his
apology for misleading his audience last month.

                    
                                                287. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 1:17 pm

Another Web page that I just discovered - the "Real Climate Wiki" -

If the "deniers" thought that the published articles supporting AGW were
flawed, wouldn't they have a similar site pointing out the alleged flaws?

http://www.realclimate.org/wiki/index.php?title=RC_Wiki

It is primarily an index for debunking of various popular media occurrences of
climate-related nonsense. Articles are sorted by where they appear (outlet and
country), or alphabetically by author. Under each article you will find links
to rebuttals of specific arguments and overall critiques of the pieces. This
is by no means comprehensive, but should provide a starting point for those
interested in seeing why these pieces are wrong. We do not include mainstream
journalist pieces that are occasionally mistaken or somewhat sensationalist
(see the main website for that kind of commentary), but we do include the op-
ed pieces that are specifically designed to confuse, obfuscate and abuse the
science.

                    
                                                288. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 2:27 pm

EN: I spent 24 years in Alaska and during 13 of those years I was 140 miles
above the arctic circle; therefore, I know something about cold, but more on
that later. I also lived about nine years in South East Alaska and I had my
boat into Glacier Bay on two separate occasions and to the face of the
tidewater glaciers; therefore, I know much about this area and am amazed at
what the sailors of the earlier days were able to do with only the wind and no
charts in what is one big rock pile.

This applies to the dire warnings regarding melting glaciers: Keep in mind
that Geo. Vancouver's ships were wind powered; therefore, he wasn't spewing
out any diesel smoke to start this massive retreat of these glaciers. "The
explorer Captain George Vancouver found Icy Strait, at the south end of
Glacier Bay, choked with ice in 1794. Glacier Bay itself was almost entirely
iced over. In 1879 naturalist John Muir found that the ice had retreated
almost all the way up the bay. By 1916 the Grand Pacific Glacier was at the
head of Tarr Inlet about 65 miles from Glacier Bay's mouth. This is the
fastest documented glacier retreat ever. Scientists are hoping to learn how
glacial activity relates to climate changes and global warming from these
retreating giants.  
http://soundwaves.usgs.gov/2001/07/glacierbaymap.gif

Glacier Bay was first surveyed in detail in 1794 by a team from the H.M.S.
Discovery, captained by George Vancouver. At the time the survey produced
showed a mere indentation in the shoreline. That massive glacier was more than
4,000 feet thick in places, up to 20 miles wide, and extended more than 100
miles to the St. Elias mountain range.

By 1879, however, naturalist John Muir discovered that the ice had retreated
more than 30 miles forming an actual bay. By 1916, the Grand Pacific Glacier –
the main glacier credited with carving the bay – had melted back 60 miles to
the head of what is now Tarr Inlet. http://www.glacierbay.org/geography.html

EN: You should take the time to read the Raina report;  
http://gbpihed.gov.in/MoEF%20Dissussion%20Paper%20on%20Himalayan%20Glaciers.pdf
This is a good report on glaciers in the Indian Himalyian Mountains.

                    
                                                289. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:40 pm

Cherry-picking again - picking one example to try to prove your point. Please
do a little research and provide RELEVANT facts:  
Expert: 99 percent of Alaska glaciers in decline  
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/27054785/ns/us_news-environment/t/expert-percent-
alaska-glaciers-decline/#.T2Yd1Xm-18E

                    
                                                290. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 24, 2012 at 4:54 am

EV. You call what I presented "cherry-picking". This FACT dates back to 1794
and is well documented. You are a fool and not even capable of "cherry-
picking" and then you send me to a MSNBC site where one has as much of an
opportunity to get the truth about anything as seeing a pig fly over head.

"While a few of Alaska's large glaciers are advancing, 99 percent are
retreating, the book, "Glaciers in Alaska," states. The book was written by
USGS research geologist Bruce Molina." I will offer up one of your "so what"
replies; like the one you gave when shown that your contention that certain
organizations received no government money and that was shown to you to be
just another one of your many lies on this subject that you have demonstrated
each time you post that you know nothing about.

"A USGS project to photograph the glaciers of Montana's Glacier National Park
also showed significant retreat. Based on these photos and glacier recession
rates, scientists predicted the park could lose its namesakes by 2030." So
What? They have been gone before and will perhaps be gone again.

"Greenland, which is covered by more ice than anywhere else in the world
outside Antarctica, has also seen significant melt of its glaciers in recent
decades."  
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/27054785/ns/us_news-environment/t/expert-percent-
alaska-glaciers-decline/#.T21HTNVsXY9

The glaciers have been in a steady decline since the last ice age ended,
except during the global Little Ice Age when they advanced again. I know that
you and Andrea Thompson are not smart enough to understand that when the
Vikings were colonizing Greenland during the global Medieval Warm Period the
glaciers there had receded farther than where they are now, but that doesn't
fit your delusional view of your demon, CO2, and it causing anthropogenic
global warming (since that is no longer happening, now you simply call it
climate change). You have no way to explain any anthropogenic influence for,
first off, the ice age, the earth coming out of the ice age, the Roman Warm
period, the Medieval Optimum, the Little Ice Age, etc. because there is none
and now you try to create alarm over CO2 that is the necessary ingredient in
the atmosphere for all life on earth because with out it there would be no
plant life and with out plants, no animal life. THERE! Your have your RELEVANT
FACTS and try to lie your way around them, which you will by presenting some
garbage that some one associated with the demonstrated to be dishonest and
self serving IPCC, NAS, NSF or any number of corrupted organizations put forth
for your consumption and the consumption of anyone else that demonstrates that
they to not possess logic or reasoning to determine this issue on their own.

                    
                                                291. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 3:19 pm

"anthropogenic global warming" is still happening - just look at the trends-
(1) the current trend - the decadal temperature increase, (2) all 13 of the
hottest years on record have occurred since 1997, (3) the rate of increase of
CO2 is unprecedented over millions of years (4) the present level of CO2 is
higher than at any time during the last 800 thousand years, and (5) the
science that explains it.

The melting of glaciers in Glacier National Park will not be important except
for tourists. But the melting of glaciers in other parts of the world WILL
have a great negative impact on millions of people.

The fact the Greenland used to greener is relevant to the extent that it shows
how LOCAL climate can vary over hundreds of years. If the BASIC science of
climate science weren't so well understood, Id think there would a chance the
we might not need to worry. But since GHGs make the Earth warm (which is why
they are called GHGs) and GHGs are increasing due to human activities, I've
very worried.

And just because there was no anthropogenic link to earlier climate
variability does not mean that what's happening now has no link - the
atmosphere now is much different now from what it was then.

I would hardly call the IPCC, NAS and NSF "corrupted organizations". Just
because you don't like their message is no excuse to disparage then. Again,
this cartoon says it best:  
http://thinkprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/climateinfographic.jpg

                    
                                                292. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 2:49 pm

Enviro: Read the Government’s EPA report which has been held back at;  
http://cei.org/cei_files/fm/active/0/DOC062509-004.pdf  
The government's own data shows that AGW is a scam, maybe that is why it has
been held up?

You can also get to the pdf at this site by going to the bottom of the New
York Times story and open the pdf. It would be well worth your while to read
what the EPA report says.

Two EPA Staffers Question Science Behind Climate 'Endangerment' Proposal  
http://www.nytimes.com/gwire/2009/06/26/26greenwire-two-epa-staffers-question-
science-behind-clima-89720.html

                    
                                                293. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 5:37 pm

Just one disenting voice does not prove anything. If you look closely at the
"five recent developments" you will find cherry-picking and irrelevant facts -
nothing to dispute the basic settled science of global warming from CO2.

                    
                                                294. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 17, 2012 at 3:09 pm

"A near-record snowfall this winter has buried Anchorage neighborhoods,
turning streets into snow-walled canyons and even collapsing some roofs.  
But some residents are hoping for more, at least another 3.3 inches. Then they
could say they made it through the winter when the nearly 60-year record of
132.6 inches was broken."

Naturally when there is an idiot like this giving the report there is bound to
be some editorializing going on.  
"AP Science Writer Seth Borenstein in Washington, D.C., contributed to this
report."

"When you start to see the extreme events become more common, that's when you
can say that it is a consequence of global warming," University of Victoria
climate scientist Andrew Weaver said." Yea sure, you bet, and all of the other
nonsense that goes with the "news" as Borenstein reports it.  
http://billingsgazette.com/news/national/alaska-s-largest-city-eyes-snow-
record/article_e39e6006-c5db-518b-91c3-46d6e52513ed.html

I see that these fools discount totally that it will be a record that has
stood for nearly 60 years that may be broken.

                    
                                                295. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 4:10 pm

You are confusing WEATHER with CLIMATE.

                    
                                                296. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 18, 2012 at 3:37 pm

Re: "Show one experiment carried out that makes what you claim above about a
trace gas, CO2, that makes up a scant .036% of the atmosphere and is 1 &1/2
times heavier than the rest of the atmosphere the driver of something as
complex as the earth’s climate."

Actually very simple:  
1. Shine an incandescent light (lot of infrared radiation - otherwise known as "heat")  
2. Take a movie of the light in the infrared range  
3. Put a bottle of nitrogen and oxygen between the light and the camera  
4. Start the camera  
5. Add a little CO2 to the bottle (only a tiny bit is needed)  
6. Watch the incredible reduction infrared radiation that the movie captures

This proves that CO2 blocks infrared radiation.

Next calculate the infrared radiation emitted by the earth and calculate how
much radiation the CO2 in the atmosphere blocks. Because the earth must remain
in "energy balance" with the sun's energy, the temperature of the earth must
increase to compensate for the blocked radiation, because emitting infrared
radiation is the way the energy balance is maintained.

You should also look at:

            1. The Biggest Control Knob: CO2 in Earth's Climate History  
http://www.wunderground.com/blog/JeffMasters/comment.html?entrynum=1453

            2. CO2 is the biggest climate control knob  
http://www.globalchangeblog.com/2010/10/co2-is-the-biggest-climate-control-
knob/

Because CO2, O3, N2O, CH4, and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) do not condense and  
precipitate, noncondensing GHGs constitute the key 25% of the radiative
forcing that supports and sustains the entire terrestrial greenhouse effect,
the remaining 75% coming as fast feedback contributions from water vapor and
clouds.

From the foregoing, it is clear that CO2 is the key atmospheric gas that
exerts principal control over the strength of the terrestrial greenhouse
effect. Water vapor and clouds are fast-acting feedback effects, and as such
are controlled by the radiative forcings supplied by the noncondensing GHGs.

RELAVENT facts please! Can you provide a link to any reputable climate
scientist that does not agree with the above?

                    
                                                297. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 20, 2012 at 5:00 am

Your "experiment" with CO2 is totally meaningless because you are
approximating the amount of this CO2 that is heavier than oxygen and nitrogen
that is present in the atmosphere & the atmosphere is made up of 78.08%
nitrogen, 20.95% oxygen, (99.03% of the atmosphere is made up of these two
gases) and now you are saying that to these "known"?? amounts of gas you will
add CO2 that makes up .036% of the total atmosphere, How stupid can you be to
imagine that you will be able to introduce such a minute amount of CO2 to your
"mix" that is probably made up of unknown quantities of the main gases?

How many different ways must one explain it to try to get you to understand
the insignificance of CO2 in the total atmosphere, especially since you fail
to understand that, it being 1 & 1/2 times heavier than the rest of that
atmosphere, it settles out of the of the column of air as altitude increases?
If there is 53% of the O2 available at 18,000 feet, then tell me what the
percentage of CO2 there is at this altitude.

"Let’s picture this in another way to really get an idea of the scale of CO2
compared to the total atmosphere. The Eiffel Tower in Paris is 324 metres high
(1063ft). If the hight of the Eiffel Tower represented the total size of the
atmosphere then the natural level of CO2 would be 8.75 centimetres of that
hight (3.4 inches) and the amount added by humans up until today would be an
extra 3.76 centimetres (1.5 inches)"  
http://a-sceptical-mind.com/co2-the-basic-facts

                    
                                                298. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 20, 2012 at 9:09 am

EN: I certainly wish that you had proposed your "experiment" to me earlier,
like say four years ago. I could have taken identical containers to Everest
Base Camp, the one in Nepal, when I was there in 2008, I could have taken the
same type of container to Thorung La Pass, (17,769 FT) that is highest
trekking pass in the world, on the Annapurna circuit, I could have had the
identical type container last September when I spent eight days going up
Kilimanjaro, and also would have had the same identical container the last
time I was back to Wyoming where I was born and raised and went over Togwotee
Pass (9,658 FT) and on the continental divide. I would have opened these
identical, seal able containers and taken ambient air samples, being very
careful to not breath any CO2 into the sample, sealed them and together with
the sea level sample from where I am at now on the Andaman Sea at Krabi and
had the test done that you described with your light by some independent
agency and see just what the results were. I would venture to say that there
would be no sign of any; "incredible reduction infrared radiation that the
movie captures" and a difference in the images taken with the camera when the
samples were all exposed to the same test. This for sure would be a more valid
test that the nonsense that you propose.

                    
                                                299. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 21, 2012 at 7:17 pm

Doug -

Your unwillingness to accept the science continues to amaze me. Instead of
conducting flawed "thought experiments", just look at the results of real
results!

In 1970, NASA launched the IRIS satellite that measured infrared spectra
between 400 cm-1 to 1600 cm-1. In 1996, the Japanese Space Agency launched the
IMG satellite which recorded similar observations. Both sets of data were
compared to discern any changes in outgoing radiation over the 26 year period
(Harries 2001). The resultant change in outgoing radiation was as follows:

Figure 1: Change in spectrum from 1970 to 1996 due to trace gases. 'Brightness
temperature' indicates equivalent blackbody temperature (Harries 2001).

What they found was a drop in outgoing radiation at the wavelength bands that
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) absorb energy.
The change in outgoing radiation is consistent with theoretical expectations.
Thus the paper found "direct experimental evidence for a significant increase
in the Earth's greenhouse effect".

http://www.skepticalscience.com/empirical-evidence-for-co2-enhanced-
greenhouse-effect.htm

Can you provide a link to an actual experiment which shows that CO2 does not
absorb enough infrared radiation to affect the earth's temperature?

                    
                                                300. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 12:52 am

While we are focusing on Anchorage, AK.:  
It is obvious EN, that the perhaps new record snowfall for Anchorage is not
just an isolated occurrence as your kind would want one to believe. Yea, I
know, since this is a cold event, it is weather; but, if it is warm event,
then it is climate change.

Record Lows - 2008  
Record Low Temperatures in the United States

RECORD OCTOBER COLD IN ANCHORAGE  
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK  
RESIDENTS IN ANCHORAGE WILL AGREE THIS OCTOBER WAS A BIT COLDER THAN  
USUAL. NOT ONLY WAS THE MONTH COLDER THAN NORMAL BUT THE AVERAGE  
TEMPERATURE OF 29.6 DEGREES PLACED OCTOBER WITHIN THE TOP TEN  
COLDEST OUT OF SOME 90 YEARS OF CLIMATE RECORDS FOR THE CITY.  
http://www.iceagenow.com/Record_Lows_2008.htm

                    
                                                301. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 12:46 pm

You just don't get it. The expectation is that with climate change there are
apt to be more extreme events - both "cold" and "hot", with "hot"
predominating. And that appears to be what is happening. The media may try to
promote "since this is a cold event, it is weather; but, if it is warm event,
then it is climate change.", but climate scientists do not.

                    
                                                302. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 1:43 am

This a long list of the views of people like Enviro and, as you will see, the
earth, the climate or humans are not a prime concern of these people.

Control is their real aim and, if they do not have the anthropogenic factor
that they need to get that from carbon dioxide, how will they gain this
control over everything that you do because energy is at the heart of any
advanced society?

Warmists 'Want To Control Every Aspect Of Your Life': 'What you eat, what you
drive, where you drive, what you believe, what you say, what you can own, how
many children you can have…'  
'how much you can travel, how much money you have, what your kids are taught,
how big your house is, the temperature of your house, how your house is
heated, how far you live from your work, what kind of light bulbs and other
appliances you have ……… Global warmers make Lenin's Bolsheviks look like
libertarians. In Soviet Russia, polar bears eat Bolsheviks'

“The data doesn't matter. We're not basing our recommendations  
on the data. We're basing them on the climate models.”  
- Prof. Chris Folland,  
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

“The models are convenient fictions  
that provide something very useful.”  
- Dr David Frame,  
climate modeler, Oxford University  
http://www.green-agenda.com/>

"Humanity is sitting on a time bomb. If the vast majority of the  
world's scientists are right, we have just ten years to avert a  
major catastrophe that could send our entire planet's climate system  
into a tail-spin of epic destruction involving extreme weather, floods,  
droughts, epidemics and killer heat waves beyond anything we have  
ever experienced - a catastrophe of our own making."  
- Al Gore,  
An Inconvenient Truth

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"We are getting close to catastrophic tipping points,  
despite the fact that most people barely notice the warming yet."  
- Dr James Hansen,  
NASA researcher

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"By the end of this century climate change will reduce the human  
population to a few breeding pairs surviving near the Arctic."  
- Sir James Lovelock,

"Nations are in effect ceding portions of their sovereignty  
to the international community and beginning to create a  
new system of international environmental governance  
as a means of solving otherwise unmanageable crises."  
- Lester Brown,  
WorldWatch Institute  
Revenge of Gaia

"Adopting a central organizing principle…  
means embarking on an all-out effort to use every  
policy and program, every law and institution…  
to halt the destruction of the environment."  
- Al Gore,  
Earth in the Balance

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Effective execution of Agenda 21 will require a profound  
reorientation of all human society, unlike anything the world  
has ever experienced a major shift in the priorities of both  
governments and individuals and an unprecedented  
redeployment of human and financial resources. This shift  
will demand that a concern for the environmental consequences  
of every human action be integrated into individual and  
collective decision-making at every level."  
- UN Agenda 21

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The current course of development is thus clearly unsustainable.  
Current problems cannot be solved by piecemeal measures.  
More of the same is not enough. Radical change from the  
current trajectory is not an option, but an absolute necessity.  
Fundamental economic, social and cultural changes that  
address the root causes of poverty and environmental  
degradation are required and they are required now."  
– from the Earth Charter website

"The goal now is a socialist, redistributionist society,  
which is nature's proper steward and society's only hope."  
- David Brower,  
founder of Friends of the Earth

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"If we don't overthrow capitalism, we don't have a chance of  
saving the world ecologically. I think it is possible to have  
an ecologically sound society under socialism.  
I don't think it is possible under capitalism"  
- Judi Bari,  
principal organiser of Earth First!

"We must make this an insecure and inhospitable place  
for capitalists and their projects. We must reclaim the roads and  
plowed land, halt dam construction, tear down existing dams,  
free shackled rivers and return to wilderness  
millions of acres of presently settled land."  
- David Foreman,  
co-founder of Earth First!

"Mankind is the most dangerous, destructive,  
selfish and unethical animal on the earth."  
- Michael Fox,  
vice-president of The Humane Society

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Human beings, as a species,  
have no more value than slugs."  
- John Davis, editor of Earth First! Journal

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Humans on the Earth behave in some ways like a  
pathogenic micro-organism, or like the cells of a tumor."  
- Sir James Lovelock,  
Healing Gaia

"Humans on the Earth behave in some ways like a  
pathogenic micro-organism, or like the cells of a tumor."  
- Sir James Lovelock,  
Healing Gaia

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The Earth has cancer  
and the cancer is Man."  
- Club of Rome,  
Mankind at the Turning Point

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"A cancer is an uncontrolled multiplication of cells;  
the population explosion is an uncontrolled multiplication of people.  
We must shift our efforts from the treatment of the symptoms to  
the cutting out of the cancer. The operation will demand many  
apparently brutal and heartless decisions."  
- Prof Paul Ehrlich,  
The Population Bomb

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"I don't claim to have any special interest in natural history,  
but as a boy I was made aware of the annual fluctuations in  
the number of game animals and the need to adjust  
the cull to the size of the surplus population."  
- Prince Philip,  
preface of Down to Earth

"One America burdens the earth much more than  
twenty Bangladeshes. This is a terrible thing to say.  
In order to stabilize world population,we must eliminate  
350,000 people per day. It is a horrible thing to say,  
but it's just as bad not to say it."  
- Jacques Cousteau,  
UNESCO Courier

"The fate of mankind, as well as of religion, depends upon  
the emergence of a new faith in the future.  
Armed with such a faith, we might find  
it possible to resanctify the earth."  
- Al Gore,  
Earth in the Balance

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The greatest hope for the Earth lies in religionists and  
scientists uniting to awaken the world to its near fatal predicament  
and then leading mankind out of the bewildering maze of  
international crises into the future Utopia of humanist hope."  
- Club of Rome,  
Goals for Mankind

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"What an incredible planet in the universe this will be  
when we will be one human family living in justice,  
peace, love and harmony with our divine Earth,  
with each other and with the heavens."  
- Robert Muller,  
UN Assistant Secretary General

"The earth is literally our mother, not only because we depend on  
her for nurture and shelter but even more because the human  
species has been shaped by her in the womb of evolution….  
Our salvation depends upon our ability  
to create a religion of nature."  
- Rene Dubos,  
board member, Planetary Citizens

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Each element, plant, insect, fish and animal  
represents a certain aspect of Gaia's - and our - being.  
In a way, we are Gaia's intelligence and awareness  
- currently lost in self-destructive madness.  
We must acknowledge, respect and love her for being  
the Mother she is to us or we deny our very selves.  
Nurture the Mother as she nurtures us."  
- Prof. Michael J. Cohen,  
Ecopsychologist

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"It is the responsibility of each human being today to  
choose between the force of darkness and the force of light.  
We must therefore transform our attitudes, and adopt a renewed  
respect for the superior laws of Divine Nature."  
- Maurice Strong,  
first Secretary General of UNEP

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The spirit of our planet is stirring!  
The Consciousness of Goddess Earth  
is now rising against all odds,  
in spite of millennia of suppression,  
repression and oppression inflicted on Her  
by a hubristic and misguided humanity.

The Earth is a living entity, a biological organism  
with psychic and spiritual dimensions.  
With the expansion of the patriarchal religions  
that focused on a male God majestically  
stationed in Heaven ruling over the Earth and the  
Universe, the memory of our planet's innate Divinity  
was repressed and banished into the  
collective unconscious of humanity."  
- Envision Earth

"Still more important is the implication that the evolution of  
homo sapiens, with his technological inventiveness and his  
increasingly subtle communications network, has vastly increased  
Gaia's range of perception. She is now through us awake and aware  
of herself. She has seen the reflection of her fair face through the  
eyes of astronauts and the television cameras of orbiting spacecraft.

Our sensations of wonder and pleasure, our capacity  
for conscious thought and speculation, our restless curiosity and  
drive are hers to share. This new interrelationship of Gaia with man  
is by no means fully established; we are not yet a truly collective  
species, corralled and tamed as an integral part of the biosphere,  
as we are as individual creatures. It may be that the destiny of  
mankind is to become tamed, so that the fierce, destructive, and  
greedy forces of tribalism and nationalism are fused into a  
compulsive urge to belong to the commonwealth of all  
creatures which constitutes Gaia."  
– Sir James Lovelock,  
Gaia: A New Look At Life

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Little by little a planetary prayer book is  
thus being composed by an increasingly united  
humanity seeking its oneness. Once again,  
but this time on a universal scale, humankind is  
seeking no less than its reunion with 'divine,'  
its transcendence into higher forms of life. Hindus  
call our earth Brahma, or God, for they rightly  
see no difference between our earth and the divine.  
This ancient simple truth is slowly dawning again upon  
humanity, as we are about to enter our cosmic age  
and become what we were always meant to be:  
the planet of god."  
- Robert Muller,  
UN Assistant Secretary General

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"What if Mary is another name for Gaia? Then her capacity for  
virgin birth is no miracle . . . it is a role of Gaia since life began . . .  
She is of this Universe and, conceivably, a part of God. On Earth,  
she is the source of life everlasting and is alive now;  
she gave birth to humankind and we are part of her."  
- Sir James Lovelock,  
Ages of Gaia

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Nature is my god. To me, nature is sacred;  
trees are my temples and forests are my cathedrals."  
- Mikhail Gorbachev,  
Green Cross International

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The spiritual sense of our place in nature…  
can be traced to the origins of human civilization….  
The last vestige of organized goddess worship  
was eliminated by Christianity."  
- Al Gore,  
Earth in the Balance

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Christianity is our foe. If animal rights is to succeed,  
we must destroy the Judeo-Christian Religious tradition."  
- Peter Singer, founder of Animal Rights 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"I pledge allegiance to the Earth and all its sacred parts.  
Its water, land and living things and all its human hearts."  
- Global Education Associates,  
The Earth Pledge

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"By fostering a deep sense of connection to others and to the earth  
in all its dimensions, holistic education encourages a sense of  
responsibility to self to others and to the planet."  
- Global Alliance for Transforming Education

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"The earth is not dead matter. She is alive.  
Now begin to speak to the earth as you walk.  
You can speak out loud, or just talk to her in your mind.  
Send your love into her with your exhalation. Feel your  
heart touching upon the heart of the planet. Say to her  
whatever words come to you: Mother Earth, I love you.  
Mother Earth, I bless you. May you be healed. May all  
your creatures be happy. Peace to you, Mother Earth.  
On behalf of the human race, I ask forgiveness  
for having injured you. Forgive us, Mother Earth"  
- US Student Textbook,  
"Prayer to the Earth"

                    
                                                303. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 1:59 am

Re "Show one experiment carried out that makes what you claim above about a
trace gas, CO2, that makes up a scant .036% of the atmosphere and is 1 &1/2
times heavier than the rest of the atmosphere the driver of something as
complex as the earth’s climate." - have a look at this video:

Iain Stewart demonstrates infrared radiation absorption by CO2  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ot5n9m4whaw

                    
                                                304. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 12:13 pm

That video really made a believer out of me. Yea! you bet. I now see where you
came up with your stupid test that you offered up. I think that one could show
some one with a CO2 fire extinguisher putting out a fire to demonstrate that
CO2 is one and one-half times heavier than the rest of the atmosphere. Would
that impress you with that fact?

                    
                                                305. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 26, 2012 at 4:54 pm

Who cares that CO2 is heavier? The main thing is that is shows that CO2
absorbs infrared radiaion. CO2 is a greenhouse gas and traps heat that
otherwise would be radiated into space. Why can't you accept those FACTS?

                    
                                                306. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 9:20 am

I can not believe that some that would say this: "Who cares that CO2 is
heavier?' This shows the same degree of reasoning that his beloved NAS and
IPCC people show when they produce their flawed "reports". If CIO2 is heavier
than the rest of the atmosphere, how much does this individule think that is
going to be creating his pane of I guess a glass like substance in the green
house that does exist but the contributing substance is not CO2 but H2O.

I understand that the information below will have no meaning to you and that
is sad.

ppm of CO2 with altitude and mass of CO2 in atmosphere to 8520 metres beyond
which there is practically no CO2  
http://greenparty.ca/blogs/169/2009-01-03/ppm-co2-altitude-and-mass-
co2-atmosphere-8520-metres-beyond-which-there-practic

                    
                                                307. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 5:26 pm

"Who cares that a molecule of CO2 is heavier than a moiecule of air" is
correct - CO2 IS well-mixed in the atmoshpere - most "deniers" do not deny
this fact. Sure, if you filled a baloon with CO2 it WOULD sink. But things
work differently at the molecular level. Try thinking for a change - if the
molecules in the air were to layer themselves by weight, there would be bands
of nitrigen, oxygen,water vapor, CO2, etc. But they all MIX at the molecular
level and ratios throughout the atmosphere are relatively the same.

                    
                                                308. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 1:11 pm

Re "Warmists ‘Want To Control Every Aspect Of Your Life’: ‘" - why do you
beleve this propoganda? The truth is more like

"The deniers did not decide that climate change is a left-wing conspiracy by
uncovering some covert socialist plot. They arrived at this analysis by taking
a hard look at what it would take to lower global emissions as drastically and
as rapidly as climate science demands. They have concluded that this can be
done only by radically reordering our economic and political systems in ways
antithetical to their “free market” belief system. As British blogger and
Heartland regular James Delingpole has pointed out, “Modern environmentalism
successfully advances many of the causes dear to the left: redistribution of
wealth, higher taxes, greater government intervention, regulation.”
Heartland’s Bast puts it even more bluntly: For the left, “Climate change is
the perfect thing…. It’s the reason why we should do everything [the left]
wanted to do anyway.”

http://www.thenation.com/article/164497/capitalism-vs-climate?page=0,1

"radically reordering " may be bit "extreme", but some "reording" is
essential. I see nothing wrong with "redistribution of wealth, higher taxes,
greater government intervention, regulation.", as long as these are done
"moderately" and "appropriately" for the "public good".

                    
                                                309. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 1:53 pm

Enviro:

Re: Since the mid 1970s, the average surface temperature has warmed about 1°F.
The Earth’s surface is currently warming at a rate of about 0.29ºF/decade or
2.9°F/century.

Now that's CLIMATE!

* * *

Even if it was true, 1 degree F is about 0.2% relative to absolute zero. That
is completely in the noise level.

Also it can be argued that the period heading towards 2070 can go the other
way.

                    
                                                310. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 19, 2012 at 9:18 pm

Doug -

Looks like you're trying to get the title "King of Irrelevant Facts"!

Is the difference between 31 degrees F and 32 degrees F in the noise level for
water? How about the difference between 212 degrees F and 213 degrees F? I
don't think serious climate scientists ever use percentages when talking about
the temperature of the earth, as percentages are meaningless in that case.

And of course "it can be argued that the period heading towards 2070 can go
the other way." - anything can happen - nuclear winters, total collapse of
civilization, etc. But, assuming no such catastrophes, and given a continued
reliance on fossil fuels, the probability is close to zero. Not something I'd
want to consider when designing an energy policy.

                    
                                                311. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 9:41 am

EV: Is this what one would call an oxymoron statement?  
"Looks like you’re trying to get the title “King of Irrelevant Facts”!" If a
fact is that, a fact, then how can it be irrelevant?

                    
                                                312. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:12 pm

Facts may be facts, but not all facts are relavant when debating AWG.

"1 degree F is about 0.2% relative to absolute zero " is an irrelevant fact.
WHat is relevant is the amout of infrared radiatoin that the CO2 absorbs, and
how the total amount varies based on the total amount in the atmosphere. Can
you provide some relevant facts on this topic?

"it can be argued that the period heading towards 2070 can go the other way"
is an irrelevant statement.

I haven't seen any RELEVANT facts from you regarding the basic science of AWG
- just lots of lots of irrelevant thought experiments and lots of irrelevant
comments

                    
                                                313. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 20, 2012 at 4:28 am

I present EN, the one that will not use their real name and for obvious
reasons, with a quotation from Atte Korhola, a Professor of Environmental
Change at the University of Helsinki:  
"When later generations learn about climate science, they will classify the
beginning of the twenty-first century as an embarrassing chapter in the
history of science. They will wonder about our time and use it as a warning of
how core values and criteria of science were allowed little by little to be
forgotten, as the actual research topic of climate change turned into a
political and social playground."  
http://www.bishop-hill.net/blog/2012/2/12/a-letter-to-paul-nurse.html

I am now on a road trip to southern Thailand from where I live 196 Kilometers
south of Bangkok and really do not have the time, at present, to respond to
your continual barrage of nonsense. When I do get the time, you will get a
more in depth response, I assure you.

                    
                                                314. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 21, 2012 at 7:28 pm

Please debate RELEVANT FACTS. Statements like the one you provide do not help
with the understanding of the science. If you can, please provide links to the
science that disputes 1) CO2 is primarily responsible for the greenhouse
effect and 2) the earth will continue to warm as more CO2 is released from the
burning of fossil fuels. Otherwise you are wasting my time with your continued
nonsense

                    
                                                315. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 1:04 pm

Time is not all you have wasted and the most serious has been the ability to
apply rational thought to YOUR problem with CO2

                    
                                                316. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 11:11 am

Still waiting for you to debate the RELEVANT FACTS. If you can, please provide
links to the science that disputes the FACTS that 1) CO2 is primarily
responsible for the greenhouse effect and 2) the earth will continue to warm
as more CO2 is released from the burning of fossil fuels. Otherwise you are
wasting my time with your continued nonsense

                    
                                                317. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 21, 2012 at 1:16 am

An interesting article on the wierd weather in the US this winter:

"The ongoing March heat wave in the Midwest is one of the most  
extreme heat events in U.S. history. With so many records being  
shattered, it is difficult to cover in detail just how  
widespread, long-lasting, and extreme the event is"

http://www.wunderground.com/blog/JeffMasters/article.html

Tornadoes, extreme flooding, unprecedented heat expected in U.S. today

By Dr. Jeff Masters

Published: 3:04 PM GMT on March 19, 2012

                    
                                                318. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 2:53 am

EN: And to think that you imagine that you can "school" me or any sane person
on the difference between climate and weather. You obviously have no idea or
understanding of what has been happening in Europe and Asia this winter. Some
more of your delusional views, like your contention that the Medieval Warm
Period was just in Europe for 300 years. Get real or at least get an idea of
what is true and what is some BS that your few AGW "scientist" feed you.

                    
                                                319. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:37 pm

"what has been happening in Europe and Asia this winter." sounds like WEATHER
to me.

Here's a great SCIENTIFIC article on the Medieval Warm Period that supports my
view:

http://www.meteo.psu.edu/~mann/shared/articles/MannetalScience09.pdf

Global temperatures are known to have varied over the past 1500 years, but the
spatial patterns  
have remained poorly defined. We used a global climate proxy network to
reconstruct surface  
temperature patterns over this interval. The Medieval period is found to
display warmth that  
matches or exceeds that of the past decade in some regions, but which falls
well below recent levels  
globally. This period is marked by a tendency for La Niña–like conditions in
the tropical Pacific.  
The coldest temperatures of the Little Ice Age are observed over the interval
1400 to 1700 C.E.,  
with greatest cooling over the extratropical Northern Hemisphere continents.
The patterns of  
temperature change imply dynamical responses of climate to natural radiative
forcing changes  
involving El Niño and the North Atlantic Oscillation–Arctic Oscillation.

                    
                                                320. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 9:35 am

EV. Your world is incredibly small, maybe it would help if you got out and saw
some of the world beyond your dark basement.

Record cold this winter: CMA  
March 13, 2012  
By China News Center  
BEIJING – China’s coldest winter since 1986 is expected to end by mid-March,
with temperatures increasing gradually in most parts of the country, according
to the China Meteorological Administration.  
The average temperature this winter was about 1 C below average for the past
three decades, Ren Guofu, chief engineer of the National Climate Center said.  
He said China experienced unusually cold temperatures for two successive
winters because of the abnormal movement of the atmospheric circulation.  
In the Inner Mongolia autonomous region, outside temperatures dropped to 45 C
below zero this winter, an historic record, according to the China
Meteorological Administration.  
http://www.chinamedia.com/news/2012/03/13/record-cold-this-winter-cma-2/

                    
                                                321. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:20 pm

How come you keep confusing WEATHER with CLIMATE? THe earth is experiencing
more extremes, which is consistent with AGW.

                    
                                                322. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 5:21 pm

Since you like to talk about the WEATHER, here's some interesting info:

Dr. Jeff Masters: A spring heat wave like no other in U.S. and Canadian
history peaked in intensity yesterday, during its tenth day. Since record
keeping began in the late 1800s, there have never been so many temperature
records broken for spring warmth in a one-week period–and the margins by which
some of the records were broken yesterday were truly astonishing.
Wunderground’s weather historian, Christopher C. Burt, commented to me
yesterday, “it’s almost like science fiction at this point.“  
Among the stunning records set yesterday are:  
 Pellston, MI: record high broken by 32°F  
 Low temperatures beat the previous record high for the date at two stations  
 Multiple Canadian cites break all-time April records for warmth in March  
Sadly, even this off-the-charts event is just what scientists have been
warning to expect if we kept spewing billions of tons of heat-trapping
greenhouse gases into the air (see Hansen et al: “Extreme Heat Waves … in
Texas and Oklahoma in 2011 and Moscow in 2010 Were ‘Caused’ by
GlobalWarming”).  
Yesterday, meteorologist Masters published a detailed statistical analysis
that concluded, “It is highly unlikely the warmth of the current ‘Summer in
March’ heat wave could have occurred unless the climate was warming.”

                    
                                                323. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 10:51 am

It is just like I told you EV. If it is a cold event, then that is "weather",
according to you and your buddies that know nothing about the issue; but, if
it is a "warm" event, then it is a sure sign of climate change/ anthropogenic
global warming or what ever you are calling it this week.

I have a question for you, EV. Why have none of the all time record high
temperatures, some set in excess of one hundred years ago, not been broken?

What follows are world record high temperatures: World (Africa) El Azizia,
Libya; Sept. 13, 1922, (136F):  
North America (U.S.), Death Valley, Calif.; July 10, 1913 (134F)  
Asia; Tirat Tsvi, Israel, June 21, 1942, (129F):  
Australia, Cloncurry, Queensland; Jan. 16, 1889 (128F):  
Europe, Seville, Spain, Aug. 4, 1881 (122F):  
South America, Rivadavia, Argentina; Dec. 11, 1905 (120F):  
Canada, Midale and Yellow Grass, Saskatchewan, Canada; July 5, 1937 (113F):  
Oceania; Tuguegarao, Philippines, April 29, 1912 (108F):  
Persian Gulf (sea-surface): Aug. 5, 1924 (96F):  
Antarctica; Vanda Station, Scott Coast, Jan. 5, 1974 (59F):  
South Pole, Dec. 27, 1978, (7.5F).  
Highest average annual mean temperature (world): Dallol, Ethiopia (Oct. 1960
Dec. 1966), 94° F.  
Longest hot spell (world): Marble Bar, W. Australia, 100° F (or above) for 162
consecutive days, Oct. 30, 1923 to Apr. 7, 1924. Notice anything regarding the
dates of these records? Anyone heard of the dust bowl & wasn't that in the
30s.  
http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0001375.html

This explains in more detail the record that was stated above and all of these
world temperature records make one wonder how it is possible that we are now
all of a sudden entering into an unprecedented anthropogenic global warming
cycle that is totally caused by CO2 with no influence from the sun or another
source, if it was happening at all. For people to believe this is truly
amazing and then to want to cripple the nation and the world to combat
something that is not a problem is a crime against humanity, all for the gain
of a few

“Marble Bar heat wave, 1923-24  
The world record for the longest sequence of days above 100°Fahrenheit (or
37.8° on the Celsius scale) is held by Marble Bar in the inland Pilbara
district of Western Australia. The temperature, measured under standard
exposure conditions, reached or exceeded the century mark every day from 31
October 1923 to 7 April 1924, a total of 160 days.  
The highest temperature recorded during the record spell was 47.5°C on 18
January 1924. There have been higher temperatures at Marble Bar, with the
highest recorded being 49.2°C, on 11 January 1905 and again on 3 January
1922.”

                    
                                                324. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 4:40 pm

It seems that you like to talk about IRRELEVANT WEATHER FACTS (and does anyone
expect ALL record highs to be beaten with only an average of 1 degree F
increase in temperature?) because the RELEVALT SCIENCE facts (temps increasing
on a decadal scale, number of HIGH records exceeting record LOW temps by a
significant margin over decades, CO2 as a driver of temperature, etc) all
support the very high probability that AGW is a real problem that needs to be
dealt with

                    
                                                325. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 12:56 pm

Boston, Mass. reached 71 degrees, topping the previous record of 69 set way
back in 1902. It was a similar story in New York City with temperatures also
peaking at 71 degrees, tying a record that had stood since 1890!  
Well, it was just as warm on this date in New York City 122 years ago.  
http://blogs.dailymail.com/donsurber/archives/52872

                    
                                                326. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 11:02 am

What's your point?

                    
                                                327. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 21, 2012 at 1:22 am

Another interesting article.

http://e360.yale.edu/feature/linking_weird_weather_to_rapid_warming_of_the_arctic/2501/

05 Mar 2012: Analysis

Linking Weird Weather to Rapid Warming of the Arctic

The loss of Arctic summer sea ice and the rapid warming of the  
Far North are altering the jet stream over North America, Europe,  
and Russia. Scientists are now just beginning to understand how  
these profound shifts may be increasing the likelihood of more  
persistent and extreme weather.

                    
                                                328. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 9:49 am

EV. This FACT from the chart, (ssmi1_ice_ext.png (1667×1250)) makes what you
claim out to be not true.  
"As the sun rises at the North Pole, Arctic ice extent hits a seven year
high."  
http://www.real-science.com/arctic-ice-extent-hits-a-sevenyear-high

                    
                                                329. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:18 pm

So what? 1). One year is NOT relevant 2). Volume of multi-year ice IS
relevant, and it is decreasing. 3) Decadal trends ARE relevant

                    
                                                330. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 10:30 am

EV: In addition to your other handicaps, reading comprehension can be added.
Did you not notice that it said for a span of SEVEN years and that is SIX
years difference in the ONE year that you maintain. It is evident that you
have no memory either or you would have recalled the reference that is
indisputable from the Washington Post article on changes in the arctic that
can be found in the Monthly Weather Review for November 1922.  
http://www.sott.net/articles/show/200389-Flashback-1922-Extra-Extra-Read-all-
about-it-Arctic-Ocean-Getting-Warm-Seals-Perish-Glaciers-and-Icebergs-Melt-

"Al Gore is not going to like this photo. Not at all. It’s a 1958 shot of the
U.S.S. Skate, the first submarine to surface at the North Pole. In case you
missed the significance of that sentence, let us hammer it home.  
It’s 1958. That’s the North Pole. There’s no ice. Gore and his global warming
brethren have repeatedly told us that the ice has never been as thin in the
arctic as it is today, but this photo tells another story. It’s pretty clear
that in 1958 the arctic was…well…pretty clear.  
Not only did the the Skate surface in virtually ice-free water at the North
Pole, but the weather was mild enough that crewmen went out to chip a bit of
ice off the sub’s hull."  
http://www.ihatethemedia.com/photo-north-pole-submarine

I do enjoy this exchange with some one that is so mentally impaired; or, I
should give you the benefit of the doubt and imagine that you just can't
remember anything that doesn't fit your narrow, brainwashed vision of what you
imagine the FACTS to be.

                    
                                                331. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 4:52 pm

It seems that you like to talk about IRRELEVANT WEATHER FACTS - what happens
in one year or seven years is not relevant (although it gives the media
something to write about) - trends over decades are. The RELEVALT SCIENCE
facts (temps increasing on a decadal scale, number of HIGH records exceeding
record LOW temps by a significant margin over decades, CO2 as a driver of
temperature, a downward trend of old arctic ice, a downward trends of
September sea ice, a downward trend of ice volume, etc) all support the very
high probability that AGW is a real problem that needs to be dealt with

                    
                                                332. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 21, 2012 at 7:07 pm

Envrio

If we were at a critical lambda point then one degree would be of concern.
Since we know the earth has been much warmer than it is now I don't see your
point.

btw, some bug in the voanews.com website filled in enviro's yahoo email
account in the reply window!

                    
                                                333. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:46 pm

One degree IS of concern because, if the AGW theory is correct, we're headed
to much warmer temperatures if we continue to burn fossll fuels.

re "Since we know the earth has been much warmer than it is now "- is NOT
RELEVANT. Do you not care about future generations? Do you think our
decendents would be happy with us if their world were 6 degrees warmer than
ours?

                    
                                                334. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:51 pm

One degree IS of concern becuase it shows that AGW is probably real and that
we're headed to a warmer, disruptive climate

"we know the earth has been much warmer than it is now " is NOT RELEVANT to
how civilization will be affected by a climate a few degrees warmer than it is
now.

                    
                                                335. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 12:31 pm

Here is some more recent evidence for anyone stupid enough to believe that the
Medieval Warm Period and Little Ice Age that lasted 350 years were confined to
the northern hemisphere and Europe. How damn stupid could one be to believe
this?

"The medieval warmup experienced by northern Europeans from say 900AD to
1250AD seems to have been at least as hot as anything seen in the industrial
era. If it was worldwide in extent that would strongly suggest that global
warming may just be something that happens from time to time, not something
caused by miniscule concentrations of CO2 (the atmosphere is 0.04 per cent CO2
right now; this figure might climb to 0.07 per cent in the medium term)."

“We showed that the Northern European climate events influenced climate
conditions in Antarctica,” says the prof, who was at Oxford when most of the
work was done but now has a position at Syracuse uni in the States. He and his
colleagues write:  
This ikaite record qualitatively supports that both the Medieval Warm Period
and Little Ice Age extended to the Antarctic Peninsula.  
In other words, global warming has already occurred in historical, pre-
industrial times, and then gone away again. Lu et al's work is published in
the peer-reviewed journal Earth and Planetary Science Letters. ®"  
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/03/23/warm_period_little_ice_age_global/

                    
                                                336. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 26, 2012 at 5:01 pm

re "both the Medieval Warm Period and Little Ice Age extended to the Antarctic
Peninsula" So what - that does not prove the "warm" events were world-wide.

Look at the evidence and science = "miniscule concentrations of CO2 " CAN
drive temperature changes, which can ifluence the weather. What IS RELAVANT
now is that the rate of increase of CO2 is unprecedented over millions of
years and the present level is higher than at any time during the last 800
thousand years. If you would bother to take the time to understand the SCIENCE
at http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83, you would
understand (1) that greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being
habitable, (2) increasing the concentration of GHGs will cause the temperature
of the Earth to increase, and (3) CO2 is the main driver of the temperature.
If you can’t provide a link to a reputable climate scientist (or scientific
organization) that refutes this, you should be willing to accept the science
and understand the consequences

                    
                                                337. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 12:44 pm

Some more facts on the Medieval Warm Period:

1) From "SURFACE TEMPERATURE RECONSTRUCTIONS FOR THE LAST 2,000 YEARS" ,NAS,
http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=11676&page=R1, which shows that
current GLOBAL temperatues EXCEED those of the MWP

Large-scale surface temperature reconstructions yield a generally consistent
picture  
of temperature trends during the preceding millennium, including relatively
warm  
conditions centered around A.D. 1000 (identified by some as the “Medieval Warm  
Period”) and a relatively cold period (or “Little Ice Age”) centered around
1700. The  
existence of a Little Ice Age from roughly 1500 to 1850 is supported by a wide
variety  
of evidence including ice cores, tree rings, borehole temperatures, glacier
length records, and historical documents. Evidence for regional warmth during
medieval times can be found in a diverse but more limited set of records
including ice cores, tree rings, marine sediments, and historical sources from
Europe and Asia, but the exact timing and  
duration of warm periods may have varied from region to region, and the
magnitude  
and geographic extent of the warmth are uncertain.

2) the Medieval Warm Period has known causes which explain both the scale of
the warmth and the pattern. It has now become clear to scientists that the
Medieval Warm Period occurred during a time which had higher than average
solar radiation and less volcanic activity (both resulting in warming). New
evidence is also suggesting that changes in ocean circulation patterns played
a very important role in bringing warmer seawater into the North Atlantic.
This explains much of the extraordinary warmth in that region. These causes of
warming contrast significantly with today's warming, which we know cannot be
caused by the same mechanisms.

                    
                                                338. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 12:31 pm

On the definition of weather and climate for the one that will not offer up
their real name and goes by Enviro.  
In September, 2009 we went to Sri Lanka and spent 2 weeks and it is an
interesting little country, about the same size as Ireland with an area of
66,000sq. Ks and is 353 Ks long and 183 Ks wide. and we have Sri Lankan
friends that live in Nuewara Ellya. Colombo is a place to rapidly get out of
and the most interesting place for us is Sigiriya. When we went from
Polonnaruwa by public bus and that is an up close and personal experience with
the population because I found that there is no such thing as a “full" bus in
Sri Lanka, we went from dry heat to where it is cold enough in the mornings
that we used the heater provided in the hotel. We then went to Yala National
park where the water holes were drying up and they hauled water to keep the
crocodiles wet and other critters something to drink and there are big cactus
plants. The day we left there to go to Colombo to get the airplane, we went a
short distance and then drove in a very hard rain storm for two hours through
a lush forest.

Sri Lanka has two different monsoons; from May to Aug. the south-west brings
rain to the southern and western sections and the central hills and is called
the Yala. The north-east monsoon blows from Oct. to Jan. and is called the
Maha and it brings rain to the north and east part of the island and mind you
this all happens on a small island and has been the established pattern. What
is weather and what is climate? Weather is a function of climate and it is a
hard to define thing in the context of what occurs on Sri Lanka. Time is the
defining factor because this is what has been happening for time immemorial
there. I would also say that in places with seasons, the weather is for sure
dictated by that, such as winter now in the United States and for sure a
series of hard, difficult winters in Europe and Asia; but, to make it a simple
thing to define is about like saying that the driving force behind the earth's
climate is CO2 and anyone that thinks that should just stay quiet and not try
to damage and economically destroy the rest of the nation and its people.

                    
                                                339. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 11:01 am

Before you disparage my comments on CO2 driving the climate (which it does by
affecting the Earth's temperature) you should read the chapter on “Global Mean
Temperature Responses “ in a book just published by the National Academy of
Sciences. The chapter starts

The rapid addition of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to the
atmosphere by human activities throws Earth’s energy budget substantially out
of balance. For a time, Earth receives more energy from the Sun than it loses
by emission of infrared radiation to space. The climate system rectifies this
imbalance through processes acting over a range of different time scales.
Restoring balance invariably results in a warmer climate, and the amount of
warming associated with a prescribed addition of carbon dioxide is called the
climate sensitivity. One obtains different climate sensitivities over
different time scales, because additional processes come into play at long
time scales, which are not important over shorter time scales.

The link to the chapter is  
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83

It’s a bit technical, but covers the concepts that I’ve been trying to get you
to understand. The SCIENCE in chapter is the basis for understanding why AGW
is real and needs to be dealt with

                    
                                                340. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 22, 2012 at 4:05 pm

Doug -

The driving force behind the earth’s climate IS CO2 - it's CO2 that keeps our
planet habitable by absobing infrared radiation. The climate then reacts to
the temperature created by the CO2 (and other GHGs). What do you think the
temperature of the earth would be without the "non-condensing" ghg's like CO2
and Methane? Relevelant FACTS please, not statements simplying saying that it
isn't so.

                    
                                                341. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 11:01 am

EN: This is your answer about the scientist that do not agree with your bogus
AGW scam and there are thousands of them that share this view that the whole
theory is an unproven hoax.

"Evidence reveals the number of official greenhouse gas theories almost
matches the number of government climatologists spouting them. With the
science in apparent turmoil critics of the theory are claiming the upper hand.
The admission by Kramm and Dlugi adds further significance to the scathing
studies by Professor Nasif Nahle of Mexico, Dr. Matthais Kleespies of Germany,
Canadian astrophysicist, Joe Postma and NASA’s Apollo moon mission veteran,
Dr. Pierre R. Latour. All four working seperately in their independent
specialisms came to very much the same conclusion: the greenhouse gas
hypothesis is wrong."

" We all know the story: a small clique of a few dozen government scientists
triggered the waste of $100 billion in research monies over 30 years. These
“consensus” scientists (those experts believing in dangerous man-made
greenhouse gas warming) are a mere 75 researchers from the 2,500 scientists -
as proven by a survey conducted by the University of Illinois"

"To sum up, Latour, Nahle and Postma have compellingly refuted the 63 self-
contradictory and idiosyncratic 2-dimensional models of orthodox climate
science. They show the models are debunked because Earth was wrongly modeled
as a flat, cold twilight planet Hansen. But from the moment Earth is correctly
modeled as a 3-dimensional sphere all the incoming solar energy impacts just
one hemisphere at a time which in turn makes the climate numbers add up
without the contrivance of any unphysical 'greenhouse gas' effect."

                    
                                                342. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 23, 2012 at 5:43 pm

I'll stay with the NAS conclusions. If any of these scientists have valid
points, I'm confident that NAS will make necessary adjustments.

From the chapter on “Global Mean Temperature Responses “ in a book just
published by the National Academy of Sciences. The chapter starts

The rapid addition of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to the
atmosphere by human activities throws Earth’s energy budget substantially out
of balance. For a time, Earth receives more energy from the Sun than it loses
by emission of infrared radiation to space. The climate system rectifies this
imbalance through processes acting over a range of different time scales.
Restoring balance invariably results in a warmer climate, and the amount of
warming associated with a prescribed addition of carbon dioxide is called the
climate sensitivity. One obtains different climate sensitivities over
different time scales, because additional processes come into play at long
time scales, which are not important over shorter time scales.

The link to the chapter is  
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83

It’s a bit technical, but covers the concepts that I’ve been trying to get you
to understand. The SCIENCE in chapter is the basis for understanding why AGW
is real and needs to be dealt with

                    
                                                343. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 24, 2012 at 11:44 am

"Within climate a positive feedback subsystem never acts in isolation, but is
always embedded within the overall climate system, which itself is always
subject to a very powerful negative feedback, the Stefan–Boltzmann law: that
emitted radiation rises with the fourth power of temperature. Hence, on earth
the gain of the overall system is always less than one, stopping the system
from suffering runaway effects. While there may have been periods of time such
as the exit from an ice age where the gain was greater than one, this has not
lasted long enough for extreme effects such as the evaporation of the oceans
as is believed to have happened on Venus."  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positive_feedback  
I hope that the above FACTS are RELEVANT enough for you EV. If the Chapter
starts the way you show it, then the ending really must be something to
behold.

                    
                                                344. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 2:10 pm

No, those facts are NOT RELEVANT to the current discussion - no serious
climate scientist expects the oceans to evaporate. What IS RELAVANT now is
that the rate of increase of CO2 is unprecedented over millions of years and
the present level is higher than at any time during the last 800 thousand
years. If you would bother to take the time to understand the SCIENCE at
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83, you would understand
(1) that greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being habitable, (2)
increasing the concentration of GHGs will cause the temperature of the Earth
to increase, and (3) CO2 is the main driver of the temperature. If you can't
provide a link to a reputable climate scientist (or scientific organization)
that refutes this, you should be willing to accept the science and understand
the consequences

                    
                                                345. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 24, 2012 at 11:27 am

"20th Century Climate Not So Hot  
Cambridge, MA - A review of more than 200 climate studies led by researchers
at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics has determined that the
20th century is neither the warmest century nor the century with the most
extreme weather of the past 1000 years. The review also confirmed that the
Medieval Warm Period of 800 to 1300 A.D. and the Little Ice Age of 1300 to
1900 A.D. were worldwide phenomena not limited to the European and North
American continents. While 20th century temperatures are much higher than in
the Little Ice Age period, many parts of the world show the medieval warmth to
be greater than that of the 20th century.  
Smithsonian astronomers Willie Soon and Sallie Baliunas, with co-authors Craig
Idso and Sherwood Idso (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global
Change) and David Legates (Center for Climatic Research, University of
Delaware), compiled and examined results from more than 240 research papers
published by thousands of researchers over the past four decades. Their
report, covering a multitude of geophysical and biological climate indicators,
provides a detailed look at climate changes that occurred in different regions
around the world over the last 1000 years. " ( Did you get that EV? "the
Medieval Warm Period of 800 to 1300 A.D. and the Little Ice Age of 1300 to
1900 A.D. were worldwide phenomena not limited to the European and North
American continents.")

"Soon and his colleagues concluded that the 20th century is neither the
warmest century over the last 1000 years, nor is it the most extreme……"  
"Soon, Baliunas and colleagues analyzed numerous climate indicators including:
borehole data; cultural data; glacier advances or retreats; geomorphology;
isotopic analysis from lake sediments or ice cores, tree or peat celluloses
(carbohydrates), corals, stalagmite or biological fossils; net ice
accumulation rate, including dust or chemical counts; lake fossils and
sediments; river sediments; melt layers in ice cores; phenological (recurring
natural phenomena in relation to climate) and paleontological fossils; pollen;
seafloor sediments; luminescent analysis; tree ring growth, including either
ring width or maximum late-wood density; and shifting tree line positions plus
tree stumps in lakes, marshes and streams.  
http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/news/archive/pr0310.html

EV: Soon, Baliunas and colleagues analyzed numerous climate indicators unlike
your hero, Mike Mann, and his bristle cone pines that he used as a proxy to
come up with his erroneous hockey stick bunch of totally debunked nonsense
that your other hero, AL Gore, showed on his equally debunked movie, "An
Inconvenient Truth".

"British judge finds nine errors in Al Gore's "alarmist and exaggerated"
Inconvenient Truth movie"  
http://britainandamerica.typepad.com/britain_and_america/2007/10/british-
judge-f.html

If the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age occurred, and they most
certainly did, then there was no anthropogenic influence on these two distinct
and proven periods in earth's climate history; therefore, it is impossible to
prove that there is a link to anthropogenic CO2 and what the earth's climate
is doing today. anthropogenic produced CO2 never drove the climate in the past
and it is not doing so now, no matter how many ways you want to try to spin
it. You have never heard that  
CO2 lags warming by as much as 800 years because cold water absorbs CO2 and
warm ocean water releases CO2.

"As water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” (The
Global Conveyer Belt has suddenly stopped for several speculated reason in the
past and caused dramatic and rapid climate changes always to the cold side;
therefore, warm is preferable to cold any day)  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water temperature increases, the increased mobility of gas molecules make
them escape from the water, thereby reducing the amount of gas dissolved.
(Could this be why warming forces the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere by
hundreds years & not what the alarmist want one to believe that it is the CO2
that is causing the warming?)  
http://www.seafriends.org.nz/oceano/seawater.htm

I hope that the above FACTS are RELEVANT enough for you, EV.

                    
                                                346. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 3:27 am

Doug,

There are people (possibly EV) that believe we want to breathe dirty air and
unless they can convince us that the world is headed towards some calamity, we
will continue to operate dirty coal plants, etc.

So it doesn't really matter what the facts are but rather how to accomplish
specific objectives.

Some people have objectives beyond cleaning up the air. They are against
development of any kind. To them it is better that millions of people starve
than to continue development.

EV could be laughing in the back of his mind as he responds, knowing that most
people will believe him because extensive psychological operations have been
in effect to promote his position, however erroneous.

Some documentation on the DOD office of perception management:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perception_management

In various ways, perception management combines truth projection, operations
security, cover and deception, and psychological operations.

                    
                                                347. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 26, 2012 at 5:14 pm

Jose -

I think you have your analogy backwards. The fossil fuel industry's objectives
is to prevent action from being taken to reduce CO2 emissions, and they have
been very successful to date. Unfortunatelty for them, the science is not on
their side. "My side" is mainly trying to get people to understand the BASIC
science of climate change and it's implications for civilization. The BASIC
climate science is irrefutable. The major unknown is "climate sensitivity",
and if it's in the 3 degree C range, we will likely experience major climate
disruptions by 2050 (and are already experiencing minor climate disruptions)

                    
                                                348. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 1:30 pm

EV: Why is warm bad? I do believe, since I spent 24 years in Alaska and 13 of
those years were 140 miles above the arctic circle, that warm is preferable to
cold any day. Tell me how many new species of plants or animals have been
found in the arctic recently. It would take a total idiot to not understand
that warmth is preferable to cold if you are either a plant or animal and
alive, but the agw fools seem to have a different take on this than what
logical folks believe.

"The poison dart frog Ranitomeya amazonica is one of more than 1,200 new
species of plants and vertebrates discovered in the Amazon rain forest between
1999 and 2009, the international conservation group WWF announced Tuesday in a
new report highlighting the region's biodiversity.  
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2010/10/photogalleries/101027-amazon-
species-wwf-bluetooth-tarantula-science-rainforest-pictures/

"NAGOYA, Aichi, Japan, October 26, 2010 (ENS) - At least 1,200 new species
have been discovered in the Amazon ecosystem, at an average rate of one every
three days during the decade from 1999 through 2009, the global conservation
organization WWF revealed today in a new report.  
This is a greater number of species than the combined total of new species
found over a similar 10-year period in other areas of high biological
diversity - including Borneo, the Congo Basin and the Eastern Himalayas, WWF
said in the report, "Amazon Alive!: A Decade of Discoveries 1999-2009."  
Presented to delegates from 193 countries at the UN Convention on Biodiversity
in Nagoya, the WWF report details the discoveries of 39 mammals, 16 birds, 55
reptiles, 216 amphibians, 257 fish and 637 plants - all new to science."  
http://www.ens-newswire.com/ens/oct2010/2010-10-26-01.html

                    
                                                349. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 25, 2012 at 2:51 pm

Re "20th Century Climate Not So Hot" -NOT RELEVANT - if that is true, so what?
That's not the issue. The issue is (1) the current trend - the decadal
temperature increase, (2) all 13 of the hottest years on record have occurred
since 1997, (3) the rate of increase of CO2 is unprecedented over millions of
years (4) the present level of CO2 is higher than at any time during the last
800 thousand years, and (4) the science, as described in detail at
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12877&page=83.

RE "Mike Mann, and his bristle cone pines" NOT CORRECT – please be more
informed! Mann used many proxies for his hockey stick. As I’ve written before,
the “Hockey Stick” has been validated over and over again. It was affirmed in
a major review by the National Academy of Scientists (in media-speak, the
highest scientific “court” in the land) . The Hockey Stick has been replicated
and strengthened by numerous independent studies. It turns out that there are
“hockey sticks” for sea level rise, ocean acidification, ocean temps, ice
melting, etc.

The fact that there are errors in Al Gore's movie in NOT RELEVANT – as I’m
sure you know, the “deniers” are hoping that people will think that finding a
few insignificant flaws in thousands of statements invalidates the entire body
of science relating to climate change, which is hardly the case.

The fact that, in the past, “CO2 lagged warming by as much as 800 years” is
actually a reason to be very worried about AGW. The lagging explains how just
a small variation in sunlight (think of it as radiative forcing in
watts/square meter) over the northern hemisphere leads to such major changes
of climate. The CO2 emitted by humans causes much more energy to be retained
(more watts/square meter) than the changes in sunlight that caused the ice
ages. We’re probably in for a rough ride!

Re “warming reduces the amount of gas dissolved” – absolutely true in the past
– one of the feedback mechanisms responsible for the great swings in
temperature during the ice ages and shows that CO2 helps control the Earth’s
temperature. The problem now is that, with rising sea temperatures, the oceans
may not be able to absorb as much of the human-released CO2 as they have on
the past. If this is the case, atmospheric concentrations will rise even
faster, with a resulting faster increase in temperature.

                    
                                                350. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 12:17 pm

Al Gore, whose company, Generation Investment Management, which is now worth
over $200 million. His partner in the company, Maurice Strong, spends most of
his time in China, the worst polluter on the planet, (CO2 is not a pollutant
but an essential ingredient for life on earth). & he is doing what he can to
make this communist country the world's next superpower. It should be noted
that Al Gore is not a climatologist. This debate about the climate has been
going on for years but not in a manner that could bankrupt our nation or the
developed world if they were ever stupid enough to sign into the Kyoto
accords.

This carbon credit buying-selling is the financial part of the global warming
scam that Al Gore has no small part in perpetuating. He set up Generation
Investment Management in 2004. It became public that Gore uses in 1 month more
than 2 times what the average American uses in one year, his average monthly
electric bill was more than $1,350. When Gore was asked by Senator Inhofe (OK)
to pledge to reduce his personal energy usage he refused & said that his
conscience was clean because he purchases "carbon offsets". "Gore wants to put
a cap on the production of greenhouse gases.”He calls for an immediate freeze
on U.S. emissions, a ban on new coal-fired power plants, tough new fuel
economy and energy efficiency standards, renewable energy mandates, carbon
taxes, and mandatory targets and timetables for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. Those emissions consist mostly of carbon dioxide (CO2), the
byproduct of fossil fuels, such as oil, coal, and natural gas, which supply
85% of all U.S. energy. Gore’s blueprint to save the planet moves the United
States towards a command economy in which government regulators hold sway over
what kinds and amounts of energy will be made available to the private sector.
His principal regulatory tool is what’s called carbon credit trading." Carbon
off-sets are nothing more than a marketing gimmick and so far Gore & his neo-
Marxist buddy; Maurice Strong, who spends most of his time in China helping
that Communist country out, have over $200 million in assets in their company.
Many companies see Kyoto & global warming laws as the best price fixing and
subsidy creating deal in history. This is why the left loves this entire
global warming BS so much, CONTROL. If you want more info on this go to:
capitalresearch.org/pubs/pdf/v1185475433.pdf

                    
                                                351. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 11:51 pm

If you understood the BASIC SCIENCE of climate change, you would also
understand that most of Gore's ideas ARE necessary to keep the global temp
from rising more than 2 degrees C.. Why do you continue to listen to the
fossil fuel-funded dis-informaton campaign?

                    
                                                352. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 12:22 pm

“35 Inconvenient Truths  
THE ERRORS IN AL GORE'S MOVIE by Christopher Monckton”  
http://www.pensee-unique.eu/35%20Inconvenient%20Truths-1.pdf

You probably fear Monckton because he knows what he is talking about and never
looses debates with your kind of "the sky is falling" alarmist who know
nothing, and it shows.

                    
                                                353. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 1:03 pm

Au contraire, Monkton refuses to debate since he knows that he is wrong. He
has been thoroughly debunked, so please quite climate scientists instead. For
example:

Monckton debunked

Readers of this blog have heard of Lord Christopher Monckton, who once posted
a rebuttal of my rebuttal of the theories of Khilyuk and Chilingar. Monckton
is a real role-model of a climate change sceptic.  
Now, John Abraham from the University of St. Thomas in Minnesota has posted a
presentation online, in which he gives a detailed rebuttal of many of
Monckton's allegations. A very instructive piece of work for all those
interested in the depths of the climate change debate. Have fun!

http://www.stthomas.edu/engineering/jpabraham/

                    
                                                354. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 9:40 am

Like almost everything that you have written before, this is not true as
anyone that looks beyond the dishonest "findings" of the National Academy of
Scientists. The “Hockey Stick” has NOT been validated by any truly unbiased
scientific group anywhere.

"The vetting procedure is generally rigorous, but for over 20 years, there was
a Temporary Nominating Group for the Global Environment to provide a back door
for the election of candidates who were environmental activists, bypassing the
conventional vetting procedure." I imagine that it because of this process
that people like John Holdren and the Disgraced ‘Deniergate” fraudster Peter
Gleick are members of the National Academy of Sciences. How long can this
institution remain "prestigious" with members like this?

                    
                                                355. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 5:02 pm

In your world, it seems that anyone opposed to your view is biased. The NAS is
about as unbiased as any organization (the scientists are not compensated for
the work they do for the NAS). Where is your link to an unbiased group that
shows WORLD temps different from Mann's latest "hockey stick"?

                    
                                                356. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3d54579e2cc1dd43f0847bcdfcb49b4c?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Bruce Parker says:
                    

March 26, 2012 at 5:17 pm

WAKE UP!

Nature: Strong Evidence Manmade ‘Unprecedented Heat And Rainfall Extremes Are
Here … Causing Intense Human Suffering’

It is very likely that several of the unprecedented extremes of the past
decade would not have occurred without anthropogenic global warming.

That’s the conclusion of a major new analysis of the scientific evidence in
Nature Climate Change, “A decade of weather extremes”. The research is by Dim
Coumou and Stefan Rahmstorf of Germany’s Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact
Research.

http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nclimate1452.html

                    
                                                357. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 1:16 pm

These are just a few more of the corrupt ramblings of bought off people who
have sold science for a few pieces of silver. They will do more damage to
science than what the Church did when they excommunicated Galileo.

                    
                                                358. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 11:09 am

If you understood the BASIC SCIENCE of climate change, you would also
understand that it is very likely that AGW is affecting the climate extremes.
Why do you continue to listen to the fossil fuel-funded dis-informaton
campaign?

                    
                                                359. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 10:07 am

Are you sure of that B.P.? It appears that you are sure of nothing. You are
the one, in addition to EV, that needs to WAKE-UP!! It would be too much to
ask for you, if you did wake-up, to then THINK.

"Coldest and Warmest Days In the United States  
As large as it is, the United States has been subject to an incredibly wide
range of temperatures. Read on to discover the Coldest Temperatures recorded
in United States History, the Coldest Day in Continental United States
History, and the Warmest Day recorded in the United States.  
Coldest Day In US History: -80 Degrees F. Its no surprise that the coldest
temperatures recorded in US history were logged in Alaska. The record came on
January 23, 1971, at Prospect Creek. It’s along the oil pipeline.  
Coldest Day in Continental US History: -70 F. This was recorded January 20,
1954 at a mining camp in Montana called Rogers Pass.  
Warmest Days in US History: 134 F. Recorded at the Greenland Ranch in Death
Valley on July 10, 1913. For a time, this also was the warmest recorded
temperature in World History. It was surpassed less than ten years later,
however, when a temperature of 136 was recorded in the Sahara Desert at Al
Azizia, Libya, on Sept. 13, 1922."  
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/coldest_and_warmest_days_in_the_united_states/

What is the deal here, B.P.? The hottest day in US history was in 1913 and the
hottest day ever recorded world wide was in 1922. What do you make of this
correlation between this happening in 1922 and then this is what was happening
in the arctic during that year. What does that say about you and EV wanting to
make the stupid assertion that the Medieval Warm Period was confined to the
North Atlantic,(this seems to be extremely important to EV to propagate this
misconception because it must have something to do with the fraudulent "hockey
stick" that Mann manufactured for Al Gore.) and this is after EV thinking that
they can school me on the difference between climate and weather  
This reference, that is indisputable from the Washington Post article on
changes in the arctic, that can be found in the Monthly Weather Review for
November 1922.  
http://www.sott.net/articles/show/200389-Flashback-1922-Extra-Extra-Read-all-
about-it-Arctic-Ocean-Getting-Warm-Seals-Perish-Glaciers-and-Icebergs-Melt-

If you actually wanted to learn something there are various links here to look
into.

The Worst US Winter Storms  
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/the_worst_us_winter_storms/

"And how about tornadoes? The recent Evansville, Indiana tornado has been used
as evidence of increasing tornado violence.  
In the first place, the 22 dead in Evansville in 2005 pales in comparison to
the 1925 Tri State Tornado’s 625 casualties. With no disrespect intended to
the people of Evansville, it just doesn’t compare.  
Further, because there are more people in the United States, it is only
logical to expect that there are more places for tornadoes to touch down and
do damage  
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/has_there_been_an_increase_in_the_number_of_natural_disasters/>

Epic Disasters: The World's Worst Disasters  
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/the_worlds_worst_floods_by_death_toll/

http://factsnotfantasy.blogspot.com/2012/02/fakegate-blows-up-in-warmist-
faces.html

                    
                                                360. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 1:16 pm

You keep talking about WEATHER. I'm trying to change the subject to CLIMATE.
Look at the TRENDS - the number yeary HOT records have exceeded COLD records
since the 1970's.

If you understood the BASIC SCIENCE of climate change, you would also
understand that it is very likely that AGW is affecting the climate extremes.
Why do you continue to listen to the fossil fuel-funded dis-informaton
campaign?

                    
                                                361. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 11:27 am

My advice: ignore all the surface temperature records full stop. GISS
(administered by warmist activist James Hansen), HadCRUT (Phil "Climategate"
Jones), they're all as bad as each other - "homogenised" to within an inch of
their lives. So it comes as little surprise that the latest version of the
Hadley/CRU temperature database now shows 2010 as being warmer than 1998. How
convenient.  
And isn't it amazing that it now better fits the global warming narrative?
Just like GISS - it was inconvenient that the 1930s were warmer in that
dataset than the present, but never mind, they found a way round it (click the
image) - magic!

http://www.australianclimatemadness.com/2012/03/new-hadcrut-temperature-
record-makes-2010-hotter-than-1998/

                    
                                                362. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 5:19 pm

I don't agree w ingoring the surface temp records - but what do you suggest as
an alternative? Ocean temps? The oceans have actually absorbed 80-90 percent
of the inceased enerrgy trapped by GHG's - and ocean temps are also on the
rise.

Google "Fingerprints global warming" and look at

http://www.climatehotmap.org/fingerprints.html  
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v421/n6918/full/nature01286.html  
http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2011/10/06/338286/charts-evidence-human-
fingerprint-on-recent-climate-change/

                    
                                                363. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 11:37 am

RE CO2 helps control the Earth’s temperature, etc,

In an "American Thinker" article
(http://www.americanthinker.com/2012/02/climate_deniers_are_giving_us_skeptics_a_bad_name.html),
Fred Singer (one of the leading "deniers") debunked a number "denier myths",
includes the following:

Another subgroup simply says that the concentration of atmospheric CO2 is so
small that they can't see how it could possibly change global temperature. But
laboratory data show that CO2 absorbs IR radiation very strongly. Another
subgroup says that natural annual additions to atmospheric CO2 are many times
greater than any human source; they ignore the natural sinks that have kept
CO2 reasonably constant before humans started burning fossil fuels. Finally,
there are the claims that major volcanic eruptions produce the equivalent of
many years of human emission from fossil-fuel burning. To which I reply: OK,
but show me a step increase in measured atmospheric CO2 related to a volcanic
eruption.

But he also endorsed some other rather horrid climate myths in the process.
See http://www.skepticalscience.com/fred-singer-debunks-and-denies.html for an
explanation of why his "science" just plain wrong. (Note: Please follow the
money! "Last year, Singer admitted that he had received from Exxon Mobil "an
unsolicited and unexpected donation of $10,000 more than a decade ago." The
Heartland leak shows that he currently receives "$5,000 per month, plus
expenses" from the institute.")

                    
                                                364. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 1:12 pm

So what regarding Dr. Singer and what ever he may have received from whom
ever. Obviously you have never looked into how much your AGW lackeys have
received from corrupt government agencies.

                    
                                                365. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 11:47 am

You just don't get it! Why do you continue to listen to Dr. Singer and the
fossil fuel-funded dis-information campaign? Their "talking points" have
mostly been debunked, yet most climate scientists willingly accept criticism
of their work and adjust their thinking accordingly. Do you continue to
disparage those with whom you disagree because you can't provide links to
factual Web pages that show they might be wrong?

                    
                                                366. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 9:22 am

You can not get anything right, can you EV?  
The Feb 21 issue of The Wall Street Journal published an editorial, “The Not-
So-Vast Conspiracy” noting that “As for ‘the largest international science
conference of skeptics’ Heartland will, according to the documents, spend all
of $380,000 this year on the Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate
Change. That’s against the $6.5 million that the UN Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) costs Western taxpayers annually, and the $2.6 billion
the White House wants to spend next year on research into ‘global changes that
have resulted primarily from global over-dependence on fossil fuels.’”  
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204909104577233191850812630.html?mod=WSJ_Opinion_AboveLEFTTop>

The global warming hoax has cost taxpayers billions since it was initiated and
earned the purveyors of “carbon credits” millions as industry and others paid
for the privilege of emitting “greenhouse gas”—primarily carbon dioxide—as
part of doing business. Currently the European Union is trying to shake down
the airline industry by charging them a surtax on their emissions as they fly
tourists and businessmen to that benighted continent. Most of the exchanges
that sold the credits have since closed. I hope that the airlines quite flying
to the EU and that is what China air is saying that they will do. So much for
the tourist income for the EU.

                    
                                                367. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 1:10 pm

Understanding climate change costs money, but far, far less money than the
costs associated with weather events made worse by global warming. It's well
worth the price. If you understood the BASIC SCIENCE of climate change, you
would also be willing to spend the money. Why do you continue to listen to the
fossil fuel-funded dis-informaton campaign?

                    
                                                368. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 11:39 am

WAKE UP!

http://www.sustainablebusiness.com/index.cfm/go/news.display/id/23545

Climate Change Close to Tipping Point, Soon Irreversible

SustainableBusiness.com News

Scientists keep beating the drum, hoping the world will wake up to the fact
that climate change is a real, non-partisan, non-advanced vs development
country issue.

At the Planet Under Pressure Conference, taking place in London, 2800
scientists warn the earth is dangerously close to an irreversible tipping
point.

Dubbing the phenomenal recent explosion in human activity, "The Great
Acceleration," leading scientists say time is running out to minimize the risk
of setting in motion irreversible and long-term climate change and other
dramatic changes to Earth's life support system.

                    
                                                369. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 28, 2012 at 1:18 pm

If you actually believe in this "tipping point" you need to seek physiological
care, and soon.

                    
                                                370. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 9:07 am

I obviously meant Psychological care but it appears to be too late for that to
do any good.

                    
                                                371. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 11:06 am

If you understood the BASIC SCIENCE of climate change, you would also
understand that the "tipping points" ARE REAL. Why do you continue to listen
to the fossil fuel-funded dis-informaton campaign?

                    
                                                372. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 12:32 pm

“35 Inconvenient Truths  
THE ERRORS IN AL GORE'S MOVIE by Christopher Monckton”  
http://www.pensee-unique.eu/35%20Inconvenient%20Truths-1.pdf

                    
                                                373. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 29, 2012 at 12:32 pm

First off, I thank Jose for letting it be known that there are people with
knowledge and a rational thought process that follow this issue and they far
out number the type of people that have been making their irrational believes
known to us here.

The only reason I carried on with this discussion was to look into the depths
of the far left, anthropogenic global warming alarmist mind to try to analyze
just what is going on there. If one can use a metaphor for the depth of this
mind, it would have to be a pond of water so shallow that one would not even
get their feet wet stepping into it.

Enviro and Bruce Parker keep using the same lies to try to further their
argument and that reminds me of a saying that the Buddhist have: “A half-truth
is a whole lie” and in this case there is nothing remotely approaching a half
truth that either of these two have presented. The fact is that no matter how
many different ways one tells a lie, using different sources of the lie, it is
still always a lie and that is the case of trying to make honest, rational,
thinking and knowledgeable people believe that a trace gas, CO2, that makes up
a paltry .036% of the atmosphere and is 1 & 1/2 times heavier than the rest of
the atmosphere is the driving force for something as diverse and complicated
as the earth's climate. These delusional people seem to think that the sun can
be totally discounted from what makes the climate act as it does and that
alone is a sign of being totally naive regarding this issue.  
The CERN experiment has significant implications for climate science because
water vapor and clouds play a large role in determining global temperatures.
Tiny changes in overall cloud cover can result in relatively large temperature
changes. When Dr Kirkby first described the theory in 1998, he suggested that
cosmic rays "will probably be able to account for somewhere between a half and
the whole of the increase in the Earth's temperature that we have seen in the
last century." "……in Switzerland, scientists finally discover the true cause
of “global warming”. It’s the sun, stupid. More specifically – as the Danish
physicist Henrik Svensmark has long postulated – it’s the result of cosmic
rays which act as a seed for cloud formation. The scientists working on the
project are naturally euphoric: this is a major breakthrough which will not
only overturn decades of misguided conjecture on so-called Man Made Global
Warming but will spare the global economy trillions of dollars which might
otherwise have been squandered on utterly pointless efforts to reduce
anthropogenic CO2 emissions." Every one with a brain understand this but
perhaps a couple that do not fall into this category of having a brain.

I will not spend too much more time on this but will offer up a couple of
other post and then I am done because I have accomplished my mission and I see
just how misinformed and delusional some people are that tend to lean to the
far left and believe in agw.

                    
                                                374. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 11:26 am

EV: Please give me one of your climate verses weather irrelevant takes on this
below:  
Record cold this winter: CMA  
http://www.chinamedia.com  
March 13, 2012  
BEIJING – China’s coldest winter since 1986 is expected to end by mid-March,
with temperatures increasing gradually in most parts of the country, according
to the China Meteorological Administration.  
http://globalfreeze.wordpress.com/2012/03/20/china-record-cold-this-winter/

In 2005 I hiked the 23.9 miles across the Grand Canyon from the North Rim to
the South Rim. It was in October and it was very cool on the N.Rim when we
left in the morning, we spent a night at Cottonwood camp ground on Bright
Angel Creek and then we went to Bright Angel camp ground below the Phantom
Ranch and it was 100*F in the shaded. I realize that climate is just a
function of weather over time; but, where in your delusional mind, do you
separate the two, as for the example that I presented regarding Sri Lanka?

                    
                                                375. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 5:10 pm

WEATHER is what happens in one year in one locatation. The east coast of the
US is experiencieng the hottest March on record. Maybe they average out to
"normal"?

I've both rafted the Grand Canyon and hiked rim to river - so I know the temp
differences.

CLIMATE is what happen globally over tens of years, and all FACTS point to
rising temps, as expected by AWG  
1. ALL annual temps since the 70's were above the 20th century average  
2. The hottest 13 year have all occurred since 1997.  
3. Each decade since the 1970's has been warmer that the previous decade  
4. etc, etc, etc. - by any definition of CLIMATE, the trend is warmng temps

WAKE UP!

                    
                                                376. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 7:30 am

Why can't you tell the truth? What you say above is a lie and if you do not
know it you are one dishonest, closed minded individual.

As I pointed out to you previously"…. by 1990, NOAA had deleted from its data
sets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers in service around the globe.  
Now, 75% represents quite a drop in sampling population, particularly
considering that these stations provide the readings used to compile both the
Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN) and United States Historical
Climatology Network (USHCN) data sets.  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html  
Yet as disturbing as the number of dropped stations was, it is the nature of
NOAA’s “selection bias” that Smith found infinitely more troubling.  
It seems that stations placed in historically cooler, rural areas of higher
latitude and elevation were scrapped from the data series in favor of more
urban locales at lower latitudes and elevations. Consequently, post-1990
readings have been biased to the warm side not only by selective geographic
location, but also by the anthropogenic heating influence of a phenomenon
known as the Urban Heat Island Effect (UHI).  
For example, Canada’s reporting stations dropped from 496 in 1989 to 44 in
1991, with the percentage of stations at lower elevations tripling while the
numbers of those at higher elevations dropped to one. That’s right: As Smith
wrote in his blog, they left “one thermometer for everything north of LAT 65.”
And that one resides in a place called Eureka, which has been described as
“The Garden Spot of the Arctic” due to its unusually moderate summers."  
http://www.americanthinker.com/2010/01/climategate_cru_was_but_the_ti.html

How can one fail to understand that if 75% of high altitude stations are
dropped as well as those in selected higher latitudes, then the resulting
reports are going to be false, and that they are, but they seem to fit the lie
you want to spread and I am beginning to wonder why you are doing this. One
would have to be totally naive to not be able to see what is happening here,
and that you appear to be. I am beginning to wonder if you actually believe
the garbage that you spew and if I am just being taken for a ride by an
unscrupulous fool.

"Global satellite data is analyzed for temperature trends for the period
January 1979through June 2009. Beginning and ending segments show a cooling
trend, while the middle segment evinces a warming trend. The past 12to 13years
show cooling using both satellite data sets, with lower confidence limits that
do not exclude a negative trend until 16years. It is shown that several
published studies have predicted cooling in this time frame. One of these
models is extrapolated from its 2000 calibration end date and shows a good
match to the satellite data, with a projection of continued cooling for
several more decades."  
http://www.ncasi.org/publications/Detail.aspx?id=3230  
This above certainly contradicts what you have maintained and therefore
demonstrates that the truth is a foreign ingredient in you ridiculous
assertions.

                    
                                                377. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 3:12 pm

Doug -

Get your FACTS straight!

http://mediamatters.org/research/201001270042

"The accusations [of deleting the data for the thermometeters] are either "a
misunderstanding or misrepresentation of the nature of the Global Historical
Climatology Network (GHCN) and methods used in calculating global
temperatures."

If the data for the dopped stations is used, the estimated temperatures would
actually be HIGHER. You should be glad that the stations were dropped!

re "Global Satellite data" - the article is by Craig Loehle and is published
in the non-peer reviewed “The Journal Energy and Environment”, which is social
science ’scientific’ vanity press which publishes most of the Denier dreck
because actual scientific journals insist on publishing only actual science.
He is also an "expert" the Heartland Institute, so I tend to discount anything
that he writes.

                    
                                                378. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 11:54 am

Doug –

As usual, you have things backwards. In evaluating the arguments of those
involved the climate change discussion, you should treat with skepticism those
who (1) cherry pick data; (2) talk about weather events instead of climate;
(3) rely on irrelevant facts; (4) refuse to provide a scientific basis for
their positions; (5) take statements by others out of context; (6) state that
an article reaches one conclusion when it actually reaches an opposite
conclusion; etc. Most climate scientists do none of these. Just because they
profess so many inconvenient truths is no reason to call them “liars”.
However, most “deniers” are only too happy to rely on those methods in order
confuse the media and the public. They are the real “dis-informers” (you would
probably call them “liars”)

I was hoping that you were curious enough and intelligent enough to understand
the BASIC science of climate science – that CO2, even though it is a trace
gas, IS the driver of the Earth’s temperature and hence has an oversize
influence on the climate relative to it abundance. It’s so simple that the
only conclusion that I can reach is that if you can’t (or more likely, are
unwilling to) understand it, your mind must be being controlled. So here it is
it again:

            1. The sun is responsible for the energy that heats our planet. 
            2. Greenhouse gases (water vapor, CO2,etc) are given that name because they keep the earth warm by absorbing infrared radiation and re-radiating much of it toward the earth 
            3. W/o GHG’s the Earth would be roughly the same temperature as the moon – hardly habitable! 
            4. GHG’s come in two varieties – “condensing” (water vapor, etc) and “non-condensing” (CO2, methane, etc.) 
            5. W/o the “non-condensing” GHG’s, the “condensing” GHG’s would quickly condense and leave the atmosphere 
            6. The “non-condensing” GHG’s provide the “framework” that allows the “condensing” GHG’s to stay in the atmosphere 
            7. As the amount of “non-condensing” GHG’s in the atmosphere increase, the temperature goes up and the amount of “condensing” GHG’s also goes up, providing a positive feedback 
            8. As the amount of “non-condensing” GHG’s in the atmosphere decrease, the temperature goes down and the amount of “condensing” GHG’s also goes down, providing a negative feedback 
            9. There are many other factors (the sun’s radiance, cosmic rays, clouds, aerosols, albedo, etc.) that affect the temperature for at given amount of GHG’s but, over time, there is an average temperature (the “equilibrium” temperature) for a given amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. A drop in the CO2 in the atmosphere will result in a lower “equilibrium” temperature, and an increase in CO2 will result in a higher the “equilibrium” temperature. (“Tiny changes in overall cloud cover can result in relatively large temperature changes”, but these average out over hundreds of years. Ditto for cosmic rays.) 
            10. Until relatively recently, the suns radiance was the primary, long-term driver of temperature and climate 
            11. What is different now is that CO2 is at the highest level it has been for over 800,000 years. 

Given the BASIC science above, it is a FACT that the Earth’s temperature will
increase as humans add CO2 to the atmosphere by burning fossil fuels. We can’t
know for certain what the increase will be, but there is a reasonable
probability that, with the increased CO2, the increase in temperature may
cause significant, detrimental changes to the Earth’s climate.

Btw, it looks like there has been another “defection” from your “camp” – Paul
Douglas (a Republican Meteorologist):

I'm going to tell you something that my Republican friends are loath to admit
out loud: climate change is real. I'm a moderate Republican, fiscally
conservative; a fan of small government, accountability, self-empowerment and
sound science. I am not a climate scientist. I'm a Penn State meteorologist,
and the weather maps I'm staring at are making me very uncomfortable. No,
you're not imagining it: we've clicked into a new and almost foreign weather
pattern. To complicate matters I'm in a small, frustrated and endangered
minority: a Republican deeply concerned about the environmental sacrifices
some are asking us to make to keep our economy powered-up. It's ironic. The
root of the word conservative is "conserve". A staunch Republican, Teddy
Roosevelt, set aside vast swaths of America for our National Parks System, the
envy of the world. Another Republican, Richard Nixon, launched the EPA. Now
some in my party believe the EPA and all those silly "global warming
alarmists" are going to get in the way of drilling and mining our way to
prosperity. Well, we have good reason to be alarmed.

Trust your gut -- and real experts. We should listen to peer-reviewed climate
scientists, who are very competitive by nature. This is not about "insuring
more fat government research grants." I have yet to find a climate scientist
in the "1 Percent", driving a midlife-crisis-red Ferrari into the lab. I truly
hope these scientists turn out to be wrong, but I see no sound, scientific
evidence to support that position today. What I keep coming back to is this:
all those dire (alarmist!) warnings from climate scientists 30 years ago?
They're coming true, one after another -- and faster than supercomputer models
predicted. Data shows 37 years in a row of above-average temperatures,
worldwide. My state has warmed by at least 3 degrees F. Climate change is
either The Mother of All Coincidences -- or the trends are real.

(see entire post at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-douglas/republican-
climate-change_b_1374900.html)

WAKE UP!

                    
                                                379. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 7:38 pm

Doug -

Looks like another "traitor" (General Motors) has left your "group". WAKE
UP!!!

The automaker told the Heartland Institute last week that it won't be making
further donations, spokesman Greg Martin said. At a speech earlier this month,
GM CEO Dan Akerson said his company is running its business under the
assumption that climate change is real.

                    
                                                380. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 1:35 am

It is you who needs to wake up, but when will that day come about? You also
need to make sure that you always have your sun glasses handy because if you
ever get your head out of your posterior, that sun that you discount for
causing the earth's climate is going to very, very bright.

I would not be very proud to have Government Motors considered as in my
"group". This miss-managed corporation that couldn't make it one their own is
now in "YOUR GROUP". This is the same corporation that, after the car salesman
in chief gave them billions of dollars, allowed them to renege on a binding
contract that they had with Stillwater Mining for their platinum and instead
buy the medal from S. Africa. Some more of that patriotism that you and yours
are noted for. We didn't see the foreign owned car corps. That are
manufactured in the US going to DC in Corporate jets with a tin cup in hand to
beg for money from government. I use to buy GM products but will do so never
again.

                    
                                                381. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 12:41 pm

The sun DOES cause the earth's climate - where else could the energy come
from? But it the GHG's that keep the planet habitable (that's why they're
called GHG's!!!) And with CO2 at the highest levels for over 800,000 years,
the Earth WILL get warmer.

                    
                                                382. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 30, 2012 at 7:55 pm

> Looks like another "traitor" (General Motors) has left your "group". WAKE
UP!!!

Gee, did anyone ever think that Government Motors was against cashing in on
carbon credits?

                    
                                                383. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 12:32 pm

Don't think GM will get much (if anything) from carbon credits They do know
that their business plans must consider the phasing out of fossil fuels.

                    
                                                384. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 7:57 am

"officially just had our COLDEST December since records began 100 years ago!  
The Met Office reckons this December was absolutely freezing, as across the
country we shivered through temperatures that averaged -1C.  
On average, temperatures in December usually hit around 4.2 degrees, so it
really was a lot colder.  
But at least it didn't rain - forecasters said it was also the third driest
December on record.  
Check out pictures of baby elephants in the snow!  
Arctic blasts caused havoc across the UK, making it hard for people to get
around in cars, planes and public transport.

Thousands of crabs wash up in Kent  
The big freeze also affected wildlife. In Kent, tens of thousands of crabs
were killed by the cold weather, and washed up on the beach."  
Since BBC has pushed this scam called Anthropogenic Global Warming from the
very beginning, they just felt obliged to end this story with this bit of
unsubstantiated nonsense  
“But globally, 2010 was one of the hottest years on record”.  
http://cdnedge.bbc.co.uk/cbbcnews/hi/newsid_9340000/newsid_9341000/9341080.stm

How could this be EV if it was not for the lying that is perpetuated by folks
like you and the biased media that can't report anything accurately “But
globally, 2010 was one of the hottest years on record”?  
Seems like a big jump on logic to believe that the COLDEST December since
records began 100 years ago is happening in the same year that this rag claims
was one of the hottest years on record when even a ten year old can look it up
and tell you that 1934 was much, much hotter than 2010. Oh well, we know that
it would take an idiot to believe this kind of garbage and who do we have
believing it? It appears that this winter, 2012, is going to be among the
worst of the last three devastating winters for the proud people of Mongolia
but still we have fools wanting rational folks to believe that there is a
general warming trend going on. Unbelievable!!! And before you go with the
climate/weather crap, please explain why the all-time record highs for the
continents and area of the earth are not being broken. You can not do so.

I have friends in MT. WY. & S. DK that are in the ranching business and they
say that if this winter is global warming then let next winter be the same.
Cold and winters are what kills and cost money if you have livestock to feed.
None of them will quit putting up hay because they all are bright enough to
know that next winter could be as cold and expensive as the one was that
preceded this mild winter. They are reasonable and rational people and do not
need a super computer model to tell them how to run their operations because
they need the truth to plan around, not some lie put forth by the IPCC or some
clown that is a member of the NAS.

                    
                                                385. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 12:43 pm

You keep confusing local WEATHER with global CLIMATE. Look at GLOBAL
TRENDS,not individual LOCAL YEARS.

                    
                                                386. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 10:54 am

Global warming ‘a myth’ – Russian academic Mar 26, 2012 19:14 Moscow Time  
"Russian geoscientist Professor Nikolai Dobretsov has called attention to the
fact that after decades of decline, the Arctic Ice Cap is into its fifth
straight year of growth.Speaking in Moscow Monday, he argued that what is
known as ‘global warming’ is in fact a brief phase of climatic oscillation
which may bring ‘global cooling’ towards the end of the 21st century.He also
said that the matter cannot be sorted out without many more permanent
observation posts in the High Arctic.  
http://english.ruvr.ru/2012_03_26/69668928/  
EV:This falls into line with what I try to tell you about all of the
observation post that have been cancelled in the arctic.

                    
                                                387. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 1:18 pm

Sounds like cherry picking and dis-information to me:

See http://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/

This year’s maximum ice extent was the ninth lowest in the satellite record,
slightly higher than the 2008 maximum (15.24 million square kilometers or 5.88
million square miles) Last year, 2011, was the lowest maximum on record, 14.64
million square kilometers (5.65 million square miles). Including this year,
the nine years from 2004 to 2012 are the nine lowest maximums in the satellite
record.

Arctic sea ice extent is declining in winter as well as in summer months,
although the decline is not as steep in the winter months.

The study showed a longer-term decline in sea ice cover of up to 6% per decade
across all North Atlantic harp seal breeding grounds since 1979.

                    
                                                388. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 11:15 am

EV: There should be enough links and people that KNOW the FACTS about this
hoax that you lie about to keep you busy. Will it make you understand what the
truth is? I would say that you are so ideologically crippled that it will not.  
"Global Cooling Consensus Is Heating Up – Cooling Over The Next 1 To 3 Decades  
By P Gosselin on 28. Dezember 2010  
As winters get harsher and the snow piles up, more and more scientists are now
warning of global cooling. Reader Matt Vooro has compiled a list (see below)
of 31 prominent scientists and researchers who have words that governments
ought to start heeding.  
UPDATE: Another one for the list – Professor Paar, from Croatia’s Zagreb
University  
Cooling seems to be the trend. Photo source: NOAA.  
Lately, the clueless among warmist scientists, governments and the MSM have
been running around in deep snow with their global warming blinders on,
denying the cold around them. Governments, entrusted to serve the citizens,
really ought to start listening up and planning accordingly.  
http://notrickszone.com/2010/12/28/global-cooling-consensus-is-heating-up-
cooling-over-the-next-1-to-3-decades/

Post commented on Professor Mike Hulme’s article about IPCC. The article can
be found here at probeinternational.org. Hulme is a Professor of Climate
Change in the School of Environmental Sciences at the University of East
Anglia – the university of Climategate fame — is the founding Director of the
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research and one of the UK’s most prominent
climate scientists. Quoting Hulme, Solomon said:  
"The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change misled the press and
public into believing that thousands of scientists backed its claims on
manmade global warming, according to Mike Hulme, a prominent climate scientist
and IPCC insider. The actual number of scientists who backed that claim was
“only a few dozen experts” he states in a paper for Progress in Physical
Geography, co-authored with student Martin Mahony.”  
http://notrickszone.com/2010/12/28/global-cooling-consensus-is-heating-up-
cooling-over-the-next-1-to-3-decades/  
EV: To have "misled" some one is basically the same as lying, whether you know
that or not.

I watched the American alarmist to the Nth degree, James Hansen, giving a
speech and it was sickening to see him looking like the bought off fool he is
in his Indiana Jones hat and all while he told his fibs about CO2, the energy
industries and never once offered up any solutions because he has none. He is
the first US bureaucrat to make over 1.2 million dollars in a year so maybe he
bought one of those Ferraris you talk about. I'll bet he didn't waste his
money on a Chevy Volt.

            1. Dr. Alexander Frolov, Head of Russia’s state meteorological service Rosgidromet. The Daily Mail.co.uk quotes Frolov:  
‘From the scientific point of view, in terms of large scale climate cycles, we
are in a period of cooling.  
‘The last three years of low temperatures in Siberia, the Arctic and number of
Russia mountainous regions prove that, as does the recovery of ice in the
Arctic Ocean and the absence of warming signs in Siberia.”  
http://notrickszone.com/2010/12/28/global-cooling-consensus-is-heating-up-
cooling-over-the-next-1-to-3-decades/

EV: You need to go to the link and school Dr. Alexander Frolov on
weather/climate and "cheery-picking". But he would pay no more attention to
your garbled drivel than what most rational people do.

                    
                                                389. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 1:32 pm

Looks like more drivel on WEATHER vs CLIMATE. If "we are in a period of
cooling", how come, when compared to previous La Niña years, the 2011 global
surface temperature was the warmest observed? Sounds like warming to me (but
it's not the single year that's important - that would be cherry picking).

"three years of low temperatures in Siberia, …" DOES NOT PROVE ANYTHING -
that's simply WEATHER. Besides, the ice in artic is NOT recovering:

http://nsidc.org/asina/faq.html#why_more

In 2008, Arctic sea ice reached a minimum extent that was about 10 percent
greater than the record low of 2007, and the minimum extent in 2009 was
greater than either 2007 or 2008. Does this mean that Arctic sea ice is
beginning to recover?

Even though the extent of Arctic sea ice has not returned to the record low of
2007, the data show that it is not recovering. To recover would mean returning
to within its previous, long-term range. Arctic sea ice in September 2008
remained 34 percent below the average extent from 1979 to 2000, and in
September 2009, it was 24 percent below the long term average. In addition,
sea ice remains much thinner than in the past, and so is more vulnerable to
further decline. The data suggest that the ice reached a record low volume in
2008, and has thinned even more in 2009. Sea ice extent normally varies from
year to year, much like the weather changes from day to day. But just as one
warm day in October does not negate a cooling trend toward winter, a slight
annual gain in sea ice extent over a record low does not negate the long-term
decline.

In addition, ice extent is only one measure of sea ice. Satellite measurements
from NASA show that in 2008, Arctic sea ice was thinner than 2007, and likely
reached a record low volume. So, what would scientists call a recovery in sea
ice? First, a true recovery would continue over a longer time period than two
years. Second, scientists would expect to see a series of minimum sea ice
extents that not only exceed the previous year, but also return to within the
range of natural variation. In a recovery, scientists would also expect to see
a return to an Arctic sea ice cover dominated by thicker, multiyear ice.

                    
                                                390. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 11:32 am

EV: Piers Corbyn is saying what I have tried to tell you all along but there
is none so blind as he who will not see, THE TRUTH.  
30. Piers Corbyn, Astrophysicist. From http://wattsupwiththat.com/2010/12/27/piers-corbyn-goes-global-cooling/  
Predicting in November that winter in Europe would be “exceptionally cold and
snowy, like Hell frozen over at times,” Corbyn suggested we should sooner
prepare for another Ice Age than worry about global warming. Corbyn believed
global warming “is complete nonsense, it’s fiction, it comes from a cult
ideology. There’s no science in there, no facts to back [it] up.”  
http://notrickszone.com/2010/12/28/global-cooling-consensus-is-heating-up-
cooling-over-the-next-1-to-3-decades/

You still haven't provided where there has been a test to prove how this trace
gas, CO2, that is essential for life on earth is the driver of the earth's
climate. You can not do so is why.

                    
                                                391. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 1:42 pm

You can call a "horse" a "cow", but that does not make it a "cow".

All the FACTS of AGW are there for anyone to understand, but since these
inconvenient truths go against your preconceived notions, you are blind to
them.

"Predicting in November.." - You keep talking about WEATHER

The simplest "test to prove how this trace gas, CO2, that is essential for
life on earth is the driver of the earth’s climate." is the Earth itself.
Without GHG's, the Earth would be about the temp of the Moon. Remove the CO2
(and other non-condensing GHG's) from the atmosphere, and the water vapor
would disappear in a matter of days. And the temperature would plumet. Do you
disput this? I don't think you'd be satisifed with a proof that shows 1+1=2.

                    
                                                392. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 11:48 am

Some information for you on glaciers that the IPCC & their WWF clowns never
heard of or they would not have predicted the Himalayan glaciers would be gone
by 2035 and you believe these kind of people?

"• Since 1980, there has been an advance of more than 55% of the 625 mountain
glaciers under observation by the World Glacier Monitoring group in Zurich.
(From 1926 to 1960, some 70-95% of these glaciers were in retreat.)  
• A comparison of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 1965 and 1990 Plant
Hardiness Zone Maps, shows a southward change of one zone, or 10°F, between
1965 and 1990.  
• Careful measurements of the oxygen isotope ratios in German oaks, which are
rigorously calibrated to temperature data, show a 1°C temperature decline from
1350 to 1800 (the lowpoint of the Little Ice Age). Temperature thereafter
increased by 1°C from 1800 to 1930, and has been declining since then.  
• From weather stations in the Alps, and in the Nordic countries, we find the
temperature decline since 1930 is also 1°C.  
• Satellite measurements have shown growth in the height and breadth of the
huge Greenland ice sheet, the largest in the Northern Hemisphere  
On Nisqually  
That brings us to the Nisqually glacier, up on the 14,410-foot Mount Rainier,
near Tacoma, Wash. Just 85 feet shy of Mount Whitney, the highest point in the
lower 48 states, Mount Rainier has 26 glaciers, and is the largest single peak
system in the United States.

In 1931, fearful that the receding glacier would provide insufficient runoff
for their newly completed hydroelectric facility, Tacoma City Light began
careful measurements of the glacier. Since the mid-1800s, the glacier had
receded about 1 kilometer. Annual to semi-annual measurements, continued by
the U.S. Geological Survey and private contractors for the National Park
Service, provide the longest continuous series of glacier measurements in
North America.

The details are described in a report by government specialists, which
appeared in the September 2000 issue of Washington Geology:

“The greatest thickening during the period of measurement occurred between
1931 and 1945, when the glacier thickened by about 50% near 2,800 meters of
altitude. This and subsequent thickenings during the mid-1970s to mid-1980s
produced waves that advanced its terminus. Glacier thinning occured during
intervening periods. Between 1994 and 1997, the glacier thickened by 17 meters
at 2,800-m altitude, indicating probable glacier advance during the first
decade of the 21st century.”  
http://www.21stcenturysciencetech.com/articles/Ice_Age.html>

                    
                                                393. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 1, 2012 at 2:33 pm

Doug -

Re: "Himalayan glaciers would be gone by 2035" - "2035" was a typo - should
have been 2300 or 2350.

You continue to cherry-pick data to support you opinions - look at the
worldwide/continental trends:

http://climate.nasa.gov/keyIndicators/

Artic Sea Ice - declining  
Antarctica mass variation since 2002 - declining  
Greenland mass variation since 2002 - declining  
Sea level - rising

http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/02/120208132301.htm

Earth's glaciers and ice caps outside of the regions of Greenland and
Antarctica are shedding roughly 150 billion tons of ice annually, according to
a new study led by the University of Colorado Boulder.

                    
                                                394. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 12:02 pm

Croat scientist warns ice age could start in five years  
Croatian Times  
A leading scientist has revealed that Europe could be just five years away
from the start of a new Ice Age.

While climate change campaigners say global warming is the planet's biggest
danger, renowned physicist Vladimir Paar says most of central Europe will soon
be covered in ice.

The freeze will be so complete that people will be able to walk from England
to Ireland or across the North Sea from Scotland to northern Europe.

Professor Paar, from Croatia's Zagreb University, has spent decades analysing
previous ice ages in Europe and what caused them.

"Most of Europe will be under ice, including Germany, Poland, France, Austria,
Slovakia and a part of Slovenia," said the professor in an interview with the
Index.hr.

"This could happen in five, 10, 50 or 100 years, or even later. We can't
predict it precisely, but it will come," he added.

And the professor said that scientists think global warming is simply a
natural part of the planet.

"What I mean is that global warming is natural. Some 130,000 years ago the
earth's temperature was the same as now, the level of CO2 was almost the same
and the level of the sea was four metres higher.

The Zagreb based scientist says it will still be possible for man to survive
in the ice age, but the spending on energy will be enormous.

EV: There are Real scientist that try to do things that will benefit humanity
instead of wanting to put us back in the stone age as your anthropogenic
global warming folks would like to do with their hoax about how using fossil
fuels is destroying the planet. I have been to Zagreb on a couple of occasions
and have enjoyed my stays there.  
"He said: "The nuclear energy we know today will not last longer than 100
years as we simply do not have enough uranium in the world to match the needs
in an ice age. But I'm still optimistic. There is the process of nuclear
fusion happening on the Sun. The fuel for that process is hydrogen and such a
power plant is already worked on in France as a consortium involving firms
from Marseille and the European Union, the US, Russia, China, Japan and South
Korea. The head of the project is a Japanese expert, and former Japanese
ambassador in Croatia", Vladimir Paar revealed."  
http://www.croatiantimes.com/news/General_News/2010-02-10/8836/Croat_scientist_warns_ice_age_could_start_in_five_years>

                    
                                                395. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 1, 2012 at 2:47 pm

Where do you find this nonsense? You must be getting pretty hard up! Sure
global warming IS natural - it's simply the result of more CO2 in the
atmosphere, as anyone with brains knows. If it weren't for the CO2 from
fossing fuel burning, we WOULD be headed into an ice age. But it only takes a
little CO2 above 280 ppm in the atmosphere to prevent another ice age. I
really liked

“What I mean is that global warming is natural. Some 130,000 years ago the
earth’s temperature was the same as now, the level of CO2 was almost the same
and the level of the sea was four metres higher."

If history is a guide, we're in for at least 4 meteres of sea level rise. And
where will most of that rise come from? Greenland, Antarctica, and other
glaciers. WAKE UP!

                    
                                                396. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 12:56 pm

EV: Here is someone that doesn't agree with you or your "scientist" such as
Peter H. Gleick & John Holdren, an old apostle of Prof Paul Ehrlich, Stanford
University who said that “Giving society cheap, abundant energy would be the
equivalent of giving an idiot child a machine gun.” at the National Academy of
Scientists. Prof Paul Ehrlich shows the kind of regard for humanity that you
and your kind is noted for.

The world needs more people like what I mention below and fewer like EV,
Holdren, Gleck and also for sure Gore and James Hansen to move ahead instead
of backwards and that is the direction they want to take us.

This discussion and the list of organizations and people's philosophies for
the world going forward that I presented above on March 19, 2012 at 1:43 am &
also on March 17, 2012 at 12:51 pm did make me recall that a man that had more
influence on world food production than any one else in the last century died
Sept. 12, 2009 and I doubt that more than a hand full of people even knew
about it or what Norman Borlaug had done for humanity, I'm almost certain that
includes Enviro. Luther Burbank, who died in 1926 and did work on the potato
that bears his name, needs to also be mentioned.

One would not want to proclaim accolades for the man that started the Green
Revolution that introduced high yielding grains to Mexico that allowed that
country to become an exporter of wheat and allowed India and Pakistan to
double their wheat yields between 1965 & 1970 and made Paul Ehrlich and his
1968 bestseller "The Population Bomb" look like the fiction it is. It is
interesting to note that in the past when the Norwegians were at themselves
and hadn't gotten into the mushrooms too frequently, they awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize to him in 1970. The honor for what use to be a prestigious prize
has now been eroded to where it is basically worthless and that is sad.

Anyway EV, if you want some more information you can go to this site for VALID
science besides the CO2 nonsense that you spew, with out knowing the first
thing about that which you speak. What Norman Borlaug did as a scientist is
what science is suppose to do, find the truth and use that truth to advance
knowledge and the human race, not like the idiots you seem to admire, to try
to take humanity back to a time of privation, despair, hunger and a very
short, unhappy existence. It has been the use of fossil fuels that has offered
the alternative and that has been advancement on all front, or haven't you
been blessed with the brains to figure that out?

Homepage Prof. dr. C de Jager  
http://www.cdejager.com/sun-earth-publications/>

                    
                                                397. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 1, 2012 at 2:40 pm

You do like to rant irrelevent drivel! You should use some of this energy to
look at the SCIENCE of CO2, infrared absorption, greenhouse gases,
temperature, and climate. "You are entitled to your own opinions, but you are
not entitied to your own facts."

                    
                                                398. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 1:46 pm

3/31/2012 8:40 PM  
Btw, it looks like there has been another “defection” from your “camp” – Paul
Douglas (a Republican Meteorologist):  
Now some in my party believe the EPA and all those silly "global warming
alarmists" are going to get in the way of drilling and mining our way to
prosperity. Well, we have good reason to be alarmed.

BTW EV: This kind of clown was never in my "camp" because he is as delusional
as you and B.P. are. If it has not been the wise use of fossil fuels that has
lead to the developed world's prosperity then what did? Please do not tell me
it was wind mills, solar companies such as Solyndra and Beacon Power.  
"In August 2010, Beacon Power became one of the first companies in the nation
to get an Energy Department loan guarantee designed to jump-start innovative
and clean energy projects. On Monday, it became the second one to file for
bankruptcy.  
http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/beacon-power-declares-
bankruptcy-second-loan-guarantee-recipient-to-
falter/2011/10/31/gIQACNAaaM_story.html

There was sure not a lot of prosperity created with these kind of boondoggle
BS ventures. Maybe for the few in on the crony capitalism but nothing for the
general population and you think that Paul Douglas would be someone that I
would consider to be "in my camp"? Some one whose camp I am in is John
Coleman, founder of the Weather Channel.  
http://www.kusi.com/story/14072205/global-warming

                    
                                                399. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 1, 2012 at 3:18 pm

Now I understamd where you get your "junk science".

Let me take one simple example where Coleman is very misleading. He states:

It is true that CO2 can absorb heat a little faster than nitrogen and oxygen
but it becomes no hotter because it cannot absorb anymore heat than there is
available to the other gases. This is against the laws of thermodynamics. All
gases share their heat with the other gases. Gas molecules fly around and are
constantly colliding with other gas molecules so they immediately lose any
excess heat to other molecules during these collisions. That's why the air is
all one temperature in any limited volume.

This is so misleading that't is pitiful.

First of all, " [CO2] cannot absorb anymore heat than there is available to
the other gases." is totally misleading. Of course it can't - only so much
heat is avaible by definition. And all of the heat is available to be absorbed
by all the gases. But guess what - only CO2 (and water vapor and a few other
gases) absorb the infrared heat - nitrogen and oxygen do not.

Next "All gases share their heat with the other gases" - of course - But guess
what - only CO2 (and water vapor and a few other gases) absorb the infrared
heat - nitrogen and oxygen do not. The heat that the CO2 absorbs is then
"shared" with the other gas molecules.

What Coleman neglects to say is that the source of heat in the atmosphere is
infrared radiation, which is absorbed by CO2 and not nitrogen and oxygen. So
what actually happens is the CO2 absorbs the radiation, gets warmer, then
"immediately lose[s] any excess heat to other molecules during these
collisions", thus warming the atmosphere. No CO2, no warming (like the moon).
Lots of CO2 (e.g., 280PPM), lots of warming (about 60 degrees F worth). More
CO2, more warming. It’s that simple. When someone like Coleman is so
misleading, why do you listen to him?

                    
                                                400. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a6316ea1df1680af02878588e2400ff?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Jose says:
                    

March 31, 2012 at 11:17 pm

Enviro:

Here is an example of how government is funding Government Motors.

If you are thinking about buying a Chevrolet Volt, your eligibility for the
$7500 Federal rebate, as well as a potential $5000 California Rebate will
surely have a significant impact on your purchasing decision. Combined this is
as much at $12,500 in government incentives on a car that many expect will
MSRP for over $40,000.

http://www.mychevroletvolt.com/chevrolet-volt-tax-incentives-and-rebates

                    
                                                401. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 4:09 pm

For those concerned w both reducing US reliance on foreign oil and with AGW,
this is a needed policy to promote development of electric cars.

                    
                                                402. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 2:28 pm

I do not find it strange that in their quest for alternative energy, EV
doesn't mention things that have been proven to worked: Must have just slipped
their mind.  
EV needs to know that the below refers to electrical generation. Besides
natural gas there is at this time no alternative for petroleum for vehicles (
I almost forgot the Chevy Volt & this little gem to help the American working
middle class out, lots of jobs created with this one, in Finland)  
"Vice President Joseph Biden heralded the Energy Department’s $529 million
loan to the start-up electric car company called Fisker as a bright new path
to thousands of American manufacturing jobs. But two years after the loan was
announced, the job of assembling the flashy electric Fisker Karma sports car
has been outsourced to Finland."  
http://www.canadafreepress.com/index.php/article/41545>

EV: If the Chevy Volt is the answer in your eyes to the use of foreign oil
then why has Government Motors suspended production of this boondoggle?

EV needs to also realize this fact:  
"Figure 2: Net Generation Shares by Energy Source: Total (All Sectors),  
Year-to-Date through March, 2011"  
(The pie chart shows this): "Coal, 44.7%; Natural Gas, 20.6%; Nuclear,20.5%;
Hydroelectric Conventional, 8.4%; Other Energy Sources, 5.2% and Petroleum
.8%"  
http://www.eia.gov/cneaf/electricity/epm/epm_sum.html

                    
                                                403. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 12:07 pm

Now you understand the problem and why the fossil fuel industry is spending so
much money on their dis-information campaign - we are addicted to fossil
fuels, and their use has to be reduced by over 90% by 2050 to forestall to the
worst effects of a warming planet. We therefore need to foster the development
of renewable energy, providing the same sorts of subsidies as were provided to
the fossil fuel and nuclear industries.

                    
                                                404. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 1:43 am

EV needs to know that the electric cars are going to have to be recharged and
wind mills and Solyndra like boondoggles will not do that job. Besides natural
gas there is at this time no alternative for petroleum for vehicles ( We can
not forgot the Chevy Volt & this little gem to help the American working
middle class out, lots of jobs created with this one, in Finland)  
"Vice President Joseph Biden heralded the Energy Department’s $529 million
loan to the start-up electric car company called Fisker as a bright new path
to thousands of American manufacturing jobs. But two years after the loan was
announced, the job of assembling the flashy electric Fisker Karma sports car
has been outsourced to Finland."  
http://www.canadafreepress.com/index.php/article/41545

EV: If the Chevy Volt is the answer in your eyes to the use of foreign oil
then why has Government Motors suspended production of this boondoggle? I do
not imagine that EV would consider the fact that Henry Ford started his auto
company with out any "help" from the Federal Government and he seem able to
design the first assembly line and other innovations without the Government
and most of the innovations that have changed and bettered human existence
have come about in this way, through innovation and damn sure not some tax
like the cap and trade that many on your side of the fence said was need to
spur new ideas and innovation. The only new ideas taxes create are ways to
cheat and not pay them. Humanity did not advance beyond the stone age because
of a tax on stones or advance beyond the age of sailing ships to steam powered
vessels because of a tax on sail cloth or mast but because of innovation and
people that were free to think and design without government interference.

                    
                                                405. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 2:05 am

There was a slight repeat on my other comments to this reply to EV because the
first one did not appear but EV needs to be told many times before anything
sinks in; therefore, no harm done.  
This goes along with the other things that Obama's green nonsense has totally
screwed up and part of that was withholding drilling permits in the Gulf Of
Mexico so that those rigs could go to Mexican waters to drill in, guess where,
the Gulf Of Mexico or to Brazil so that they could drill in their off shore
sites and send the oil to China. The main point is, they were no longer being
used to developing the United States off shore oil and it would seem that was
part of Obama's plan to raise gas prices and that is what happened. This
includes not issuing permits on federal lands or off shore of the US and for
sure no permits to drill in ANWR or even to allow a pipeline from Canada to be
built that would add jobs with no government cost.

This is what EV thinks is the answer? Electric cars. EV knows no more about
this subject than they do about CO2 and that appears to be next to nothing
from the nonsense that they put forth about this trace gas that is essential
for all life on earth as we have come to enjoy it.

"GM has just announced it will be idling the plant (and the 1,300 workers at
that plant) where the “game changing” Chevy Volt electric car is – uh, was –
built. GM says it’s only temporary – until they figure out how to “align
production with demand.” It could be a long wait for those workers.  
GM, like every car company, has embraced the politics of green because it
leads to taxpayer-financed green. Think Solyndra was a boondoggle? The
Mackinac Center for Public Policy estimates that the actual cost-per-car of
each Volt, once all the federal subsidies are factored in, comes to $250,000
or $3 billion, total. (Lookee here for more.)  
Guess who paid for that?  
It wasn’t GM’s money. It was your money. And mine. And the money taken from
millions of other taxpayers, all poured into the coffers of GM to further the
advancement of otherwise economically untenable projects that would never have
see the light of day except for the fact that we have a system of crony
capitalism that distorts the free market like a funhouse mirror."  
http://epautos.com/2012/03/03/the-volt-sleeps-with-the-fishes/

                    
                                                406. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 12:14 pm

From MArch 3:

Mar 3, 2012 at 10:01 am

Yesterday, General Motors told 1,300 Detroit employees “they will be
temporarily laid off for five weeks” due to lower than expected demand for its
Chevy Volt plug-in hybrid-electric vehicle.

No doubt there are many contributing factors, but in January, GM CEO Dan
Akerson explained:

We did not design the Volt to become a political punching bag and that’s what
it’s become.

He had been called in to testify by the Tea-Party crowd running the U.S. House
in a hearing witch-hunt titled, “Volt Vehicle Fire: What Did NHTSA Know and
When Did They Know It?” Yes, that’s a reference to Nixon and Watergate!

In fact, NHSTA concluded it does not believe the Volt and other electric
vehicles “pose a greater risk of fire than gasoline-powered vehicles.”

Media Matters put together a video of the conservative media
misrepresentations:

As TP Green reports, those who launched “conspiracy-tinged partisan attacks”
got what they wanted:

Relentless attacks on the Chevy Volt from Rush Limbaugh and Republican
politicians have taken their toll, as General Motors has announced a five-week
suspension in production of the range-extended electric car. Conservative
enemies of clean energy and the Obama administration seized on isolated
reports Volts with battery fires, calling the cars “Obama-mandated death
traps.” Limbaugh even said GM was a “corporation that’s trying to kill its
customers.”

Has there ever been a more relentless partisan campaign against American
products and American jobs than this?

* * *

GM Says Chevrolet Volt Production To Resume A Week Early  
By Derek Kreindler on April 5, 2012

                    
                                                407. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 16, 2012 at 9:39 am

So, EV, what is the deal here? If this Ill-conceived vehicle is so great, then
why didn't people buy the thing, fire or no fire? Then you have the nerve to
post this: "Has there ever been a more relentless partisan campaign against
American products and American jobs than this?" with out understanding that
the electric Fisker Karma sports car that your buddies in this current
administration have supported with MY money is being made in Finland, lots of
jobs for Americans if they move to Finland. Is the electricity to charge these
things going to come from your windmills and solar panels that produce less
that 3% of the total electrical needs in the US?

                    
                                                408. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 11:45 am

EV, as does B. P, keeps mentioning the temperature and they want one to
believe that 2010 was the hottest year since records have been kept when the
statistics show that for the United States that year was in 1934 and that was
during a 10 year drought that covered a huge part of the US.("Over the 11-year
span from 1930-1940, a large part of the region saw 15% to 25% less
precipitation than normal.") #1 They can not seem to understand that if there
is a 75% drop in reporting stations around the globe there just might be a
difference in the temperature statistics going forward because by 1990, NOAA
had deleted from its data sets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers.
Canada’s reporting stations dropped from 496 in 1989 to 44 in 1991, with the
percentage of stations at lower elevations tripling while the numbers of those
at higher elevations dropped to one in service plus they left one thermometer
for everything north of LAT 65 and that one resides in a place called Eureka,
which has been described as "The Garden Spot of the Arctic” due to its
unusually moderate summers. The above is in addition to all of the reporting
stations that were lost when the USSR fell and even EV and B.P. should know
where most of these stations were located. Sure sounds like some lying going
on here with temperature. Then EV states that this does not matter and with
these 75% of the high latitude and high elevation stations in the reporting
data base, the temperatures would be higher. Just how dishonest or stupid
could one be and I challenge this individual to prove this, about like his
test for how CO2 can cause climate change, I would assume.

When global satellite data is analyzed for temperature trends for the period
January 1979 through June 2009 the beginning and ending segments show a
cooling trend, while the middle segment shows a warming trend. "The past 12to
13years show cooling using both satellite data sets, with lower confidence
limits that do not exclude a negative trend until 16years. It is shown that
several published studies have predicted cooling in this time frame. One of
these models is extrapolated from its 2000 calibration end date and shows a
good match to the satellite data, with a projection of continued cooling for
several more decades." #2

Then there is the hockey stick diagram that is a total lie and has been so
proven by 765 different scientists from 453 research institutes that have
worked on the medieval warm period. The Canadian mathematician Steven McIntyre
had serious doubts about the correctness of the representation. McIntyre
showed not only that Mann had used an algorithm that resulted in 90 percent of
the cases to a hockey stick, but found also serious errors in the selection of
the data and the location of places, as well as the use of incorrect data. In
2007, McIntyre examined records across America. He found that between 1999 and
2007, the US equivalent of the Met Office had changed the way it adjusted old
data.  
The result was to make the Thirties seem cooler, and the years since 1990 much
warmer. Previously, the warmest year since records began in America had been
1934.

"Over the 11-year span from 1930-1940, a large part of the region saw 15% to
25% less precipitation than normal. This is very significant to see such a
large deficit over such a long period of time. This translates to 50 to 60
inches of much needed moisture which never arrived that decade. For an area
which only averages less than 20 inches of precipitation a year, deficits like
this can make the region resemble a desert. Deficits like this are the
equivalent of missing three entire years of expected precipitation in one
decade. Figure 2 is a map of the precipitation departures from normal in terms
of a percentage of normal (total precipitation divided by normal
precipitation) for the Dust Bowl region for 1930 to 1940."  
http://www.srh.noaa.gov/ama/?n=dust_bowl_verses_today

"Severe drought in 1934 covered 80% of the country, compared with 25% in 2011  
In June, 1934 the entire country had triple digit heat. We didn’t come
anywhere close to that this summer."  
http://docs.lib.noaa.gov/rescue/mwr/062/mwr-062-06-0212.pdf

This is a lie that all alarmist had to defend with "tricks", more lies or what
ever it takes because if the true global temperatures are shown the graph sure
does not resemble a hockey stick but an up and down line that shows the Roman
warm period, the Medieval warm period and the Little Ice age. Then these two
act like a logical and rational person is to believe that the MWP was just a
local event because they can see that even with the lies that they dig up,
they can not discount it. This is after the one wants to try to lecture some
one on the difference between weather and climate.

The whole point is, if the warm and cold periods are shown accurately, then
that blows their false contention about the climate being driven by
anthropogenic factors and that lone factor in carbon dioxide. It is a very
lame horse that the alarmist have put their saddle on and it is about to go
down since lies will always come to be known for what they are, lies.

# 1 http://www.srh.noaa.gov/ama/?n=dust_bowl_verses_today

# 2 http://www.ncasi.org/publications/Detail.aspx?id=3230

                    
                                                409. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 11:36 pm

“tricks” = "clever programming", NOT "tricking the public"

You continue to confuse WEATHER and CLIMATE when you talk about specific years

"NOAA had deleted from its data sets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers"
- for "scientific reasons", and if they hadn't they would have shown an even
greater temperature increase - you should be glad they did!

In the Canadian tradition, it would be “unparliamentary” to accuse
ClimateAudit’s Steve McIntyre of purposefully misrepresenting climate science,
but his latest attack on the so-called “hockey stick” suggests that McIntyre
is a great deal more interested in scoring distorted debating points than in
saying anything that is actually factually correct. The "Hockey stick" has
been validated over and over again.

Why don't you understand that the "climate [is] being driven by anthropogenic
factors and that lone factor in carbon dioxide"? CO2 is the primary "non-
condensing" GHG and provides the "framework" for "condensing" GHGs - more CO2
= warmer climage. What could be simpler (and more "inconvenient" for you) ?

                    
                                                410. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 2:39 am

EV: Please take some time and explain just how what you say below can possibly
be true. Where is the logic behind this statement that if reporting stations
from high latitudes and altitudes are removed from the data set, how could
what you try to maintain be true?  
“NOAA had deleted from its data sets all but 1,500 of the 6,000 thermometers”
– for “scientific reasons”, and if they hadn’t they would have shown an even
greater temperature increase – you should be glad they did!" Why and How
should I be glad that they did this?

                    
                                                411. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 2:03 pm

Take some time to read

http://www.skepticalscience.com/Dropped-stations-introduce-warming-bias-
intermediate.htm

                    
                                                412. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 2:43 am

EV: Try your normal style lying that everyone sees through to explain this
from the actual emails.

So far one of the most circulated e-mails from the CRU hack is the following
from Phil Jones to the original hockey stick authors – Michael Mann, Raymond
Bradley, and Malcolm Hughes.  
From: Phil Jones  
To: ray bradley ,mann@xxxxx.xxx, mhughes@xxxx.xxx  
Subject: Diagram for WMO Statement  
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1999 13:31:15 +0000  
Cc: k.briffa@xxx.xx.xx,t.osborn@xxxx.xxx  
Dear Ray, Mike and Malcolm,  
Once Tim’s got a diagram here we’ll send that either later today or  
first thing tomorrow.  
I’ve just completed Mike’s Nature trick of adding in the real temps  
to each series for the last 20 years (ie from 1981 onwards) amd from  
1961 for Keith’s to hide the decline. Mike’s series got the annual  
land and marine values while the other two got April-Sept for NH land  
N of 20N. The latter two are real for 1999, while the estimate for 1999  
for NH combined is +0.44C wrt 61-90. The Global estimate for 1999 with  
data through Oct is +0.35C cf. 0.57 for 1998.  
Thanks for the comments, Ray.  
Cheers  
Phil  
Prof. Phil Jones  
Climatic Research Unit Telephone +44 (0) xxxxx  
School of Environmental Sciences Fax +44 (0) xxxx  
University of East Anglia  
Norwich Email p.jones@xxxx.xxx  
NR4 7TJ  
UK

                    
                                                413. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 2:25 pm

"Smoke screen alert!"

Your argument has been thouroughly debunked (included by me above)- your are
misinterpreting the statement.

The "decline" refers to a decline in northern tree-rings, not global
temperature, and is openly discussed in papers and the IPCC reports.

see http://www.skepticalscience.com/Mikes-Nature-trick-hide-the-decline.htm

                    
                                                414. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 2:20 pm

EV needs to explain this with out lying about it but can they say anything
with out fabricating some far from feasible "story"?

How “The Trick” was pulled off  
by Steve McIntyre  
For the benefit of new readers, we discussed some aspects of the “trick” at
Climate Audit in the past. Obviously, the Climategate Letters clarify many
things that were murky in the past. On the left is a blowup of IPCC 2001 Fig
2.21 showing where the Briffa reconstruction (green) ends. More on this below.  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2009/11/28/how-the-trick-was-pulled-off/

I some how from experience with you know that you will not be able to
understand the above information so I include this again for your viewing
pleasure:  
Climategate 'hide the decline' explained by Berkeley professor Richard A.
Muller  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8BQpciw8suk

                    
                                                415. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 2:34 pm

Why do you believe anything that McIntyre says?

from http://deepclimate.org/2011/01/20/another-climategate-whopper-from-
mcintyre/

So chalk up another “climategate” falsehood to go with McIntyre’s repeated
“hide the decline” nonsense (see here, here and here), not to mention the
spurious “fudge factor” accusation. And don’t get me started on Yamal.

The last time I checked ClimateAudit, McIntyre was blathering about lack of
“acknowledgment”, in his best whining Rodney I-can’t-get-no-respect
Dangerfield fashion. But it’s high time for McIntyre himself to acknowledge
the sad truth about his long and disturbing record of innuendo, half-truths
and outright falsehoods.

And for everyone else to acknowledge that McIntyre has nothing worthwhile to
say about climate scientists. Or climate science for that matter.

                    
                                                416. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 11, 2012 at 8:33 am

Do you believe what Berkeley professor Richard A. Muller in the video?
Probably too simple and straight forward for you to grasp.

                    
                                                417. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 12:06 pm

EV keeps wanting to talk about climate verses weather and only seems to think
that a thirty year period defines the issue. They do not want to go back to
the Medieval Warm Period that is a proven fact nor the Little Ice Age because,
with these climatic shifts that have been proven to be a fact and were world
wide, the hoax of anthropogenic global warming is blown out of the water or
where ever the lie resides at present. The link below gets one to a chart that
shows the different climatic periods in earth's long history and there was NO
anthropogenic effects on any of these periods, and that is as true today as it
was 2 billion years ago.

"During the last 2 billion years the Earth's climate has alternated between a
frigid "Ice House", like today's world, and a steaming "Hot House", like the
world of the dinosaurs.  
This chart shows how global climate has changed through time."  
http://www.scotese.com/climate.htm

"The world's most recent glacial period began about 110,000 years ago and
ended around 12,500 years ago. The maximum extent of this glacial period was
the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and it occurred around 20,000 years ago.  
Although the Pleistocene Epoch experienced many cycles of glacials and
interglacials (the warmer periods between the colder glacial climates), the
last glacial period is the most heavily studied and best known portion of the
world's current ice age, especially with regard to North America and northern
Europe."

"Most of the world's glaciers are famous today however for their significant
retreats in recent years. Such a retreat represents a new shift in the earth’s
climate- something that has happened time and time again over the earth's 4.6
billion year history and will no doubt continue to do in the future."  
http://geography.about.com/od/climate/a/glaciation.htm

I know that EV will not understand that what is presented above demonstrates
the difference between climate and weather but just what has the individual
shown that they do or can understand?

                    
                                                418. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 10:15 pm

You are right - "Such a retreat represents a new shift in the earth’s climate-
something that has happened time and time again over the earth’s 4.6 billion
year history and will no doubt continue to do in the future.”

The change IS a new shift, but  
1) W/o the CO2 from fossil fuels, we'd be heading into a new ice age  
2) The CO2 levels are the highest they have been in over 800,000 years  
3) the additional CO2 traps more infrared radiation, warming the Earth  
4) If the glaciers continue to retreat at the current accelerating pace, we
could see 1-2 meters of sea level rise by 2100 - a rather disasterous amout
for our civilization

                    
                                                419. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 3:35 am

"The change IS a new shift, but  
1) W/o the CO2 from fossil fuels, we’d be heading into a new ice age"

Is there a possibility that EV does have a small amount of common sense and
the ability to rationalize this issue enough to realize that, if something is
alive, warm is preferable to cold any day? Could that be why over 90% of the
earth's life forms are found in the tropics and not in the polar regions? EV
I'm sure can give a true and honest answer to the above question.

                    
                                                420. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 12:21 pm

Just trying to make you understand ths AGW is real. In past geologic times,
there were aligators in the Arctic and sea levels were hundreds of feet higher
- are those the conditions that you'd like condem the Earth to?

                    
                                                421. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 12:37 pm

"Modern Global Cooling: 2012 Winter Is 2nd Coldest In Last 15 Years - By 2100,
Winters Might Be 1 Degree Colder  
If the current modern global cooling continues, winters in the Northern
Hemisphere and summers in the Southern Hemispere could be colder - human CO2
emissions may actually be irrelevant"  
http://www.c3headlines.com/2012/03/modern-global-cooling-2012-winter-is-2nd-
coldest-in-last-15-years-by-2100-winters-might-be-1-degree-.html

"NEW UK Met Office global temperature data confirms that the world has not
warmed in the past 15 years.  
Analysis by the Global Warming Policy Foundation (GWPF) of the newly released
HadCRUT4 global temperature database shows that there has been no global
warming in the past 15 years – a timescale that challenges current models of
global warming.  
The graph shows the global annual average temperature since 1997. No
statistically significant trend can be discerned from the data. The only
statistically acceptable conclusion to be drawn from the HadCRUT4 data is that
between 1997 – 2011 it has remained constant, with a global temperature of
14.44 +/- 0.16 deg C (2 standard deviations.)"  
http://jennifermarohasy.com/2012/04/no-global-warming-for-15-years-david-
whitehouse/

It looks like Phil Jones can no longer "hide the decline" like EV's hero,
Mann. wanted to do with "tricks".  
"We also note a comment in an email sent by Professor Phil Jones of the
University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit: “Bottom line – the no upward
trend has to continue for a total of 15 years before we get worried.” Well,
EV, is he worried now?  
http://jennifermarohasy.com/2012/04/no-global-warming-for-15-years-david-
whitehouse/

Ev seems to infer that anyone not buying into their ridiculous scam of agw
just has to be in big oils pockets:  
"Obama is the top recipient of BP PAC and individual money over the past 20
years." | Reuters  
http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0510/36783.html#ixzz1r4eyvfIV

The energy industries have done more for humanity than what the type of self
serving fools EV seems to support.

                    
                                                422. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 4, 2012 at 5:37 pm

"Figures don't lie, but liars figure".

The EARTH IS NOT COOLING!!!!!! The 13 warmest years since 1850 occurred in the
last 15 years; 2010 was the warmest year ever when there was a la nina event.

The temperature of the ATMOSPHERE may not have increased much in the last
10-15 years, but most of "global warming" goes into the OCEANS. Current
observations of the 700 metre surface layer have shown little warming, or even
cooling, in the last 8 years; but the surface layer down to 1500 metres has
shown significant warming.

There are many "unknowns" in climate science of ocean heat content (see
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2011/10/global-warming-and-
ocean-heat-content/ for a good discussion). But we know the earth continues
absorb more heat that it emits (see
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/01/120130172611.htm) and that more
CO2 will absorb more infrared radiation. So the expectation is that the EARTH
will continue to warm and, over time, so will the atmospere.

                    
                                                423. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 2:31 am

EV: what follows also address the phony claims made by your kind of hysterical
"alarmist" who need no proof or knowledge of basically anything to run around
like chicken little about the oceans becoming warmer or more acidic when the
base line for this, the pH scale, wasn't developed until 1909 the Danish
scientist Soren P.L. Sorenson

I agree that "There are many “unknowns” in climate science of ocean heat
content" but EV, you are not going to find the truth by going to your trusted
sites such as Realclimate & Sciencedaily that uses someone like James Hansen
for a source. This is the same Hansen that thinks nothing of altering data to
suit his flawed theory, like your other hero, Michael Mann, thinks is ethical.

This is what the organization that he works for, or against, says:  
"On land the situation is considerably more complex, and includes the
deposition of rain and snow on land; water flow in runoff; infiltration of
water into the soil and groundwater; storage of water in soil, lakes and
streams, and groundwater; polar and glacial ice; and use of water in
vegetation and human activities."  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"The pycnocline (meaning rapid change of density) separates the surface layer
of the ocean from the deep ocean. Deep ocean water has a temperature of about
3 degrees Celsius and a salinity measuring about 34-35 psu." (What does all of
this do to the ocean's pH? Where and what depth are your pH observations taken
from?)  
http://www.windows2universe.org/earth/Water/deep_ocean.html

"The interaction between water temperature and salinity effects density and
density determines thermohaline circulation, or the global conveyor belt. The
global conveyor belt is a global-scale circulation process that occurs over a
century-long time scale. Water sinks in the North Atlantic, traveling south
around Africa, rising in the Indian Ocean or further on in the Pacific, then
returning toward the Atlantic on the surface only to sink again in the North
Atlantic starting the cycle again." (Again, your narrow time span makes your
worries groundless if you are looking at 20-30 years and who & where and at
what depths were these readings taken regarding PH and temperatures? Also NASA
seems to want to compress this circulation time span into centuries when most
believe it is at least a thousand year cycle)  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

"As water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” [The
Global Conveyer Belt has suddenly stopped for several speculated reason in the
past and caused dramatic and rapid climate changes always to the cold side;
therefore, warm is preferable to cold any day and now the same NASA is saying
that the time span is a thousand years and it is the same NASA that also said
the time period was perhaps a hundred years]  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

                    
                                                424. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 3:01 pm

What's your point? Unlike most "deniers", climate scientists like Hansen will
acknowledge their mistakes when they are shown to be wrong. You might not like
the "inconvenient truths" found on RealClimate and similar sites, but they DO
NOT contain any debunked climate science (as is often found on your favorite
sites). They report the controversies as they see them from a SCIENTIFIC
perspective, with their only bias that of scientists who understand the basics
of climate science and wanting the public to be able to separate fact from
fiction. Your "deniers" just want the throw up "smoke screens", while Hansen,
etc. are trying to clear away the fog.

                    
                                                425. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 4:57 am

Monday, February 6, 2012  
New paper finds 20th century warming within range of natural variability  
A paper published this week in the journal Climate of the Past analyzes an
"unprecedentally large network of temperature…proxy records" [a total of 120]
and concludes that warming of the 20th century was "within the range of
natural variability over the last 12 centuries." Only two of the eight types
of temperature proxies analyzed indicate 20th century warming exceeded that of
the Medieval Warming Period.  
http://hockeyschtick.blogspot.com/2012/02/new-paper-finds-20th-century-
warming.html

                    
                                                426. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 3:20 am

EV: Why would GISS be so reluctant to provide this information athat is
legally requested? Do you imagine that they have something to hide?

“Climate Gate” Development: CEI Files Notice of Intent to Sue NASA  
By Chris Horner on 11.24.09 @ 9:46AM

Today, on behalf of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, I filed three
Notices of Intent to File Suit against NASA and its Goddard Institute for
Space Studies (GISS), for those bodies’ refusal – for nearly three years – to
provide documents requested under the Freedom of Information Act."

                    
                                                427. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 1:57 pm

GISS has nothing to hide - CEI is just trying to make the public think there
are problems w the basic understanding of climate science, where the BASIC
science was settled long ago. Think of the suit as a smoke screan trying to
hide what the climate scentists really know.

                    
                                                428. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 11, 2012 at 9:17 am

"Rural US Sites Show No Temperature Increase Since 1900  
Using data downloaded from NASA GISS and picking rural sites near, but not too
near, to urban sites, a comparison has been made of the temperature trend over
time of the rural sites compared to those of the urban sites. 28 pairs of
sites across the U.S. were compared. The paired rural site is from 31 to 91 km
from the urban site in each pair. The result is that urban and rural sites
were similar in 1900, with the urban sites slightly higher. The urban sites
have shown an increase in temperatures since then. The rural sites show no
such temperature increase and appear to be generally unchanging with only ups
and downs localized in time. Over a 111 year time span, the urban sites
temperatures have risen to be about 1.5C warmer than the rural sites. So, the
much touted rising temperatures in the U.S. are due to the urban heat island
effect and not due to a global warming such as has been proposed to be caused
by human emissions of CO2 due to the combustion of fossil fuels."  
http://objectivistindividualist.blogspot.com/2009/12/rural-us-sites-show-no-
temperature.html

"Skeptical Science is maintained by John Cook, the Climate Communication
Fellow for the Global Change Institute at the University of Queensland. He
studied physics at the University of Queensland, Australia. After graduating,
he majored in solar physics in his post-grad honours year. He is not a climate
scientist. Consequently, the science presented on Skeptical Science is not his
own but taken directly from the peer reviewed scientific literature."
http://www.skepticalscience.com/about.shtml

EV: You need to read : “The Delinquent Teenager Who Was Mistaken for the
World’s Top Climate Expert” by Donna Laframboise to find out about the IPCC
and their peer review process, if one could call it anything other than a
contrived attempt to make their hoax appear to have the blessing of scientist
agreeing on something much like the site, Skeptical Science that you like to
refer to. One of your like minded "friends", Peter Gleick, of the latest in
your kind of fraud and deception with the Heartland emails wrote a review of
this book and he has received the most number of negative comments that I've
ever seen on Amazon.

                    
                                                429. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 11:20 am

You need to look at more then "rural US". Take a look at the results by your
friend Berkeley professor Richard A. Muller

http://berkeleyearth.org/  
http://berkeleyearth.org/pdf/berkeley-earth-decadal-variations.pdf

"We obtained this estimate by choosing 2000 sites randomly from a list of  
approximately 30,964 temperature recording stations world-wide that had not
been  
used by NOAA, GISS, or HadCRU"

"The four curves show a broad trend of “global warming” with some  
unevenness"

Note that the amount of warming IS consistent w the "hockey stick"

                    
                                                430. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 17, 2012 at 11:09 am

EV: This is a great site and it shows science at work but the graphs show that
1998 to have the highest temperatures, a sharp drop and now a leveling off of
temperature with, as one would expect, Hansen's GISS showing the most bias
because his temps are always the highest. It appears that the graphs on PG. 5,
Fig. 3 from 1950 on, the peaks in temps were higher than the present shown on
the graphs. They certainly do not show this: "The EARTH IS NOT COOLING!!!!!!
The 13 warmest years since 1850 occurred in the last 15 years; 2010 was the
warmest year ever when there was a la nina event." nor this "Note that the
amount of warming IS consistent w the “hockey stick” but this is certainly
demonstrated to be TRUE for you: “Figures don’t lie, but liars figure”.

Any way, thanks for this site and since you didn't seem to understand it I
will offer you some interesting info from the  
Decadal Variations in the Global, Atmospheric Land Temperatures pdf  
"Correlation does not imply causation. The association between Atlantic sea
surface  
temperature fluctuations and land temperature may simply indicate that both
sets of  
temperatures are responding to the same source of natural variability.
However, it is  
also interesting to consider whether oceanic changes in the AMO may be driving  
short-term fluctuations in land surface temperature. Such fluctuations might  
originate as instabilities in the AMO region itself, or they might occur as a
non-linear  
response to changes elsewhere (such as within the ENSO region).

Since 1975, the AMO has shown a gradual but steady rise from -0.35 C to +0.2 C
(see Figure 2), a change of 0.55 C. During this same time, the land-average
temperature has increased about 0.8 C. Such changes may be  
independent responses to a common forcing (e.g. greenhouse gases); however, it
is  
also possible that some of the land warming is a direct response to changes in
the  
AMO region. If the long-term AMO changes have been driven by greenhouse gases  
then the AMO region may serve as a positive feedback that amplifies the effect
of  
greenhouse gas forcing over land. On the other hand, some of the long-term
change in  
the AMO could be driven by natural variability, e.g. fluctuations in
thermohaline  
flow. In that case the human component of global warming may be somewhat  
overestimated.

This correlation could indicate that the AMO plays an important intermediary
role in the  
influence of the Pacific ENSO on world climate; alternatively, it might
indicate that  
variability in the thermohaline flow plays a bigger role than had previously
been  
recognized. The models could be tested by studying the temperature
correlations in  
the ocean as a function of location and time."

                    
                                                431. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 7, 2012 at 3:26 am

EV: You can read through these and see how much honesty and integrity is
present with the institutions you seem so willing to protect and parrot their
"message".  
7. Removed 4-line header from a couple of .glo files and loaded them into  
Matlab. Reshaped to 360r x 720c and plotted; looks OK for global temp  
(anomalies) data. Deduce that .glo files, after the header, contain data  
taken row-by-row starting with the Northernmost, and presented as '8E12.4'.  
The grid is from -180 to +180 rather than 0 to 360.  
This should allow us to deduce the meaning of the co-ordinate pairs used to  
describe each cell in a .grim file (we know the first number is the lon or  
column, the second the lat or row - but which way up are the latitudes? And  
where do the longitudes break?  
There is another problem: the values are anomalies, wheras the 'public'  
.grim files are actual values. So Tim's explanations (in _READ_ME.txt) are  
incorrect..  
8. Had a hunt and found an identically-named temperature database file which  
did include normals lines at the start of every station. How handy - naming  
two different files with exactly the same name and relying on their location  
to differentiate! Aaarrgghh!! Re-ran anomdtb:

            1. Decided to concentrate on Norwich. Tim M uses Norwich  
as the example on the website, so we know it's at (363,286).  
Wrote a prog to extract the relevant 1961-1970 series from  
the published output, the generated .glo files, and the  
published climatology. Prog is norwichtest.for. Prog also  
creates anomalies from the published data, and raw data  
from the generated .glo data. Then Matlab prog plotnorwich.m  
plots the data to allow comparisons.  
First result: works perfectly, except that the .glo data is  
all zeros. This means I still don't understand the structure  
of the .glo files. Argh!

            2. Trying something _else_. Will write a prog to convert  
the 1961-1970 .glo files to a single file with 120 columns  
and a row for each non-zero cell. It will be slow. It is a  
nuisance because the site power os off this weekend (and  
it's Friday afternoon) so I will get it running at home.  
Program is glo2vec.for, and yup it is slow. Started a second  
copy on uealogin1 and it's showing signs of overtaking the  
crua6 version that started on Friday (it's Tuesday now). I'm  
about halfway through and the best correlation so far (as  
tested by norwichcorr.for) is 0.39 at (170,135) (lon,lat).  
http://www.anenglishmanscastle.com/HARRY_READ_ME.txt

                        
                                                    432. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                        

April 8, 2012 at 2:15 pm

"Smoke screen alert!"  
1. You can't infer "intent" from a few emails  
2. Climate scientists are only human  
3. Even in one climate scientist has manipulated data, you can’t infer that all climate scientist manipulate the data (do you discredit ALL “deniers” when it has been shown that MANY (if not most) manipulate the data?)  
4. The "deniers" are hoping that you will think the AGW climate science is a "house of cards" - discredit one fact and the whole house comes tumbling down. But there are so many lines of evidence that support AGW that if even one thread is shown to be wrong, there overall evidence is still overwhelming.
                    
                                                433. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 8, 2012 at 2:48 pm

Doug –

Congratulations! You managed to write almost 10 responses without either
mentioning “weather” or driveling on about CO2 not being responsible for our
warm climate! Do you finally understand the BASIC science of global warming?
It’s really smple:

            1. Greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being habitable 
            2. CO2 (a “non-condensing” GHG) is the main driver of the temperature of the Earth 
            3. Increasing the concentration of GHGs will cause the temperature of the Earth to increase 
            4. When considering the temperature of the Earth, you have to include the ocean temperatures (which have absorbed 80-90% of the temperature increase caused by the increase of GHG’s over the last 50 years) 
            5. The Earth is in “energy imbalance” – less energy is radiated that is absorbed from the Sun (hence the Earth IS continuing to warm)
                        
                                                    434. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                        

April 9, 2012 at 3:00 pm

EV: How does what follows fit in with your presenting the lie that the
Medieval Warm Period was just confined to Northern Europe? Any one that can
believe this kind of crap is a total fool, or do I repeat myself? I can not
call this "cherry picking" when you continually bring up the year 2010 as the
hottest on record and that also is a total lie. If the lower forty eight had a
mild winter, how does that fit in with what Alaska put up with?

"Erdenemunkh has many reasons to leave the ancient lifestyle behind. This
year, his Central Mongolian home region of Azraga was hit with a "dzud," a
devastatingly harsh winter that killed as much as 40 percent of many families'
livestock. For a nomadic family, the loss of livestock translates into a
direct loss of household income. And that's not even the worst-case scenario
-Erdenemunkh had a neighbor who lost all but one of his 80 cows in the
unrelenting cold.  
Herders distinguish among three different types of dzud. This year's was
considered a "glass dzud," where the ground froze solid under a thick layer of
snow, prohibiting animals from grazing. With temperatures reaching -40 to -60
degrees Fahrenheit throughout January, it was the coldest winter in local
memory, and animals both froze and starved to death. Most families in Azraga
said this year was even worse for them than the notorious dzud of 2010, in
which almost 8 million head of livestock, or 17 percent of the entire
country's animals, died and the government of Mongolia declared disaster
status."  
http://tomnelson.blogspot.com/2012/04/year-that-winter-forgot- mongolia.html>

How can this be, EV? This winter being even colder than the 2010 winter. You
explain this one with your CO2 crap and how it is burning up the planet and if
cold is better than warm, then go right now to where I have been in Mongolia
and tell these people that; but, you would not have the courage to do so;
would you, being so wrapped in your far left BS.

                    
                                                435. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 10, 2012 at 5:25 pm

Who ever impied that "Medieval Warm Period was just confined to Northern
Europe"? All I ever said was that the warming was NOT GLOBAL.

You keep talking about the WEATHER. Do you dispute any of the claims
("unconvenieht truths") on the following blog page ("Yes, Deniers, Global
Warming Continues")?

http://thinkprogress.org/romm/2012/04/07/458637/yes-deniers-global-warming-
continues

What don't understand the BASIC science of global warming? It’s really smple:

            1. Greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being habitable 
            2. CO2 (a “non-condensing” GHG) is the main driver of the temperature of the Earth 
            3. Increasing the concentration of GHGs will cause the temperature of the Earth to increase 
            4. When considering the temperature of the Earth, you have to include the ocean temperatures (which have absorbed 80-90% of the temperature increase caused by the increase of GHG’s over the last 50 years) 
            5. The Earth is in “energy imbalance” – less energy is radiated that is absorbed from the Sun (hence the Earth IS continuing to warm)
                        
                                                    436. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                        

April 9, 2012 at 3:18 pm

What do you make of this EV? How does this fit into your preposterous scenario
of the burning up planet. More lies please; but, make them more believable
than the ones you told about the organizations that you claim do not get
federal funding for their "climate change" propaganda, presented on my dime
regarding something that I know is a hoax.  
"Alaska has blown away all records for sea ice this winter. Four of the five
iciest years around Alaska have been since 2007. Look for the MSM to respond
by publishing stories about drowning Polar Bears who can’t find any ice."  
http://www.real-science.com/alaska-has-the-most-ice-ever-recorded

Polar Bear Blog - October 1, 2009 - More Bears, Less People..  
"Back in June, the Churchill River did not ‘break’, the term given when the
last ice jam opens up and flows out with the tide, until June 16. For years,
the port of Churchill has kept records of break-up and 2009 tied for the
latest breakup in the last fifty years. A cool summer further contributed to a
good, long ice season for the bears."

"Other exciting news from Churchill this summer includes the sighting of a
mother with triplets along the coast of Hudson Bay. First reported by the
summer tundra buggy tour, this is a very positive sign for Churchill’s bear
population. Most bears that show up in the Churchill area can be considered as
the periphery of the western Hudson Bay population, usually young, old or
nutritionally challenged. Most healthy bears stay far away from Churchill
until late in the season."  
http://www.polarbearalley.com/  
Here is another one for you from the same source:  
Polar Bear Blog - October 5, 2009 - Good Ol' Days Are Here Again… Sort of  
"Should be interesting to see how this season shapes up with the impressive
ice conditions on Hudson Bay. Barring an unseasonably warm October (it is
marginally above normal but not enough to make a big difference…), 2009 should
go down on record as one of the longer ice seasons since 1971, the beginning
of Environment Canada's modern weather records, definitely the longest ice
season since 1992 - the year in which the ice season was extended due to the
global cooling caused by the eruption of Mount pinatubo."  
http://www.polarbearalley.com/  
This one is about the bears;  
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1545036/Polar-bears-thriving-as-the-
Arctic-warms-up.html  
Since you and Al made the polar bear your canary in the mine, you need to
explain why their numbers are up and the LAST one is not standing around on
the last ice cube in the Arctic Ocean.

                    
                                                437. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 10, 2012 at 4:05 pm

I thought you had given up talking about the WEATHER!

Look at "A Visualization of March Heat Breaking 15,000 Records in the U.S."  
http://www.theatlantic.com/video/archive/2012/04/a-visualization-of-march-
heat-breaking-15-000-records-in-the-us/255677/

What climate change scientists are saying is that  
1) Climate change makes events like these (at both extremes - hot and cold)
more likely  
2) A specific extreme weather event may not have been CAUSED by global
warming, but the event most likely would not have been so extreme w/o global
warming.  
3) We are getting to the point where some exteme events MAY be attributable to
global warming

                    
                                                438. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 9, 2012 at 3:34 pm

EV: This is what the WWF tells you and you no doubt believe them, don't you?  
"Polar bears are in serious danger of going extinct due to global warming.  
Polar bears need our help and protection to ensure a long, healthy future for
the species. The best way you can help polar bears is by reducing your carbon
footprint and working with National Wildlife Federation to campaign to reduce
carbon pollution."  
http://www.nwf.org/Wildlife/Wildlife-Library/Mammals/Polar-Bear.aspx>

"Healthy polar bear count confounds doomsayers  
paul waldie  
WINNIPEG— From Thursday's Globe and Mail  
Published Wednesday, Apr. 04, 2012 8:44PM EDT  
Last updated Thursday, Apr. 05, 2012 5:05AM EDT  
The debate about climate change and its impact on polar bears has intensified
with the release of a survey that shows the bear population in a key part of
northern Canada is far larger than many scientists thought, and might be
growing.  
The number of bears along the western shore of Hudson Bay, believed to be
among the most threatened bear subpopulations, stands at 1,013 and could be
even higher, according to the results of an aerial survey released Wednesday
by the Government of Nunavut. That’s 66 per cent higher than estimates by
other researchers who forecasted the numbers would fall to as low as 610
because of warming temperatures that melt ice faster and ruin bears’ ability
to hunt. The Hudson Bay region, which straddles Nunavut and Manitoba, is
critical because it’s considered a bellwether for how polar bears are doing
elsewhere in the Arctic."  
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/healthy-polar-bear-count-
confounds-doomsayers/article2392523/

This makes one believe that some one is lying and that some one has an agenda
and that agenda has always relied on lies to propagate its story line and the
truth has never mattered, has it EV?

                    
                                                439. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 10, 2012 at 5:40 pm

"Cherry picking alert!!!!"

One single "healthy polar bear count" DOES NOT confound climate scientists.

In 2005, five of 19 polar bear subpopulations were known to be in decline (5
stable, 2 increasing, 7 unknown); by 2009, eight of the 19 subpopulations were
known to be in decline (3 stable, one increasing, 7 unknown).

I attended a leture by Prof Lindzen (of MIT) who showed a graph of the polar
bear population. The numbers had been declining, but then showed an sharp
increase - his "proof" that global warming was not a problem. What he
neglected to mention was that the "sharp increase" coincided with a ban on
polar bear hunting. So of course the polulation increased - correlation is NOT
causation.

                    
                                                440. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 10, 2012 at 5:53 pm

WAKE UP!!!!

What was it like the last time CO2 levels were as high as they are now?

A vivid picture of our climate’s future can be found in our past. Currently,
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels have reached 393 parts per million
(ppm). The last time CO2 was that high was around 3 million years ago, during
the Pliocene. Back then, CO2 levels remained at around 365 to 410 ppm for
thousands of years.

Global temperatures over this period is estimated to be 3 to 4°C warmer than
pre-industrial temperatures. Sea levels were around 25 metres higher than
current sea level (Dwyer 2008).

Doug - is this what you want to commit our planet to?

                    
                                                441. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 6:41 am

Meteorologist Mark Nolan stated: "I'm not sure which is more arrogant - to say
we caused [global warming] or that we can fix it."

EV: It is a certainty that Dr. Robert B. Laughlin knows far and away more
about this subject that you and your fellow foaming at the mouth "alarmist" do
and he has won a Nobel prize. Name one of your fellow "chicken little"
mentality type folks that have won a Nobel Prize.

“Please remain calm: The Earth will heal itself — Climate is beyond our power
to control…Earth doesn’t care about governments or their legislation. You
can’t find much actual global warming in present-day weather observations.
Climate change is a matter of geologic time, something that the earth
routinely does on its own without asking anyone’s permission or explaining
itself.” — Nobel Prize-Winning Stanford University Physicist Dr. Robert B.
Laughlin, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1998, and was formerly a
research scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

EV: Neither of these two folks below ever won a Nobel Prize for anything, did
they?  
“Unless we announce disasters no one will listen.” - Sir John Houghton, first
chairman of IPCC

“It doesn’t matter what is true, it only matters what people believe is true.”
- Paul Watson, co-founder of Greenpeace

EV: Pay some attention to what Huxley said and answer where you stand on this
regarding YOUR agw.  
"Scepticism is the highest of duties; blind faith the unpardonable sin."
Huxley

You seem so worried about Sea levels and act like YOU are going to do
something about what they do. I know that you still use the same amount of
fossil fuel produced energy that you always have because I rather doubt that,
if you heat your home or what ever cave you lay around in, you use only wood,
you probably do not use a tallow candle or a whale oil lamp for light and if
you go some where, do you saddle the horse or walk? I imagine that you do use
food that was raised using fossil fuels to produce and distribute and if that
is the case you are a terrible hypocrite, but in the minds of you people that
think that you just have to be members of some elite group because you
"believe", like your hero, Al Gore, who left a car out side of a venue in
defiance of Swedish law idle for an hour and he also took a private jet to get
to Sweden and then while screaming like you do about sea levels flooding
everything up to the next to top floor of the Empire State Building, (I, like
you, exaggerate some times but I make the exaggeration known, unlike what you
do) and soon, he buys beach front property in California. If you think that
these kinds of lies and hypocrisy helps to make your case, just keep it up.

Sea Level Drop  
The latest NASA satellite data show that sea levels have dropped 6 mm over the
last year – the biggest drop ever recorded since satellite data has been
taken. This is hardly the kind of acceleration Rahmstorf had in mind. You’d
think the media would be falling all over themselves to report this good news.
They have not. Only a tiny few German media outlets have reported the
plummeting sea level news.

http://notrickszone.com/2011/08/31/der-spiegel-global-warming-now-causes-sea-
level-drop-throug

                    
                                                442. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 3:31 pm

Why do you keep "cherry picking" the sea level data. I'm losing track of the
number of times i've tried to point this out. See
http://www.cmar.csiro.au/sealevel/ for the 130 year trend (another "hockey
stick")

And you keep recycling your old,tired arguments. Of course "Climate is beyond
our power to control" - but we can INFLUENCE it by adding lots of CO2 to the
atmosphere.

Why are you refusing to talk about the basic science?

                    
                                                443. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 14, 2012 at 4:16 am

EV: you are a strange and sad individual if you can not understand that the
sea levels have been raising since the end of the last ice age some 12,000
years ago, no argument there from me. It is only you "chicken little's" that
claim rapid and unprecedented rise in sea levels that make me wonder about
your intelligence and honesty; but, with you there is no puzzle to either of
the two issues, intelligence and honesty.

It appears that either you do not read your own sources or that you can not
understand what you pretend to read:  
"Our most recent estimate of changes in global averaged sea level since 1993
are estimated from satellite altimeter data (red) and since 1880 by combining
in situ sea level data from coastal tide gauges and the spatial patterns of
variability determined from satellite altimeter data (blue)."  
http://www.cmar.csiro.au/sealevel/

Evidently EV, you were unable to notice that the red line on the graph is in
decline and also be appraised of some "climategate" type altering of the tide
gauge readings of late since it is a known that the levels are not increasing
like your models have predicted.

                    
                                                444. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 2:50 pm

I guess you rely on nonsense like "the red line on the graph is in decline and
also be appraised of some “climategate”" because you don't understand the
importance of long term trends and you are trying to change the discussion
away from the most most important facts. Do you deny the 130 year long trend
of sea level rise? A slight drop for a few years does not mean much,
patricularly when there is good explanation (heavier than normal
percipitation). Let look a the FACTS  
(1) The ocean is warming is this causes the water to expand, resulting sea
level rise  
(2) The overall trend for glaciers is melting, resulting sea level rise

                    
                                                445. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 14, 2012 at 4:32 am

EV: Thanks for presenting this site: http://www.cmar.csiro.au/sealevel/ that
confirms what I had presented to you in this site:
http://notrickszone.com/2011/08/31/der-spiegel-global-warming-now-causes-sea-
level-drop-through-weather-shifts/

It appears that both you and your hero who we do not hear much from of late
and for that we can be extremely thankful, Al Gore, need to take a deep breath
and try to gain some scientific facts before you try to push your
anthropogenic global warming hoax further.

                    
                                                446. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 2:38 pm

Do you deny the 130 year long trend of sea level rise? A slight drop for a few
years does not mean much, patricularly when there is good explanation (heavier
than normal percipitation). Let look a the FACTS  
(1) The ocean is warming is this causes the water to expand, resulting sea
level rise  
(2) The overall trend for glaciers is melting, resulting sea level rise

                    
                                                447. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 7:13 am

EV: You really need to do some research before you let every one in on just
how irrational and delusional you really are. You had best WAKE UP!!!! because
this period was not so bad as you seem to want to make it out to be.

"The Pliocene, 5.3 to 2.6 million years ago,* was a time of global cooling
after the warmer Miocene. The cooling and drying of the global environment may
have contributed to the enormous spread of grasslands and savannas during this
time. The change in vegetation undoubtedly was a major factor in the rise of
long-legged grazers who came to live in these areas."

"Over the course of the Pliocene, the global climate became cooler and more
arid. The beginning of the epoch saw numerous fluctuations in temperature,
which gave way to the general cooling trend towards the end of the Pliocene.
This long term cooling, actually started in the Eocene and continued up to the
ice ages of the Pleistocene. During the Pliocene, large polar ice caps started
to develop and Antarctica became the frozen continent that it is today."

"It is uncertain what caused this climate cooling during the Pliocene. Changes
in the amount of heat transported by oceans has been suggested as one possible
explanation; higher concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere may
also have contributed. It is also possible that the raising of the Himalayas,
caused by plate collisions between India and Asia, accelerated the cooling
process."

EV: What is stated by Berkley at this site should really blow your mind and
make you wonder when they say that "higher concentrations of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere may also have contributed" to "the global climate became
cooler". Just what is one to believe, EV? This was as close to mentioning CO2
that I noticed and it was not in a context that you would like, is it EV?

"Generally though, the climate of the Pliocene is thought to have been much
warmer than it is today. The warmest phase was in the middle of the epoch, the
interval between three and four million years ago. The climate was especially
mild at high latitudes and certain species of both plants and animals existed
several hundred kilometers north of where their nearest relatives exist today.
Less ice at the poles also resulted in a sea level that is thought to have
been about 30 meters higher than today's."  
http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/tertiary/pliocene.php

This demonstrates that basically CO2 has had next to no influence on the
earth's climate in the past or in the present age, The Neocene, that we enjoy
today of moderate temperatures that allow for the existence of present day
life forms on earth such as "chicken littles" that are fun to toy with.

                    
                                                448. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 3:22 pm

Au contraire, CO2 is the main driver of the Earth's temperature. Do you want
to commit the Earth to a climate like the past , where the sea levels wouild
be about 30 meters higher than today? Again , here the undisputed basic
science:

            1. Greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being habitable 
            2. CO2 (a “non-condensing” GHG) is the main driver of the temperature of the Earth 
            3. Increasing the concentration of GHGs (primarily from the burning of fossil fuels) will cause the temperature of the Earth to increase 
            4. When considering the temperature of the Earth, you have to include the ocean temperatures (which have absorbed 80-90% of the temperature increase caused by the increase of GHG’s over the last 50 years) 
            5. The Earth is in “energy imbalance” – less energy is radiated that is absorbed from the Sun (hence the Earth is continuing to warm)
                        
                                                    449. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                        

April 11, 2012 at 11:09 am

I'm sure that EV can dream up some lie or link to Skeptical Science to dispute
what this person who has lived with the elements in this area notorious for
horrible storms and bad weather to try to maintain that what he reports is not
true. I know who I will believe and it will not be some one that consistently
makes a mockery of the truth.

Published April 10, 2012  
“In my 26 years of fishing, this season's were the worst conditions I had ever
experienced – the storms, the ice,” Captain Keith Colburn told Fox411’s Pop
Tarts column. “I can’t really describe it – my heart was racing, and we were
on constant high alert. You realize quickly that you aren’t in control of your
own destiny. Mother nature is. We were tested on a lot of different fronts.”  
http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2012/04/10/deadliest-catch-captain-keith-
colburn-says-this-season-conditions-most-horrific/?intcmp=features

                    
                                                450. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 12:32 am

Sounds like one of the predicted effects of climate change to me.

                    
                                                451. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 3:42 am

Delusional and dishonest fools have nothing to worry about when they feel that
they can claim that if it is a warm event, then it is global warming and
climate change and, on the other hand, if it is a cold event then that is
merely weather and the event is also a result of their hoax, anthropogenic
global warming. If one could go to Las Vegas and operate under these rules,
one would soon break the house and be banned from the tables because how could
one lose?

                    
                                                452. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 2:44 pm

Where do you come up with this nonsense ("Delusional and dishonest fools have
nothing to worry about when they feel that they can claim that if it is a warm
event, then it is global warming and climate change and, on the other hand, if
it is a cold event then that is merely weather") - I guess you invent it to
try bolster you case. Most climate scientists think that global warming "loads
the dice" in favor of more extreme events.

                    
                                                453. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 3:43 am

Enviro says:  
April 8, 2012 at 12:21 pm  
"Just trying to make you understand ths AGW is real. In past geologic times,
there were aligators in the Arctic and sea levels were hundreds of feet higher
– are those the conditions that you’d like condem the Earth to?"

I do not know if this goes to the top of the inane, totally lacking in logic
or thought of a long list of similar remarks you have put forth, EV. It is
obvious that you will continue to do so and that is what makes this exchange
with you so much fun to find out what the latest absurd comment will be.  
Yes, during the earth's 4.5 billion years of existence there have been
multitudes of climate changes, from the whole earth warm enough for what you
maintain to be true for the arctic and also for trees that have left their
fossilized leaves in the shale deposits on Antarctica. How much of this has
been due to climate change or due to tectonic shifts of the continents is
something I would not ask you because you would not know even how to find the
answer; but, one thing is certain and that is that there were no anthropogenic
influences on ANY of these changes.

It is easy to see that you are so crippled by your believe that the trace gas,
CO2, is responsible for the earth's climate that you can not look at this
issue realistically and that is truly sad. While you naively take this route
for reasons unknown to even you, others do so to enrich themselves by pushing
this hoax and that is criminal, and to destroy peoples trust in science while
they pursue their self serving, monetarily enriching, control grabbing scam is
beyond being criminal when their action effects billions of people by
attempting to deny them the use of energy that has brought humanity from a
life of a simple, hard and short existence to one of pleasure and
accomplishment, for those fortunate enough to have this energy, never before
seen on earth and that energy comes from coal, nuclear and hydro produced
electricity and for transportation almost exclusively from petroleum or
natural gas. I expect EV to maintain that a Airbus A-380 can fly using
batteries.

It seems that with the stupid comment that EV made, they want to discount that
this occurred after the event that they seem to imagine would be so
horrendous, a warm arctic, and they must be once more reminded that if
something is alive, warmth is much preferable to cold any day and also they
should be aware that where alligators and crocodiles live today there are also
humans and many other life forms coexisting with them; but, to realize these
facts would require thought and logic and that is something that has been
shown to be totally lacking in this individual's modus operandi .

"Abrupt climate change, on the other hand, has very different causes and
effects. While climate is often remarkably steady with expected norms of daily
and seasonal fluctuations, paleoclimate research has shown that climate can in
fact change very quickly, in a matter of seasons and years rather than
centuries or millennia as was previously thought.

One example of abrupt climate change is an event that happened some 11,600
years ago at the termination of the Younger Dryas cold event, which was the
last blast of cold climate at the end of the last Ice Age some (note #1)Ice
core records from Greenland show in less than a decade there was a sudden
warming of around 15 degrees Celsius (27oF) of the annual mean temperature. At
the same time a doubling of annual precipitation occurred. Researcher Richard
Alley suggests that not only does the climate system have dials that slowly
alter climate patterns, there are also switches that can suddenly shift
climate in dramatic ways. (Source: Alley, et al. 1993. Graphic above from
CLIVAR.) This abrupt event can be found in paleo records from many parts of
the world, although not necessarily to such an extreme degree."  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/ctl/abrupt.html  
Note #1, I had to edit NOAA's presentation to make it more understandable,
imagine that.

"Due to variations in the Earth's orbital process, the planet has experienced
a series of Ice Ages over the past 2.6 million years. The most recent cycle
culminated in the Last Glacial Maximum (or LGM) some 18,000 years ago, the
world- especially the northern hemisphere- was a very different place than it
is today. Ice covered large areas- nearly 32% of the Earth's land area, sea
level was about 120 meters lower than it is today, and many large, non-extinct
mammals such as mammoths roamed the northern lands (Ruddiman, 2001).  
The Ice Ages which have dominated the Earth's environment for around the past
two million years are thought to be caused primarily by orbital fluctuations
that, while changing the sunlight received by only a few percent, have major
impact on climate systems. These orbital forces include the 22,000 year cycle
of precession, 100,000 and 400,000 cycles of eccentricity, and 41,000-year
cycles of Earth's obliquity or axial tilt. Scientists are still researching
exactly what mechanisms trigger the flux and flow of Ice Ages."  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/ctl/clisci100k.html

EV: I know from past experience with you that you lack the ability to read and
understand so I will high light this FACT for you and we are talking about
CLIMATE and not weather. "The Ice Ages which have dominated the Earth's
environment for around the past two million years are thought to be caused
primarily by orbital fluctuations that, while changing the sunlight received
by only a few percent, have major impact on climate systems." Did you see the
lack of any mention of your hated CO2 in the above presentation?

                    
                                                454. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 13, 2012 at 3:17 pm

Yes - the ice ages were caused by orbital variations - but the CO2 feedback
(which influences the H2O feedback) is what influenced the dramatic changes. I
hate to keep repeating what I've said before, but you don't seem understand
the BASIC science of global warming. It’s really smple:

            1. Greenhouse gases are responsible for our planet being habitable 
            2. CO2 (a “non-condensing” GHG) is the main driver of the temperature of the Earth 
            3. Increasing the concentration of GHGs will cause the temperature of the Earth to increase 
            4. When considering the temperature of the Earth, you have to include the ocean temperatures (which have absorbed 80-90% of the temperature increase caused by the increase of GHG’s over the last 50 years) 
            5. The Earth is in “energy imbalance” – less energy is radiated that is absorbed from the Sun (hence the Earth IS continuing to warm)

You have yet to present anything which refutes the above 5 points

And what was it like the last time CO2 levels were as high as they are now?

A vivid picture of our climate’s future can be found in our past. Currently,
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels have reached 393 parts per million
(ppm). The last time CO2 was that high was around 3 million years ago, during
the Pliocene. Back then, CO2 levels remained at around 365 to 410 ppm for
thousands of years.

Global temperatures over this period is estimated to be 3 to 4°C warmer than
pre-industrial temperatures. Sea levels were around 25 metres higher than
current sea level (Dwyer 2008).

Doug – is this what you want to commit our planet to?

                    
                                                455. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 10:00 am

I. There is no argument from most people that greenhouse gases are responsible
for our planet being habitable, unlike the moon and Mars that basically has no
atmosphere. Note the key word here, EV, and that is atmosphere.

I hope that there are some out there that realize the earth's atmosphere is
made up of 78.08% nitrogen, 20.95% oxygen, ( 99.03% of the atmosphere is made
up of these two gases) .93% argon and .0001% neon, helium and krypton for
constant components and .4% water vapor that constitutes 95% of what cause the
green house affect and we had best not forget CO2 at .036% and the rest is
made up of trace gases such as CH4,SO2,03 and NO, and NO2.? These trace gases
are very important, H2O being the most important because it contributes 95% to
the green house effect, and with out these gases the surface of the earth
would too cool/cold to support life as we know it.

            1. When will you ever use logic and just plain common sense to realize that a trace gas that is 1 & 1/2 times heavier than the rest of the atmosphere, [#1]as this site that I presented you with before but is beyond your ability to understand and you never gave me any answer for what the percentage of CO2 there is at 18,000′ feet compared to sea level? I will present you with some examples to try to get you to understand that CO2 IS NOT the driver of the earth's atmosphere and never has been. Water vapor makes up 95% of what constitutes the green house effect on earth.

"It is interesting to note that, even though carbon dioxide is necessary for
life on Earth to exist, there is precious little of it in Earth’s atmosphere.
As of 2008, only 39 out of every 100,000 molecules of air were CO2, and it
will take mankind’s CO2 emissions 5 more years to increase that number by 1,
to 40."  
http://www.drroyspencer.com/global-warming-natural-or-manmade/

This below should try to get you to realize just what one part per million is
comparable to, but you are incapable of understanding what the average eight
year old child can grasp.  
One inch in 16 miles,  
One penny in $10,000.  
I know that you understand that these 112 additional ppm are spread out over
this 16 miles in different one inch segments and wouldn't it be a task to be
told to sort out the 392 pennies from the number that it would take to make up
$10,000.  
At 392 parts per million CO2 is a minor constituent of earth's atmosphere-
less than 4/100ths of 1% of all gases present. Compared to former geologic
times, earth's current atmosphere is CO2- impoverished.

Let’s picture this in another way to really get an idea of the scale of CO2
compared to the total atmosphere. The Eiffel Tower in Paris is 324 metres high
(1063ft). If the height of the Eiffel Tower represented the total size of the
atmosphere then the natural level of CO2 would be 8.75 centimetres of that
height (3.4 inches) and the amount added by humans up until today would be an
extra 3.76 centimetres (1.5 inches)

EV wants people to believe that this trace gas is the driver of the earth's
climate. Can EV tell me what they have ever been able to "trap" with a gas? It
is unbelievable that anyone could be so naive and stupid to expect others to
be taken in by this scam that they can't seem to see through on their own, Oh
well.

            1. Milankovic cycles mesh very well with greenhouse gas forcing in explaining ice ages. Milankovic cycles are wobbles in the Earth's orbit that trigger entering or exiting a glacier period. The problem is the Milankovic forcing is too small to account for the actual changes. So when at the end of the glacial period, as the orbital forcing triggers a small warming, the warming evaporates some CO2 from the ocean, the CO2 warms the air further, causing more CO2 to evaporate, etc, until voila the Earth exits the glacial period. So the two forcings work together where only one would be insufficient. In short, increases of CO2 has never cause the earth to "burn up" in the past when the levels were many times higher than today; so why would that happen now? Also EV, where is the anthropogenic influence in any of the earth's past climate cycles? There is none  
The first thing one notices is how little correlation CO2 has with temperature

            2. ………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Carboniferous……………14…………………………800  
Neogene…………………..14…………………………280

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Cretaceous…………….18………………………1700  
Paleogene……………..18………………………..500

………………Mean Surface Temp C………Mean CO2 ppm  
Permian…………………16………………………..900  
Jurassic…………………16.5……………………1950

            1. I have no idea how many times or ways I have to answer this question, but here it is again:  
"As water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” [The
Global Conveyer Belt has suddenly stopped for several speculated reason in the
past and caused dramatic and rapid climate changes always to the cold side;
therefore, warm is preferable to cold any day]  
http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/oceanography/ocean-earth-system/ocean-
water-cycle/

            2. This one is so ludicrous because the earth is NOT in any kind of imbalance because, I imagine that EV wants one to believe,of an increase in CO2 that is an extremely minor green house gas. I offered this challenge to EV before and got some foolish bunch of BS that they wanted one to believe was an experiment with introducing "just a little bit" of CO2 to nitrogen & O2 and then take a photo or some such nonsense. 

EV should know that every lab experiment every done trying to correlate
"warming" with CO2 has failed! If you can show me some empirical test results
I would be glad to look at them - NOTE not computer models or explanations -
test results. Everyone is well aware of IR radiation on CO2 and that CO2
infused atmospheres cool slower but to date there has not been one
reproducible experiment that links CO2 to warming in the atmosphere - a rather
inconvenient fact wouldn't you say? I would like for EV to supply me with the
mathematical derivation of CO2 forcing.

# 1: ppm of CO2 with altitude and mass of CO2 in atmosphere to 8520 metres

beyond which there is practically no CO2  
http://greenparty.ca/blogs/169/2009-01-03/ppm-co2-altitude-and-mass-
co2-atmosphere-8520-metres-beyond-which-there-practic

                    
                                                456. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 3:08 pm

Re #5 ("earth is NOT in any kind of imbalance") - see

http://www.cgd.ucar.edu/ccr/aboutus/staff/kiehl/EarthsGlobalEnergyBudget.pdf,
which shows that the earth absorbed an average of about .9 watts/square meter
annually from March 2000 to May 2004 (a short time period, admittedly, but
that was based on the best data available)

Also - the oceans have been warming for a while - perhaps over 100 years. That
energy must come from an energy imbalance.

                    
                                                457. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 15, 2012 at 3:27 pm

Re #1 and #2The importance CO2

This is what you seem unwilling to confront - CO2 is the driver of the Earth's
temperature. It's really simple - what is your problem with understanding it?

Let's take this one step at a time. Here is a list of the GHG's and their
residency time:

Gas Approximative time of residence in the atmosphère  
CO2 100 years  
Methane 12 years  
Nitrous oxide 120 years  
Halocarbons from several weeks up to 50.000 years  
Water vapor 10 days

CO2 and Methane are "forcings" - CAUSING the temperature to change as their
atmospheric concentration changes. (they absorb the infrared radiation and
warm the atmosphere)

Water vapor is a "feedback" - changing in response to temperature changes

If the "non condensing" GHG's were removed from the atmosphere , the
"condensing" GHG's would, over time, "condense out" of the atmosphere

"water vapor is indeed responsible for a major portion of Earth’s warming over
the past century and for projected future warming. However, water vapor is not
the cause of this warming. This is a critical, if subtle, distinction between
the role of greenhouse gases as either forcings or feedbacks. In this case,
anthropogenic emissions of CO2, methane, and other gases are warming the
Earth. This rising average temperature increases evaporation rates and
atmospheric water vapor concentrations. Those, in turn, result in additional
warming."

see http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/2008/02/common-climate-
misconceptions-the-water-vapor-feedback-2/

                    
                                                458. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 16, 2012 at 5:19 am

"Honolulu International Airport (IATA: HNL, ICAO: PHNL, FAA LID: HNL) is the
principal aviation gateway of the City & County of Honolulu and the State of
Hawaii and is identified as one of the busiest airports in the United States,
with traffic now exceeding 21 million passengers a year and rising."  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honolulu_International_Airport

I wonder if the Mauna Loa CO2 report take into consideration that in 1984
there was a total of 5,261,373 flights in Hawaii and in 2010 the Total
Statewide was 30,479,154 or 5.79 times more flights and I know that you know
what powers these aircraft?

The obvious question is how much of this increase in CO2 is from aircraft and
how much of it is from other sources?

                    
                                                459. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 18, 2012 at 3:33 pm

Such a stupid question does not deserve a thoughtful response.

                    
                                                460. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 4:15 pm

EV; How could one expect a thoughtful response from some one who does not even
understand the question? I well imagine that you could see no connection
between the number of flights and the increase in CO2 when you are saying that
it is the use of fossil fuels that is causing this earth threatening increase
in your dreaded substance and, if I'm not mistaken ALL of the millions of
airline flights are powered by a petroleum fuel.

                    
                                                461. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 18, 2012 at 3:38 pm

Doug

Re the Volt:

GM’s Former Vice Chairman, Bob Lutz, slammed GOP media pundits yesterday for
spreading “pure fiction” about the Chevy Volt and other electric vehicles.

Conservative commentators — led by Rush Limbaugh and Fox News — have taken
every opportunity to tear down the Chevy Volt, calling it “crappy,” a “Fred
Flinstone car,” and an “exploding Obamamobile.” They’ve even called Volt
drivers “dorks.”

The attacks have gotten so intense, hardcore Republicans are now slamming the
onslaught of ludicrous comments. Lutz, a Republican who once called climate
change a “total crock of shit,” has become increasingly critical of fellow
conservatives who have undertaken a vicious media campaign against the Volt.

Speaking yesterday at the Hudson Institute, a conservative think thank, Lutz
called out the “knee-jerk” pundits who have tried to turn the Volt into a
political joke. E&E News reported on his comments:

“The unfortunate thing is that because electric cars are very associated with
the left-wing environmental green movement to combat global warming and reduce
[carbon dioxide], the idea of vehicle electrification triggers this visceral
reaction on the part of conservatives — which is, if it’s electric it must be
a product of the left-wing, Democratic enviro-political machine, therefore we
hate it,” said Lutz, a self-described conservative.

“This is an unfortunate, knee-jerk reaction because what the Volt and other
vehicles like it are about is … shifting portions of the American mobile
sector onto a more efficient and domestically produced power source,” he said.

“No electric vehicle has ever caught fire [in use], and yet the right is
constantly talking about the flammability, overheating, fire hazard of the
electric vehicle,” he told the conservative audience. “Folks, it’s pure
fiction. Please get it out of your heads.”

Last month, Lutz wrote a column in Forbes lamenting that “all the icons of
conservatism are (shock, horror!) deliberately not telling the truth” about
the Volt.

Lutz called Charles Krauthammer — his former “hero-figure on the Right” — a
member of the “the list of right-wing pundits I no longer take seriously” for
claiming that the Volt was an example of Obama’s “interventionist policies.”

In fact, the Volt has been in development since 2006 — two years before Obama
was even elected.

Lutz isn’t the only conservative who is roiled by the GOP punditocracy’s
campaign against electric vehicles. Last month, Lee Speckerman, another self-
professed lover of Fox News, went on the network’s morning show to bash its
commentators’ “fetish for demonizing the Volt.” Speckerman argued the Volt was
“the iPhone of the American automobile industry.”

Despite the continued attacks and a cycle of very sluggish sales, March was
GM’s best sales month ever for the Volt.

                    
                                                462. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 4:08 pm

EV is very hung up on the VOLT and that is good because he doesn't know
anything about the earth's climate or CO2. I really wonder if the one that
spreads all of this nonsense that is not proud enough of it to use their own
name is the proud owner of a VOLT. I remind him of some particulars about the
VOLT. If it was any good and was what the public wanted, why would it have to
be so heavily subsidized and it still does not sell. I imagine that EV, being
a neo Marxist, imagines that people should be FORCED to buy the thing.  
"GM has just announced it will be idling the plant (and the 1,300 workers at
that plant) where the “game changing” Chevy Volt electric car is – uh, was –
built. GM says it’s only temporary – until they figure out how to “align
production with demand.” It could be a long wait for those workers.  
GM, like every car company, has embraced the politics of green because it
leads to taxpayer-financed green. Think Solyndra was a boondoggle? The
Mackinac Center for Public Policy estimates that the actual cost-per-car of
each Volt, once all the federal subsidies are factored in, comes to $250,000
or $3 billion, total. (Lookee here for more.)  
Guess who paid for that?  
It wasn’t GM’s money. It was your money. And mine. And the money taken from
millions of other taxpayers, all poured into the coffers of GM to further the
advancement of otherwise economically untenable projects that would never have
see the light of day except for the fact that we have a system of crony
capitalism that distorts the free market like a funhouse mirror."  
http://epautos.com/2012/03/03/the-volt-sleeps-with-the-fishes/

Besides natural gas there is at this time no alternative for petroleum for
vehicles but we should not forget the Chevy Volt & this little gem to help the
American working middle class out, lots of jobs created with this one, in
Finland, that broke down on its first run out of the showroom in the US and
had to be hauled back in on a diesel powered truck.  
"Vice President Joseph Biden heralded the Energy Department’s $529 million
loan to the start-up electric car company called Fisker as a bright new path
to thousands of American manufacturing jobs. But two years after the loan was
announced, the job of assembling the flashy electric Fisker Karma sports car
has been outsourced to Finland."  
http://www.canadafreepress.com/index.php/article/41545

"Despite the continued attacks and a cycle of very sluggish sales, March was
GM’s best sales month ever for the Volt." It sounds like Government Motors
finally sold one of these things and it was probably to a government agency
because no one else, including EV, is buying them. GM’s Former Vice Chairman,
Bob Lutz is also one of the reason why the company went broke in the first
place so his endorsement is really worth a lot, right EV.

                    
                                                463. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 9:14 am

Now we have EV making this totally contradictory statement:  
"Do you deny the 130 year long trend of sea level rise? A slight drop for a
few years does not mean much, patricularly when there is good explanation
(heavier than normal percipitation). Let look a the FACTS  
(1) The ocean is warming is this causes the water to expand, resulting sea
level rise  
(2) The overall trend for glaciers is melting, resulting sea level rise"

I attempted to explain to EV that the sea level has been raising since the end
of the last ice age and that has been far longer ago than the 130 year trend
that they ignorantly mention; so, where is there any argument here? Now they
are showing just how confused they really are, as though there was ever any
question regarding this point of being confused and unable to use logic or,
for EV, the least common of the senses. So heavier than normal precipitation
cause the sea levels to DROP? Where is the logic in that absurdity? Where does
this precipitation go after it is in cloud form? One would think that it will
end up in the seas but not using EV's "logic".

"Sea Level Rise: Still Slowing Down  
Back in the summer of 2009, we ran a piece titled “Sea Level Rise: An Update
Shows a Slowdown” in which we showed that the much ballyhooed “faster rate of
sea level rise during the satellite era” was actually slowing down.  
http://www.worldclimatereport.com/index.php/2011/04/07/sea-level-rise-still-
slowing-down/

As for your #1 irrelevant statement. You CAN not understand this, CAN you? “As
water travels through the water cycle, some water will become part of The
Global Conveyer Belt and can take up to 1,000 years to complete this global
circuit. It represents in a simple way how ocean currents carry warm surface
waters from the equator toward the poles and moderate global climate.” What
part of 1,000 years do you not understand?

I have seen where the sea levels in the past have been much higher than at
present as shown by the limestone islands and coast that grace the Andaman Sea
coast of Thailand, I have seen the signs of much higher sea levels during the
two times I was out in Vietnam's Halong Bay that has spectacular limestone
islands. Most recently I saw the signs of a much higher sea level when I was
on Zanzibar and saw where the Indian Ocean has eroded the ancient coral that
is the foundation for this island and was much higher in the past.

                    
                                                464. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 10:06 am

"The first results from the lab's CLOUD ("Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets")
experiment published in Nature today confirm that cosmic rays spur the
formation of clouds through ion-induced nucleation. Current thinking posits
that half of the Earth's clouds are formed through nucleation. The paper is
entitled Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia and galactic cosmic rays in
atmospheric aerosol nucleation.  
This has significant implications for climate science because water vapour and
clouds play a large role in determining global temperatures. Tiny changes in
overall cloud cover can result in relatively large temperature changes."

"When Dr Kirkby first described the theory in 1998, he suggested cosmic rays
"will probably be able to account for somewhere between a half and the whole
of the increase in the Earth's temperature that we have seen in the last
century."  
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/08/25/cern_cloud_cosmic_ray_first_results/

While in EV's eyes this is a "test":  
"Actually very simple:  
1. Shine an incandescent light (lot of infrared radiation – otherwise known as “heat”)  
2. Take a movie of the light in the infrared range  
3. Put a bottle of nitrogen and oxygen between the light and the camera  
4. Start the camera  
5. Add a little CO2 to the bottle (only a tiny bit is needed)  
6. Watch the incredible reduction infrared radiation that the movie captures  
This proves that CO2 blocks infrared radiation.  
Or this:  
Iain Stewart demonstrates infrared radiation absorption by CO2"  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ot5n9m4whaw

This is the test that Dr. Kirkby to prove that CO2 is not the driver of the
earth's climate and CO2 wasn't even in the test that was carried out at CERN.

"CERN is no fringe laboratory pursuing crackpot theories at some remote
backwater. CERN, based in Geneva, is the European Organization for Nuclear
Research, a 50-yearold institution, originally founded by 12 countries and now
counting 20 country-members. It services 6,500 particle physicists -- half of
the world's total -- in 500 institutes and universities around the world. It
is building the $2.4-billion Large Hadron Collider, the world's most powerful
particle accelerator. And it is home to Jasper Kirkby's long-languished CLOUD
project, among the most significant scientific experiments to be proposed in
our time. Finally, almost a decade after Dr. Kirkby's proposal first saw the
light of day, the funding is in place and the work has begun in earnest."  
http://www.nationalpost.com/news/story.html?id=975f250d-ca5d-4f40-b687-a1672ed1f684

"CLOUD uses a particle beam from CERN as a stand-in for cosmic rays, and fires
them through an ultra-clean steel chamber filled with select atmospheric
gases, to see if and how particles that could nucleate clouds are formed.
Project head Jasper Kirkby proposed the experiment back in 1998. But it had a
hard time getting off the ground – perhaps in part because Kirkby received
some bad press for emphasizing the importance of cosmic rays to climate change
(see this story from the National Post). CLOUD finally got going in 2006, and
they started work with the full kit in November 2009 (here’s a CERN video
update about that)."  
http://blogs.nature.com/news/2010/12/sunny_days_for_cloud_experimen.html

"To find out, Kirkby and his team are bringing the atmosphere down to Earth in
an experiment called Cosmics Leaving Outdoor Droplets (CLOUD). The team fills
a custom-built chamber with ultrapure air and chemicals believed to seed
clouds: water vapour, sulphur dioxide, ozone and ammonia. They then bombard
the chamber with protons from the same accelerator that feeds the Large Hadron
Collider, the world's most powerful particle smasher. As the synthetic cosmic
rays stream in, the group carefully samples the artificial atmosphere to see
what effect the rays are having.  
Early results seem to indicate that cosmic rays do cause a change. The high-
energy protons seemed to enhance the production of nanometre-sized particles
from the gaseous atmosphere by more than a factor of ten."  
http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110824/full/news.2011.504.html

OK, EV, the above describes a TEST and experiment and do you see CO2
mentioned?

                    
                                                465. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 10:14 am

"CERN's 8,000 scientists may not be able to find the hypothetical Higgs boson,
but they have made an important contribution to climate physics, prompting
climate models to be revised.  
The first results from the lab's CLOUD ("Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets")
experiment published in Nature today confirm that cosmic rays spur the
formation of clouds through ion-induced nucleation. Current thinking posits
that half of the Earth's clouds are formed through nucleation. The paper is
entitled Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia and galactic cosmic rays in
atmospheric aerosol nucleation.  
This has significant implications for climate science because water vapour and
clouds play a large role in determining global temperatures. Tiny changes in
overall cloud cover can result in relatively large temperature changes.  
Unsurprisingly, it's a politically sensitive topic, as it provides support for
a "heliocentric" rather than "anthropogenic" approach to climate change: the
sun plays a large role in modulating the quantity of cosmic rays reaching the
upper atmosphere of the Earth." (Imagine that EV, the sun has an influence on
the earth's climate.)

"Climate models will have to be revised, confirms CERN in supporting
literature (pdf):  
"[I]t is clear that the treatment of aerosol formation in climate models will
need to be substantially revised, since all models assume that nucleation is
caused by these vapours [sulphuric acid and ammonia] and water alone.  
The work involves over 60 scientists in 17 countries.  
Veteran science editor Nigel Calder, who brought the theory to wide public
attention with the book The Chilling Stars, co-authored with the father of the
theory Henrik Svensmark, has an explanation and background on his blog, here,
and offers possible reasons on why the research, mooted in the late 1990s, has
taken so long.  
Svensmark, who is no longer involved with the CERN experiment, says he
believes the solar-cosmic ray factor is just one of four factors in climate.
The other three are: volcanoes, a "regime shift" that took place in 1977, and
residual anthropogenic components.  
When Dr Kirkby first described the theory in 1998, he suggested cosmic rays
"will probably be able to account for somewhere between a half and the whole
of the increase in the Earth's temperature that we have seen in the last
century."  
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/08/25/cern_cloud_cosmic_ray_first_results/

                    
                                                466. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 19, 2012 at 10:18 am

"Sunspots and cosmic rays anticorrelate because sunspots are the result of a
lot of magnetic field lines caused by circulating charges in the sun getting
their act together and deflecting cosmic rays from the cosmos, not from the
sun, from hitting the earth, not all, but quite a few. There is a clear
experimental effect – lots of sunspots, less cosmic rays hitting Colorado. At
the same time there are less clouds (Svensmark) when there are less cosmic
rays. Less clouds means the earth heats up. So its a two step process. More
sunspots, less cosmic rays, warmer earth. During the last 50 years or so,
there have been record numbers of sunspots, low cosmic ray fluxes and somewhat
higher temperatures. Read Nir Shaviv's analysis of the effect leading to a
maximum estimate of 1.3 degrees change for a doubling of CO2, assuming
everything besides cosmic rays is due to CO2. That agrees with Roy Spencer's
latest CO2 sensitivity calc. And both of these are very generous to CO2.  
Manmade CO2 is a disappearingly small effect."  
http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110824/full/news.2011.504.html

                    
                                                467. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 20, 2012 at 1:25 pm

Doug -

Thought you might like to know that the American Meteorological Society (AMS)
is in the process of revising it's statment on climate change. Though
currently in "draft" mode, the new statement makes the unequivocal case for
human-induced climate change.

You can read more about it on one of my favorite blogs -
http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/04/19/467274/nasas-jameshansen-reviews-
draft-american-meteorological-society-climate-statement-stronger-but-still-
inadequate/

(I know you don't like Hansen or the ThinkProgress Web site, but please pay
attention to what the new AMS statement will contain)

WAKE UP!!!!!

                    
                                                468. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4b46b3ce3380b1e1c0457411d4e8eb28?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Enviro says:
                    

April 20, 2012 at 3:19 pm

Doug –

It’s been fun “jousting” with you about climate change – you’ve really taught
me a lot about the mental state of “deniers”:  
1. They like to insult the “believers” – perhaps because that gives them a sense of moral authority when the facts are against them  
2. They so believe that climate change is a hoax that they are unwilling to accept any science that proves them wrong (e.g., CO2 is the main driver of climate change, significantly increasing the CO2 in the atmosphere (e.g., to 450ppm) will significantly warm the Earth’s atmosphere (perhaps by 2 degrees C for 450 ppm CO2), etc.)  
3. They do not believe there will be significant consequences with a warmer world (high sea levels, more droughts, floods, heat waves, cold snaps, etc.) and do not understand that the costs of inaction probably exceed the costs of action  
4. They cherry-pick the data and grasp at irrelevant facts, assuming that if they can find a single flaw in the vast amount of data that supports climate change, then the “theory” of AGW will be invalidated  
5. They are unwilling to take seriously the statements by the worlds’ preeminent scientific organizations regarding climate change, all of which express something like ” man-made climate change is real and poses a threat to every living thing on the earth.”  
6. They think that tens of thousands of scientist can engage in an elaborate hoax  
7. They are unwilling to admit that the “denial machine” is driven by (a) the fossil fuel industry, which stands to lose huge profits when the economy “decarbonizes”, (b) citizens who distrust science because it contradicts their other beliefs (those who deny evolution, etc.), (c) those who distrust the government because doing something about climate change requires some government regulations (e.g., carbon taxes/fees)  
8. They are unwilling to concede that there is even a remote possibility the AGW is a threat to civilization, and are unwilling to go along with even simple “no regrets” steps to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels.

I’ll be traveling most of the next two months, so this is my last post to this
site.

                    
                                                469. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 22, 2012 at 10:56 am

I wonder what EV and his hero, James Hansen, (might as well mention his other
like minded hero, Al Gore, who claimed that agw skeptics were people that
didn't believe that man had walked on the moon when some of these people
actually did WALK ON THE MOON)  
"Two Apollo-era astronauts and two prominent former NASA scientists will speak
at The Heartland Institute's Seventh International Conference on Climate
Change (ICCC-7), taking place in Chicago on May 21-23. The four men were among
49 signatories to a March 28 letter to NASA and the Goddard Institute for
Space Studies (GISS) urging the agencies to cease their "unbridled advocacy"
of anthropogenic global warming. Dr. Harrison Schmitt, the first scientist and
last man to walk on the moon in the Apollo 17 mission, and Apollo 7 lunar
module pilot Walter Cunningham will talk about how NASA's "unproven and
unsupported remarks" on global warming damage the agency's reputation. The
astronauts will be joined in the discussion by Harold Doiron, who worked for
decades on vehicle stability and design at NASA, and Thomas Wysmuller, a
meteorologist for the Royal Dutch Weather Bureau in Amsterdam and a long-time
employee and consultant for NASA.

Two Apollo-era astronauts and two prominent former NASA scientists will speak
at The Heartland Institute's Seventh International Conference on Climate
Change (ICCC-7), taking place in Chicago on May 21-23. The four men were among
49 signatories to a March 28 letter to NASA and the Goddard Institute for
Space Studies (GISS) urging the agencies to cease their "unbridled advocacy"
of anthropogenic global warming. (Read the letter here.)

Dr. Harrison Schmitt, the first scientist and last man to walk on the moon in
the Apollo 17 mission, and Apollo 7 lunar module pilot Walter Cunningham will
talk about how NASA's "unproven and unsupported remarks" on global warming
damage the agency's reputation."  
http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2012/04/19/prweb9418654.DTL

EV: These people possess something that you and your kind will never have and
that is logic, common sense and most important, integrity. I will submit a
couple other post to close out my experiment of finding out just how
irrational, delusional and dishonest the anthropogenic global warming crowd of
clowns is. I must add, EV, that no matter how many different ways or from how
many different sources you present a lie, it will always be that, a lie.

                    
                                                470. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 23, 2012 at 1:49 pm

            1. If you were/are insulted; so be it. You presented NO facts of anything to support your flawed position. 
            2. Anthropogenic climate change has been proven time and again to be a hoax for governments and certain organizations and individuals to gain CONTROL because if one controls the energy, who cares about anything else in a developed society?  
“The desire to save humanity is always a false front for the urge to rule it”
— H L Mencken

            3. There have been no extremes in any weather event that have not occurred previously and were more sever; note this:  
"Severe drought in 1934 covered 80% of the country, compared with 25% in 2011  
In June, 1934 the entire country had triple digit heat. We didn’t come
anywhere close to that this summer."  
http://docs.lib.noaa.gov/rescue/mwr/062/mwr-062-06-0212.pdf  
Today, the disaster is reported immediately, relayed around the world by
satellites, and seen live in the living rooms of millions on television. It
certainly looks as though things are getting worse, because we are seeing more
of them.  
It’s all a matter of perception.
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/coldest_and_warmest_days_in_the_united_states/  
The Worst US Winter Storms  
http://www.epicdisasters.com/index.php/site/comments/the_worst_us_winter_storms/  
Also note the high temperature extremes that I supplied you with that HAVE not
been broken by your non warming climate.  
http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0001375.html  
Nor has there been an increase in Hurricanes in the US since your type
predicted more sever occurrences after Katrina. These are FACTS and not some
made up hyperbolic bit of BS.

            4. How can a "FACT" be irrelevant? 
            5. Your "worlds preeminent scientific organizations regarding climate change " are, for the most part, nothing better than harlots being paid to present the views that the governments want put forth( Example the UN's IPCC) so that they can gain the control and revenue from phony "cap and tax" carbon taxes, that, even if CO2 was a problem, would do nothing to alleviate it. 
            6. I gave you examples of tens of thousands of REAL scientist that have not sold their souls to the devil for a few shekels:  
“I am ashamed of what climate science has become today.” The science
“community is relying on an inadequate model to blame CO2 and innocent
citizens for global warming in order to generate funding and to gain
attention. If this is what ‘science’ has become today, I, as a scientist, am
ashamed.” — Research Chemist William C. Gilbert published a study in August
2010 in the journal Energy & Environment titled “The thermodynamic
relationship between surface temperature and water vapor concentration in the
troposphere” and he published a paper in August 2009 titled “Atmospheric
Temperature Distribution in a Gravitational Field.”  
“The dysfunctional nature of the climate sciences is nothing short of a
scandal. Science is too important for our society to be misused in the way it
has been done within the Climate Science Community.” The global warming
establishment “has actively suppressed research results presented by
researchers that do not comply with the dogma of the IPCC.” — Swedish
Climatologist Dr. Hans Jelbring, of the Paleogeophysics & Geodynamics Unit at
Stockholm University.  
There are none of your "tens of thousands of scientist" that have ever won a
Nobel Prize in their specialty while this skeptic did.  
“Please remain calm: The Earth will heal itself — Climate is beyond our power
to control…Earth doesn’t care about governments or their legislation. You
can’t find much actual global warming in present-day weather observations.
Climate change is a matter of geologic time, something that the earth
routinely does on its own without asking anyone’s permission or explaining
itself.” — Nobel Prize-Winning Stanford University Physicist Dr. Robert B.
Laughlin, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1998, and was formerly a
research scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

            7.             8. I will answer your 7 & 8 in much more detail at a later date plus a pertinent question regarding your 2 months of travel.
                        
                                                    471. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                        

April 25, 2012 at 1:45 am

I entreat EV to look at this site and video, especially since the CLOUD
experiment that was done in the CERN particle accelerator proves Svenmark's
hypothesis and there has never been a test/experiment that has shown that CO2
contributes one damn thing to what the earth's climate does, one way or the
other. For the alarmist to make the types of claims that they do regarding CO2
with out ANY proof that it does what they claim is indeed fatuitous.

Svensmark, being a scientist, devised experiments of his own to test his
theory and that demonstrates how science works. It is not about a group of
self serving charlatans proclaiming that "the debate is over".

"Svensmark: Evidence continues to build that the Sun drives climate, not CO2"  
http://hockeyschtick.blogspot.com.au/2012/04/svensmark-evidence-continues-to-
build.html

The reply to EV's drivel and his assertions in the 7TH & 8TH points that they
mention will be presented when time permits.

                    
                                                472. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 27, 2012 at 4:50 am

When is the economy going to “decarbonizes”, as EV puts it? Does he and his
kind think that more government subsidized Solar Trust Of America, Solyndra
and Beacon Power boondoggles will get them to the "utopia" of their
"renewable" green agenda? Maybe they believe that more non generating
windmills will do the job for them.

I know that FACTS are something that the EVs of the "green" world do not want
to deal in but I will present a few anyway and the first of these FACTS are
regarding the petroleum industry. When the EV type folks in the US fill up
their rides, besides spilling a large part of the fuel trying to get it into
the ride because they are bitching so much about how much it is costing to
spill/fill the tank, they have no idea that petroleum products account for far
more than transportation fuel but it is also used in thousands of products
that these good "green" fools use every day with out any thought as to where
the base for these products comes from.  
"A partial list of products made from Petroleum (144 of 6000 items)  
One 42-gallon barrel of oil creates 19.4 gallons of gasoline. The rest (over
half) is used to make things like:"  
http://www.ranken-energy.com/Products%20from%20Petroleum.htm  
Just, from this perspective, how does EV imagine that the economy will
"decarbonizes”?

EV likes to imagine that it is the fossil fuel industries that are waging a
huge battle against their wind power, solar power or whatever. They are so
naive that they do not realize the divisions between petroleum and the coal
industry because oil is used for industry and transportation; only .8%; and,
that is largely petroleum coke, is used to generate electricity in the U.S.
(#1) while coal produces 44.7% as of last March. The question for EV is why do
they imagine that the energy companies have to fund anything regarding this
issue when there is nothing at present that can replace their products?

The energy companies use their money to fund research and development into
finding more oil and natural gas and other sources of energy. They have
discovered the vast reserves in the Bakken field on private lands and have,
because of directional drilling, revitalized a one hundred year old field in
eastern MT and N. DK and have another oil boom going on there around Baker,
MT. On the North Slope of the Brooks Range, where I have worked, they are able
to drill up to 40 wells from a single drill pad and that decreases the foot
print from drilling but the polar bears have further to go to come and walk
around these drill sites and the caribou do not have as many pipe lines to lay
under for shade in the summer, or to get on the mounds to try to get away from
the mosquitoes. The amount of natural gas developed has increased dramatically
due to new methods to extract it from newly found shale deposits deep under
the earth's surface.

The petroleum industry has developed the science to find oil a mile beneath
the ocean surface and to drill into the deposits and produce the fuel for EV
to eventually spill while filling his ride. I do not think that EV has ever
heard about the Troll platform that the Norwegians built and use in one of the
harshest ocean environments in the world, the North Sea. (#2)" With an overall
height of 472m it is the tallest structure ever moved by mankind".

This is another energy company development to get more oil from old fields so
that EV can "be traveling most of the next two months". (#3) "I’m talking
about Chevron’s newly launched field of solar concentrating mirrors installed
in an old oil field in Coalinga, Calif. These 7,600 mirrors track the sun,
capture rays, then shine the concentrated light on what’s basically a water-
filled box sitting on a pole." also this is what I most like about this and
that there is no crony capitalism involved because "And the best part: no U.S.
taxpayer money on the line."

I would think time and money spent on this nonsense of anthropogenic global
warming could be better applied to other proven problems on earth. I have
personally seen the total destruction of the rain forest of Malaysian Borneo
(I understand that is even more pronounced in the Indonesian portion of this
Island) to grow trees that produce palm oil that in turn can be refined into
bio fuels, the total environment for any critters that rely on these forest is
gone and now these unique animals, such as the orangutan, are on the road to
extinction. Just another area where this green revolution destroys rather than
saves but the EVs of the world can pat them selves on the back for "saving the
planet". A side note, as with ethanol, it takes more energy to produce this
biodiesel than what is derived from the burning of it.

"We utilize energy from carbon, not because we are bad people, but because it
is the affordable foundation on which the profound improvements in our
standard of living have been achieved – our progress in health and welfare. I
taught science in Kenya, Africa and witnessed first hand this simple rule –
without energy life is brutal and short." Dr. John Christy

Coal will be next for EV to consider, if they in fact consider anything beyond
their narrow, ideologically crippled view point.  
(#1) "Figure 2: Net Generation Shares by Energy Source: Total (All Sectors),  
Year-to-Date through March, 2011"  
(The pie chart shows this): "Coal, 44.7%; Natural Gas, 20.6%; Nuclear,20.5%;
Hydroelectric Conventional, 8.4%; Other Energy Sources, 5.2% and Petroleum
.8%"  
http://www.eia.gov/cneaf/electricity/epm/epm_sum.html  
(#2) Gas and oil from the field is extracted via three platforms – Troll A, B
and C.  
http://www.offshore-technology.com/projects/troll/  
(#3 "The light heats the water into steam, which is then pumped through the
oil field and deep down into the reservoir in order to loosen up and coax out
heavy oil.  
And the best part: no U.S. taxpayer money on the line."  
http://www.forbes.com/sites/christopherhelman/2011/10/04/chevron-uses-solar-
power-to-steam-oil-out-of-california-fiel

                    
                                                473. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6f85c7a5dc495607160c853b97ad620?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 29, 2012 at 3:11 am

This reply regarding coal is in regard to this comment EV made to me: "They
are unwilling to admit that the “denial machine” is driven by (a) the fossil
fuel industry, which stands to lose huge profits when the economy
“decarbonizes”

The coal plants remove 99% of the particulates and now we have EV telling us
that CO2, an essential for life on earth trace gas, is a "pollutant". It
amazes me that EV didn't bring up the excuse that the EPA is using to close
coal fired power plants down and that is mercury:  
"2012 EPA itself says the purported “hazards to public health” from mercury
and non-mercury emissions from American EGUs are “anticipated to remain after
imposition” of the new regulations."

"EPA computer models claim mercury emission cuts will reduce average per
person “avoided IQ loss” by an undetectable “0.00209 IQ points,” with
estimated “total nationwide benefits” of $500,000 to $6.1 million by 2016. Job
creation from the rules, it says, will be “not statistically different from
zero.” (There is something that has caused an acute IQ loss in the EVs of the
world but the EPA is not going to be able to remove it because it is genetic,
I fear)

"The EPA also confessed that U.S. power plants actually contribute a mere 3
percent of the total mercury deposited in computer-modeled American watersheds
and subsequently, in fish tissue. Citizens will justifiably wonder where the
other 97 percent comes from, and why we should spend so much money for so
little benefit."

"Third, the agency’s estimates for mercury exposure risks are solely for
“hypothetical female subsistence consumers” who daily eat almost a pound of
fish that they catch in U.S. streams, rivers, and lakes over a 70-year
lifetime (less than 1 percent of U.S. women). For the rest of American women,
who eat mostly ocean fish purchased at a grocery on a far less frequent basis
EPA’s rules are irrelevant."

"Fourth, EPA admitted that only 22 to 29 percent of its computer-modeled
watersheds are “at risk” from EGU mercury, even when it erroneously assumed
that at least 5 percent of total mercury deposition into the watersheds came
from U.S. power plants. If the modeling criteria were tweaked only slightly -
to reflect actual average freshwater fish consumption rates for American women
and require that at least 15 percent of total mercury deposition be
attributable to EGUs - not one U.S. watershed would be at risk."

"Finally, EPA ignores the presence of selenium in nearly all fish. Its strong
attraction to mercury molecules protects fish and people against buildups of
methylmercury, mercury’s biologically active and more toxic form."

"Combining any series of small-probability scenarios results in a near-zero
likelihood that the events will actually happen. If each of five scenarios has
only a 20 percent chance of happening, the likelihood of all five happening is
0.032 percent."

"As the preceding analysis suggests, the probability that all the EPA’s
improbable scenarios will actually happen is virtually zero; the likelihood
that its new regulations will benefit human health is also zero."

"However, EPA still stubbornly “disagrees that [mercury] exposure levels in
the U.S. are lower than those in the Faroe Islands.” Exposure to methylmercury
in the United States is “the same” as in the North Atlantic’s Faroe Islands,
EPA insists." I well imagine that the EPA is trying to find someone to crucify
over this mercury issue, as they have sought out ones to crucify over CO2 and
crucify them they have.

I have been to China four times, if one counts a visit to Hong Kong many years
ago. The last three visits began in 2006 and if EV is worried about the air in
the United States they should try to see something in China because almost
everywhere there the air is so bad that one can hardly see the ground from
30,000′ up in an airplane and eventually their air is our air; but, these
phony treaties such as the Kyoto accord exempt China and India from any
restrictions because they know what these two countries would tell them where
to go with their restrictions.

"Chronic respiratory diseases - Most illness and death in this category is due
to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Major COPD risk factors
include tobacco, childhood pneumonia, various occupational exposures, and air
pollution from unventilated indoor cooking and heating. These risk factors are
far more prevalent in developing countries."  
http://www.smartglobalhealth.org/issues/entry/chronic-diseases  
(no mention of CO2 because CO2 is not a pollutant)

I have been to Nepal three times and have a very good friend that is a Gurkha
and I have been to his village two times to spend a few days and their means
of cooking is an earthen stove that burns wood (in the high mountains of the
Sherpa's area the fuel is Yak dung) and there is no stove pipe, the smoke just
goes out into the room and maybe out the cracks between the roof and the wall.
Many parts of the world do their food preparation in this manner. In my
friends village, if you want running water that is what you do when you carry
it up the long trail from the spring at the bottom of the valley. Electricity
would be very welcome there.

EV seems to want to discount the benefits of having a reliable supply of
electricity and he more than likely would sound like a scalded cat if their
electricity is out for over ten minutes. When I was in Kathmandu the power was
off more than it was on and they should have plenty of electricity because
they have so much potential from hydro. Actually in some of the remote
villages they do have hydro plants that give them a steady supply of power,
unless a belt is broken as was the case in Manang and their power had been
down for weeks waiting to get a new one from Italy. Last Sept. I was in
Tanzania and the power was on and off, mostly off and the air was bad from
cooking fire smoke.

While EV labors to find more and more reasons to shut down coal fired
electrical plants with out coming up with alternatives, there are engineers
that work for these companies that have and continue to develop more efficient
and cleaner generating plants.

                    
                                                474. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0302ec7051ec82440ef1f5a161ec730?s=67&d=mm&r=g) J.Doug Swallow says:
                    

April 30, 2012 at 1:30 am

(b) "citizens who distrust science because it contradicts their other beliefs
(those who deny evolution, etc.)" I find this comment to be irresponsible,
offensive and it goes beyond being ignorant because ignorance is a condition
that can be redeemed through education but this is a stupid thing to say and
stupid is a condition that those afflicted with it must just learn to live
with and the EVs of the world demonstrate that they do not do so well with the
handicap. For this comment to come from some one who believes in basically
nothing is not surprising. I did point out the cult that they are a tithing
member of and that is the cult of anthropogenic global warming and I presented
EV with the outline of the believes of this cult:  
J.Doug Swallow says:  
March 10, 2012 at 4:35 am  
IS BELIEF IN AGW A CULT?  
Our Global Warming cultists deny they are well, cultists.  
Okay, let’s examine record:  
They worship a pantheon of gods, starting with Mother Gaia. They even opened  
their latest congregation at Canned Corn by offering a prayer to one of the  
local Deities. Remember, these are the same people who claim to have science  
on their side (H/T Andrew Bolt).  
They have a Prophet in the form of Al Gore – the Goracle, who has many  
mansions and travels the world in a big jet, spreading their Gospel – “Do as  
I say, not as I do”…….. and so forth, but this expresses the believes of this
cult.

This is what a high priest of EV's cult had to say some time back:  
“What if Mary is another name for Gaia? Then her capacity for  
virgin birth is no miracle . . . it is a role of Gaia since life began . . .  
She is of this Universe and, conceivably, a part of God. On Earth,  
she is the source of life everlasting and is alive now;  
she gave birth to humankind and we are part of her.”  
- Sir James Lovelock,  
Ages of Gaia

"He previously painted some of the direst visions of the effects of climate
change. In 2006, in an article in the U.K.’s Independent newspaper, he wrote
that “before this century is over billions of us will die and the few breeding
pairs of people that survive will be in the Arctic where the climate remains
tolerable.” (Is this where EV gets their distorted views from because they do
not appear to be bright enough to formulate any views of their own?)

This old fool is able to understand his mistakes and admit to them while we
have folks like EV that tenaciously hang on to their "believes" because that
is what their cult has told them to believe.

"However, the professor admitted in a telephone interview with msnbc.com that
he now thinks he had been “extrapolating too far."  
The new book, due to be published next year, will be the third in a trilogy,
following his earlier works, “Revenge of Gaia: Why the Earth Is Fighting Back
– and How We Can Still Save Humanity,” and “The Vanishing Face of Gaia: A
Final Warning: Enjoy It While You Can.”  
The new book will discuss how humanity can change the way it acts in order to
help regulate the Earth’s natural systems, performing a role similar to the
harmonious one played by plants when they absorb carbon dioxide and produce
oxygen.  
Climate's 'usual tricks'  
It will also reflect his new opinion that global warming has not occurred as
he had expected. (NOICE THIS, EV)  
“The problem is we don’t know what the climate is doing. We thought we knew 20
years ago. That led to some alarmist books – mine included – because it looked
clear-cut, but it hasn’t happened,” Lovelock said.  
“The climate is doing its usual tricks. There’s nothing much really happening
yet. We were supposed to be halfway toward a frying world now,” he said.  
“The world has not warmed up very much since the millennium. Twelve years is a
reasonable time… it (the temperature) has stayed almost constant, whereas it
should have been rising -- carbon dioxide is rising, no question about that,”
he added. (He has more honor than EV because he does not lie about this FACT)  
He pointed to Gore’s “An Inconvenient Truth” and Tim Flannery’s “The Weather
Makers” as other examples of “alarmist” forecasts of the future.  
In 2007, Time magazine named Lovelock as one of 13 leaders and visionaries in
an article on “Heroes of the Environment,” which also included Gore, Mikhail
Gorbachev and Robert Redford.  
“Jim Lovelock has no university, no research institute, no students. His
almost unparalleled influence in environmental science is based instead on a
particular way of seeing things,” Oliver Morton, of the journal Nature wrote
in Time. “Humble, stubborn, charming, visionary, proud and generous, his ideas
about Gaia have started a change in the conception of biology that may serve
as a vital complement to the revolution that brought us the structures of DNA
and proteins and the genetic code.”  
http://worldnews.msnbc.msn.com/_news/2012/04/23/11144098-gaia-scientist-james-
lovelock-i-was-alarmist-about-climate-change?lite  
The above quote from what Oliver Morton said makes one to not believe anything
that is in the journal "Nature" because of this type of bias.

EV: Every time you fill up your ride now you are sacrificing to your cult and
I hope it gives you a feeling of "doing the right thing" & incidentally, what
others believe of a spiritual nature is none of your damn business, If I
believe in the Big Bang and that the earth is 4.5 billion years old does not
mean that I can't have questions and solutions other than what your agw cult
might provide and that is nothing, zero as far as answering those questions.

                    
                                                475. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/40c0ee8e219c4eb043363c33e68cf709?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Leslie Graham says:
                    

February 13, 2012 at 6:21 am

I like the "Guest Lecturer" euphanism.

Why don't you come right out and admit it was none other than Fred Singer.  
Nuff said.

And as for the 16 "respected" scientists. Do me a favour. 14 engineers five of
whom have links to Exxon.  
How gullible can you get.  
No wonder the Wall Street Journal was roundly condemned by just about everyone
in the field for irresponsibly publishing the same tired old list of long-
debunked myths and nonsense.

                    
                                                476. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3af01240755943db4afa68f6a66cad1f?s=67&d=mm&r=g) aditaya says:
                    

November 18, 2012 at 1:45 pm

how can we finish global warming

                    
                                                477. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6f1824a29b5521c9f9ff0b276b3494a8?s=67&d=mm&r=g) paul says:
                    

February 15, 2012 at 12:29 pm

Why do some people prefer to yell than to think? Don't you people have brains?
Use them!

                    
                                                478. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/57cf133041455b61c813dd4d58a1c5c9?s=67&d=mm&r=g) ace says:
                    

July 2, 2012 at 4:52 pm

Leslie, you are the blinded one.

                    
                                                479. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cec6d2a2b6f870c237aa6524929252f8?s=67&d=mm&r=g) Eltjo Wever ( Holland ) says:
                    

October 17, 2012 at 4:06 pm

First i think that this is about knowing.  
We know that there is global warming and that it has been done by human hand.  
Are you really going to tell me that there is nothing going on and that people
should not worry.  
That is just a hole lot of crap to begin with.  
I think that you are the ones hoe should get your story's strait.  
Gabs in the ozone layer, oceans and rivers and canals damaged by oil or other
chemical crap.  
The melt down, the warming up from within, animals that are endangered and the
list go's on and on, ( ALL DONE BY HUMAN HAND )  
And then you people come up and just say that there is no problem at all.  
Understand this, you don't need to be a rocket scientist to see what is going
on.  
You can see it, and also the fact that children at this moment are very
worried about the future.  
And people have all reason to worry, everything is going down hill.  
But you know what, you people just keep on dreaming and believe in this
fairytale that there is nothing to be worried about when it comes to global
warming.

Comments are closed.

__484 Comments Join the Discussion

### Study: Trip to Mars Could Weaken Astronaut's Immune System

January 25, 2019

![Artist impression of humans exploring Mars.

\(NASA\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-world/files/2019/01/humans-

exploring-mars-276x207.jpg)

### Quantum Mechanics Will Be Used to Determine Weight and Measurement

Standards

November 16, 2018

![A replica of the prototype of the kilogram \(Le Grand K\) at the Cité des

Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris, France. \(Japs 88/Wikimedia

Commons/Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0

Unported\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-world/files/2018/11/800px-

Prototype_kilogram_replica-276x207.jpg)

### NASA's Dawn Spacecraft Ends 11-Year Mission

November 3, 2018

![This image of Ceres approximates how the dwarf planet's colors would appear

to the eye. This view of Ceres, produced by the German Aerospace Center in

Berlin, combines images taken during Dawn's first science orbit in 2015.

\(NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/11/ceres-in-color-276x207.jpg)

### Earth's Largest Organism is Deteriorating

October 19, 2018

![The Pando aspen clone as seen from a distance \(green foreground and middle

-- not yellow\). The photo captures about ½ the total grove. A close look

reveals many dead trees on the ground. Foreground depicts successful

regeneration; middle green shows dying forest with little new growth. \(Lance

Oditt, Studio 47.60° North - with

permission\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/10/182295_web-276x207.jpg)

### Bees Take a Break During Total Solar Eclipse

October 12, 2018

![A bee gathers nectar from a flower \(Photo: BitHead Via Creative Commons @

Flickr\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2013/02/30907760_faf0da7772_b-276x207.jpg)

### Study: Pluto Should Be a Planet!

September 15, 2018

![NASA released this high-resolution enhanced color view of Pluto on 9/25/15.

The image combines blue, red and infrared images taken by the

Ralph/Multispectral Visual Imaging Camera \(MVIC\) on 7/14/15.

\(NASA/JHUAPL/SwRI\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2015/09/crop_p_color2_enhanced_release_small-276x207.png)

### New Blood Test Tells Your Body's Time

September 11, 2018

![This diagram depicts the circadian patterns typical of someone who rises

early in morning, eats lunch around noon, and sleeps at night \(10 p.m.\).

\(Yassine Mrabet via Wikimedia Commons\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2014/01/Biological_clock_human-276x207.jpg)

### Did a Volcanic Eruption Lead to Napoleon's Defeat at Waterloo?

August 24, 2018

![The Battle of Waterloo. Painting by William Sadler \(Wikimedia

Commons\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/08/Battle_of_Waterloo_1815-276x207.png)

### Iron and Titanium Found in Atmosphere of Ultra-hot Exoplanet

August 17, 2018

![This artist's concept shows planet KELT-9b orbiting its host star, KELT-9.

\(NASA/JPL-Caltech\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/08/180815130555_1_900x600-276x207.jpg)

### Astronomers Find and Confirm 44 New Extrasolar Planets

August 10, 2018

![The 44 confirmed planets and their approximate size class, orbits and

surface temperatures. \(John Livingston\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/08/177466_web-276x207.jpg)

### Lowest Frequency Fast Radio Burst Detected

August 4, 2018

![The Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment, \(CHIME\) in 2015,

during construction of the parabolic trough reflector at the Dominion Radio

Astrophysical Observatory in British Columbia, Canada. \(Mateus A.

Fandiño/Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 via Wikimedia

Commons\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/08/CHIME_experiment_construction_-_2015-07-16-1-276x207.jpg)

### Space and Earth Weather Align to Make a Bad Situation Worse

August 2, 2018

![NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory \(SDO\) captured this image of the sun as

it pumped out a powerful X1.8-class flare solar flare on 12/19/14. X-class

flares are the biggest and most intense of these solar explosions that blast

large amounts of energy, light and high speed particles into space.

\(NASA\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2014/12/RTR4IZAP-276x207.jpg)

### Possible New Power Source of Yellowstone Supervolcano Found

July 30, 2018

![The gorgeous colors of Yellowstone National Park’s Grand Prismatic hot

spring are among the park’s many hydrothermal features created by the fact

that Yellowstone sits above a supervolcano – the largest type of volcano on

Earth. \(Robert B. Smith & Lee J. Siegel\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2015/04/image2-276x207.jpg)

### Mars In The News

July 27, 2018

![This image, captured by the Hubble Space Telescope, shows Mars, as it was

observed On 5/12/16, before opposition in 2016 \(NASA, ESA, the Hubble

Heritage Team \(STScI/AURA\), J. Bell \(ASU\), and M. Wolff \(Space Science

Institute\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2016/05/1609a-276x207.jpg)

### Why Men Recover Faster from the Flu Than Women

July 25, 2018

![A microscopic image of the H1N1 \('swine flu'\) influenza virus - In 2009,

the World Health Organization declared this new strain as a

pandemic.](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2012/11/1024px-H1N1_influenza_virus-276x207.jpg)

### Astronomers Discover A Dozen New Jovian Moons

July 21, 2018

![Various groupings of Jovian moons with the newly discovered ones shown in

bold. \(Roberto Molar-Candanosa, courtesy of Carnegie Institution for

Science\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/07/175278_web-276x207.jpg)

### Smartphone App Helps Farmers Fight Pest

July 19, 2018

![Fall armyworm larvae have caused an estimated $2.5 billion to $6.2 billion

in damage annually to maize in sub-Saharan Africa since the pest arrived there

in 2016. \(John C. French Sr., Retired, Universities:Auburn, GA, Clemson and U

of MO, Bugwood.org\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/07/Fall-armyworm-larva-on-corn-JohnCFrenchSr-

Bugwood.org__0-276x207.jpg)

### Scientists: It's New Era In Space Research

July 13, 2018

![Artistic rendering of a flaring supermassive black hole 3.7 billion light-

years from Earth in the constellation Orion, which is the suspected source of

a super-high-energy subatomic particle, a neutrino, that has launched a new

era of space research. \(Nate Follmer, Penn

State\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/07/Blazar_LR-276x207.jpg)

### Car Vibrations May Induce Drowsy Driving

July 10, 2018

![Drowsy driver \(Joonas Tikkanen/CC BY-ND 2.0 via

Flickr\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/07/7478206746_7523de3be4_o-276x207.jpg)

### Astronomers Discover Ancient Galactic Collision that Reshaped the Milky

Way

July 6, 2018

![An impression of the encounter between the Milky Way galaxy and the smaller

"Sausage" galaxy about 8 billion to 10 billion years ago. The record of this

ancient encounter is still preserved in the velocities and chemistry of the

stars. \(V. Belokurov \(Cambridge, UK\); Based on image by ESO/Juan Carlos

Muñoz\)](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-

world/files/2018/07/180704112033_1_900x600-276x207.jpg)

## Top Tags

                    
                                                * NASA262 Posts
                            * astronomers103 Posts
                            * ESA87 Posts
                            * Mars86 Posts
                            * study81 Posts
                            * "European Space Agency"80 Posts
                            * "solar system"77 Posts
                            * spacecraft76 Posts
                            * Sun63 Posts
                            * JPL62 Posts
                    

![VOA](https://blogs.voanews.com/science-world/wp-content/themes/voa-top-

content/img/voa-logo_142x60_2x_f8f8f8.png)

                    
                                                * Archives
                            * Contact
                            * Science World
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

