
                    
                                                * Pier Cam
                            * Calendar
                            * Contact Us
                            *   
                            * ![UC San Diego](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sio-cdn/images/header/logo/ucsd-new-WHITE.png)
                    

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sio-cdn/images/header/logo/logo-sio-hdr-

white.png)

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sio-cdn/images/header/logo/logo-sio-hdr-

white.png)

__ MENU

__

__

                    
                                                * ABOUT
                    
                              * Mission and Quick Facts
                              * History
                              * Leadership
                              * Collaborators
                              * Entrepreneurial Resources
                              * Visitor Information
                              * Contact Us
                    
                            * NEWS
                    
                              * News and Archives
                              * From the Porthole
                              * _explorations now_
                              * Videos
                              * Blogs and Expeditions
                              * Publications
                              * Social Media
                              * Contact Us
                    
                            * RESEARCH
                    
                              * Research Topics
                              * Research Seminars
                              * Centers, Labs, and Projects
                              * Recent Publications
                              * Research Sections
                              * Integrated Research Themes
                              * Shared Facilities
                    
                            * EDUCATION
                    
                              * Doctoral
                              * Master's
                              * Undergraduate
                              * Courses
                              * Prospective Students
                              * Current Students
                              * Careers in Oceanography
                              * Contact Us
                              * SIO Department Committees
                    
                            * SHIPS
                    
                              * Scripps Fleet
                              * Nimitz Marine Facility 
                              * Cruise Planning
                              * Shipboard Technical Support
                              * Schedules
                              * Policies & Procedures
                              * UC Ship Funds Program
                              * Employment Opportunities
                              * Maps and Directions
                              * Marine Facility Shop Support
                              * Contacts
                    
                            * RESOURCES AND FACILITIES
                    
                              * Safety at Scripps
                              * Research Facilities
                              * Shared Facilities
                              * Scripps Information Technology
                              * Administration, Services, and Support 
                              * Scripps Policies 
                              * Employee Resources
                              * Entrepreneurial Resources 
                              * Scientific Diving
                              * Maps and Directions
                              * Oceanographic Collections
                              * Sustainability at Scripps
                              * Contact Us
                    
                            * GIVING
                    
                              * Why Give
                              * Where to Give
                              * How to Give 
                              * Get Involved 
                              * Give Now
                    
                            * PEOPLE
                    
                              * Directory
                              * Research Profiles
                              * Faculty
                              * Alumni
                              * Diversity at Scripps
                              * Jobs at Scripps
                              * Postdoctoral Scholars
                              * Scripps Awards
                    
                            * _ _
                            * /Scripps News
                            * /
                    

Ocean Salinity Trends Show Human Fingerprint

# Ocean Salinity Trends Show Human Fingerprint

Like ocean temperature, changes in last half-century only explicable in
context of human-caused climate change

Nov 07, 2012

![](https://scripps.ucsd.edu/sites/scripps.ucsd.edu/files/communications-

content/field_crop/LARGE_RH_Pierce_Salinity_132001_0_0.jpg)

Changes in ocean salinity over the second half of the 20th Century are
consistent with the influence of human activities and inconsistent with
natural climate variations, according to a new study led by researchers at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego.

Observed changes agree with computer models' predictions about how salinity
will change in a steadily warming world, said Scripps climate researcher David
Pierce, the study's lead author. Ocean salinity changes are driven by patterns
of evaporation and rainfall, which themselves are changing. Observations over
recent decades have found a general intensification of salinity differences in
which salty ocean regions, most notably in the north Atlantic Ocean,
experience even more evaporation of surface waters and relatively fresh
regions are becoming even more diluted with precipitation. These patterns are
part of global changes in precipitation and evaporation that influence the
amount of rainfall over land.

Pierce said the study provides an independent check of the effects of climate
change on the water cycle using different instruments and techniques than
weather station rainfall measurements. Studies of rainfall over land are
harder to measure and place in context because of changes to weather stations
over the years and the episodic nature of storms.

"The salinity in the ocean averages out all that variability," said Pierce.

The paper, "The fingerprint of human-induced changes in the ocean's salinity
and temperature fields," recently appeared in the American Geophysical Union
journal _Geophysical Research Letters_. Co-authors include Peter J. Gleckler,
Benjamin Santer, and Paul Durack of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
in Livermore, Calif. and Tim Barnett of Scripps Oceanography.

The study builds on previous analyses conducted in the last decade by Barnett,
Pierce, and others that demonstrated that rising temperatures in the upper 700
meters (2,000 feet) of the ocean also can be explained only by anthropogenic
climate change. The observed global warming is caused mostly by an
accumulation of carbon dioxide created by fossil fuel use.

The new study complements the temperature analysis by considering salinity,
the other main factor besides temperature that determines the density of ocean
water. Ocean water density is a key factor determining how water moves in the
oceans.

"By combining the analysis of salinity and temperature, this study brings our
level of understanding global scale oceanic changes to a new level," said
Gleckler.

The previous temperature studies and this analysis of ocean salinity use a
technique known as detection and attribution. In this method, observed trends
in ocean salinity are compared to the effects of various historical phenomena
such as volcanic eruptions or solar fluctuations and to climate cycles such as
El Ni√±o. When the computer climate models were run, the influence of those
phenomena do not replicate the salinity or temperature patterns that
researchers have observed since 1955. Only when the warming trends associated
with human activity were added could the observed salinity trends and
temperature changes be explained.

The research performed in this study will likely contribute to the next report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, scheduled to be released in
phases beginning in 2013.

The U.S. Department of Energy and NOAA funded the research.

View the discussion thread.

* * *

This story appears in _explorations now_ , Scripps Institution of
Oceanography's award-winning ocean and earth science magazine. Sign up to
receive our free monthly story roundup.

##

                    
                                                * Scripps News
                              * News Archives
                              * From the Porthole
                              * explorations now
                              * Videos
                              * Blogs and Expeditions
                              * Publications
                              * Social Media
                              * Contact Us
                    

_Print_ _Email_ Print/PDF/Email * Share _Facebook_ _Twitter_ _Googleplus_
_Pinterest_ _LinkedIn_

#### Scripps Oceanography

                    
                                                * Home
                            * About
                            * News
                            * Research
                            * Education
                            * Ships
                            * Resources and Facilities
                            * Giving
                            * People
                    

#### Quick Links

                    
                                                * Safety at Scripps
                            * Entrepreneurial Resources
                            * California Sea Grant
                            * Scripps IT
                            * Alumni
                            * Birch Aquarium at Scripps
                            * Research Topics
                            * Oceanographic Collections
                            * Scripps Events
                            * Scripps Scholars
                            * Jobs at Scripps
                            * Venue Rentals
                            * _explorations now_
                    

#### Scripps Education

                    
                                                * Doctoral Programs
                            * Master's Programs
                            * Undergraduate Programs
                            * Prospective Students
                    

#### Research Sections

Biology

                    
                                        Center for Marine Biotechnology & Biomedicine (CMBB)
                    Integrative Oceanography Division (IOD)
                    Marine Biology Research Division (MBRD)
                    

Earth

                    
                                        Cecil H. and Ida M. Green Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics (IGPP)
                    Geosciences Research Division (GRD)
                    

Oceans & Atmosphere

                    
                                        Climate, Atmospheric Science & Physical Oceanography (CASPO)
                    Marine Physical Laboratory (MPL)
                    

#### Contact Us

                    
                                                * Scripps Institution of Oceanography
                    

9500 Gilman Drive  
La Jolla, California 92093

_Phone_ (858) 534-3624

                    
                                                * _Location_ Maps and Directions
                            * #### Stay Connected
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * _video_ Pier Cam
                            * Powered by Dark Sky
                    

**(C) 2019** Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego Log in | Submit
a Help Request  
Terms of Use

sharknado

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

