

![logo](/images/logo/sa-black-logo-2019.png)

![logo](/images/logo/sa-white-logo-2019.png)

                    
                                                * Trending Latest Sections  ![search icon](/images/sciencealert_system/search.png) ![menu icon](/images/sciencealert_system/bar-icon_x3.png)
                    
                              *
                    

Tech

                    
                                                  *
                    

Health

                    
                                                  *
                    

Space

                    
                                                  *
                    

Environment

                    
                                                  *
                    

Humans

                    
                                                  *
                    

Physics

                    
                                                  *
                    

Nature

                    
                                                  *
                    

Politics & Society

                    
                                                  *
                    

Comment & Opinion

Sections ![arrow

icon](https://www.sciencealert.com/images/sciencealert_system/white_arrow_right.png)

                    
                                                  *
                    

Tech

                    
                                                  *
                    

Health

                    
                                                  *
                    

Space

                    
                                                  *
                    

Environment

                    
                                                  *
                    

Humans

                    
                                                  *
                    

Physics

                    
                                                  *
                    

Nature

                    
                                                  *
                    

Politics & Society

                    
                                                  *
                    

Comment & Opinion

Follow Us![arrow

icon](https://www.sciencealert.com/images/sciencealert_system/white_arrow_right.png)

                    
                                                  * ![](/images/sciencealert_system/homepage_share_icons/typical/facebook_x3.png)
                    

Facebook

                    
                                                  * ![](/images/sciencealert_system/homepage_share_icons/typical/twitter_x3.png)
                    

Twitter

                    
                                                  * ![](/images/sciencealert_system/homepage_share_icons/typical/instagram_x3.png)
                    

Instagram

                    
                                                  * ![email icon](/images/sciencealert_system/menubar_email.png)
                    

Daily Email

                    
                                                  * ![rss icon](/images/sciencealert_system/rss_x3.png)
                    

RSS Feed

Company![arrow

icon](https://www.sciencealert.com/images/sciencealert_system/white_arrow_right.png)

                    
                                                  * About Us
                              * Our Team
                              * Contact Us
                              * Privacy Policy
                              * Terms & Conditions
                    

Â© ScienceAlert Pty Ltd. All rights reserved.

![main article image](/)

(University of the Witwatersrand)

HUMANS

# This 3.6-Million-Year-Old Fossil Is The Oldest, Most Complete Human

Ancestor Ever Seen

MICHELLE STARR

7 DEC 2017

After 20 years of slow, careful excavation, the world's most complete skeleton
of an ancient human ancestor has just been unveiled.

It belongs to the genus _Australopithecus,_ and it's 3.67 million years old.
It is, by far, the most complete hominin skeleton globally older than 1.5
million years, and the oldest hominin skeleton ever found in South Africa. Its
name is "Little Foot" - because the discovery of the skeleton started with
four small footbones.

"This is one of the most remarkable fossil discoveries made in the history of
human origins research and it is a privilege to unveil a finding of this
importance today," said Ron Clarke from the Evolutionary Studies Institute at
the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, who discovered the
skeleton 20 years ago.

Little Foot is not the oldest hominin skeleton ever found - that honour goes
to Ardi, a hominin that lived in Ethiopia 4.4 million years ago. But Little
Foot is significantly more complete than Ardi, and may be more informative.

It's expected that Little Foot will be able to provide a wealth of information
about our early _Australopithecus_ ancestors - how they moved, how their
skeletons are put together, what they looked like.

Isotope analysis of the fossilised tooth enamel may even help fill in some
gaps about the environment Little Foot lived in, and the food she ate.

![little foot in situ](/images/2017-12/little-foot-in-situ.jpg)(University of
the Witwatersrand)

Little Foot is relatively small, standing about 135 centimetres (4 feet, 4
inches). She's a female skeleton, as determined by her pelvic structure, face
and teeth. It's thought that the bones may have belonged to a young girl who
met her demise falling down a shaft into the caves below.

Importantly, her presence suggests that hominins were spread out farther
across Africa than previously thought, and she's the first skeleton that
allows a comparison between arm length and leg length in a single individual.

Her legs were longer than her arms, which shows that she's much more like
humans than apes. She walked upright, and probably lived in trees.

The fossilised skeleton was first found in the Sterkfontein caves not far from
Johannesburg, more than 20 years ago.

Clarke was alerted to its presence in 1994 by foot and leg bones that had been
blasted from the rock by lime miners years prior, but it wasn't until 1997
that the rest of the skeleton was found, deep in the cave.

It was embedded in a concrete-like rock called breccia, so excavating it from
the cave was slow work. Large blocks of the breccia, in which the skeleton was
embedded, were painstakingly removed from the cave. It took until 2012.

Meanwhile, in a laboratory, a team of experts carefully removed the breccia
from around the skeleton.

"My assistants and I have worked on painstakingly cleaning the bones from
breccia blocks and reconstructing the full skeleton until the present day,"
Clarke said.

"The process required extremely careful excavation in the dark environment of
the cave. Once the upward-facing surfaces of the skeleton's bones were
exposed, the breccia in which their undersides were still embedded had to be
carefully undercut and removed in blocks for further cleaning in the lab at
Sterkfontein."

Researchers from around the world are currently studying the skeleton to learn
more about this amazing specimen, and we can expect peer-reviewed studies in
the upcoming years.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=10055482&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-K4K325YQZBuCu.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

