

Skip to main content

![Home](https://climate.ncsu.edu/sites/default/files/sco-logo.png)

__

                    
                                                * __
                    

## Search form

                    
                                                * Office
                              * About Our Office
                              * Charter
                              * Mission
                              * Staff & Students
                              * History
                              * Contact Us
                            * Education
                              * NC Climate
                              * Climate Education Modules
                              * Outreach Event Information
                              * RAIN Across the River Program
                            * Data Services
                              * Explore Data
                              * Request Data
                              * Data Charging Policy
                              * Our Data Network
                              * Related Resources
                              * CRONOS API
                              * Mobile-Friendly Station Page
                            * Tools
                              * Interactive Maps
                              * Agriculture
                              * Weather Events
                              * Climate Tools
                              * All Tools A-Z
                            * News
                              * Blog
                              * Activity Reports
                    

# Composition of the Atmosphere

## Education Menu

                    
                                                * Education Home
                            * Background and Basics
                              * Climate and Weather
                              * Tilt and Latitude
                              * Atmospheric Properties
                              * Energy Transfer
                              * The Atmosphere
                                * Structure of the Atmosphere
                                * Composition of the Atmosphere
                              * Understanding Weather Patterns
                              * Weather Forces
                              * The Water Cycle
                              * Severe Weather
                              * Measuring Weather and Climate
                            * Climate Variability
                              * Circulations
                              * Semi-Permanent Highs and Lows
                              * Mid-Latitude Cyclones
                              * Tropical Cyclones
                              * North Atlantic Oscillation
                              * Pacific/North American Pattern
                              * El Niño
                              * La Niña
                              * Southeast Climate Patterns
                              * Drought and Heat
                            * Climate Change
                              * Vegetation: Its Role in Weather and Climate
                              * Greenhouse Effect
                              * Greenhouse Gases
                              * Global Warming vs. Climate Change
                              * Models
                              * Climate Change Causes
                              * Effects of Climate Change on the Southeast
                            * Index
                            * Activities Index
                    

_The atmosphere contains many gases, most in small amounts, including some
pollutants and greenhouse gases. The most abundant gas in the atmosphere is
nitrogen, with oxygen second. Argon, an inert gas, is the third most abundant
gas in the atmosphere._

**_Why do I care?_** The composition of the atmosphere, among other things,
determines its ability to transmit sunlight and trap infrared light, leading
to potentially long-term changes in climate.

**_I should already be familiar with:_** Humidity

* * *

The atmosphere is concentrated at the earth’s surface and rapidly thins as you
move upward, blending with space at roughly 100 miles above sea level. The
atmosphere is actually very thin compared to the size of the earth, equivalent
in thickness to a piece of paper laid over a beach ball. However, it is
responsible for keeping our earth habitable and for producing weather.

The atmosphere is composed of a mix of several different gases in differing
amounts. The permanent gases whose percentages do not change from day to day
are nitrogen, oxygen and argon. Nitrogen accounts for 78% of the atmosphere,
oxygen 21% and argon 0.9%. Gases like carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides, methane,
and ozone are trace gases that account for about a tenth of one percent of the
atmosphere. Water vapor is unique in that its concentration varies from 0-4%
of the atmosphere depending on where you are and what time of the day it is.
In the cold, dry artic regions water vapor usually accounts for less than 1%
of the atmosphere, while in humid, tropical regions water vapor can account
for almost 4% of the atmosphere. Water vapor content is very important in
predicting weather.

Greenhouse gases whose percentages vary daily, seasonally, and annually have
physical and chemical properties which make them interact with solar radiation
and infrared light (heat) given off from the earth to affect the energy
balance of the globe. This is why scientists are watching the observed
increase in greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane carefully,
because even though they are small in amount, they can strongly affect the
global energy balance and temperature over time.

##

## Want to learn more?

Temperature, Pressure, Density

##

## Links to National Science Education Standards:

7th grade science: 7.E.1.1 : Compare the composition, properties and structure
of Earth's atmosphere to include mixtures of gases and differences in
temperature and pressure within layers.

Earth Science: EEn.2.5.1 : Summarize the structure and composition of our
atmosphere.

## Contact Us

                    
                                                *  __Research III Building, Suite 130
                    

1005 Capability Drive  
Centennial Campus Box 7236  
NC State University  
Raleigh, NC 27695-7236

                    
                                                *  __919-515-3056
                    

877-718-5544 (toll free)

                    
                                                *  __877-684-8056
                            *  __sco@climate.ncsu.edu
                    

![](/images/ncstate-brick-4x1-blk-min.png)

![](/images/arsco.png)

## Recent Tweets

Did you know that 20% of all recorded Atlantic tropical cyclones since 1851
have made landfall in or passed within… https://t.co/7luMgKu2jG _5 hours 6
min_ ago

Slight changes to NC's drought map, determined by the NC Drought Management
Advisory Council,… https://t.co/Hsh5YNNseT _5 hours 58 min_ ago

Spent the day digging holes and dodging rain showers (thankfully no thunder)
while installing the first half of our… https://t.co/wLr6REgaZM _1 day 3
hours_ ago

Read More

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

