
                    
                                                * Latest Stories
                            * Newsletter
                            * MASTHEAD
                            * Donate
                            * Membership
                            * Contact Us
                            * ABOUT
                            * ClimateProgress
                    

Search icon Search icon

Close icon

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * Youtube
                            * Instagram
                    

Search icon

Close icon

Search icon

                    
                                                * Latest Stories
                    

Think Progress Header Logo

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * Youtube
                            * Instagram
                    

Hamburger icon

Close icon

### Topics Menu

                    
                                                * Video
                            * ClimateProgress
                            * World
                            * Politics
                            * Health Care
                            * Mueller Report
                    

### More Menu

Open More Menu

                    
                                                * ABOUT
                            * MASTHEAD
                            * Tips
                            * Newsletter
                            * Membership
                            * DONATE
                            * ADVERTISE
                            * Contact Us
                    

Advertisement

# High Carbon Levels Can Make It Harder For Plants To Grow

Natasha Geiling Twitter Jun 13, 2015, 1:00 pm

SHARE

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * Email
                            * SMS
                            * WhatsApp
                    
                            * Share
                    

CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK

In contrast to a popular conservative argument, a new study has found that
increased atmospheric carbon dioxide isn't necessarily a boon to plant growth
-- instead, it causes plants to have a more difficult time absorbing nitrogen,
a nutrient critical to plant growth and health.

Published in the journal _Global Change Biology_ , the study found that as
carbon dioxide levels in the air increase, the concentration of nitrogen in
plants decreases, thus decreasing the plant's protein levels and growth
ability. The team of international researchers studied the impact of increased
atmospheric carbon across multiple types of ecosystems -- from grasslands for
forests -- by looking at large-scale field experiments conducted in eight
countries across four different continents.

"For all types of ecosystem the results show that high carbon dioxide levels
can impede plants' ability to absorb nitrogen, and that this negative effect
is partly why raised carbon dioxide has a marginal or non-existent effect on
growth in many ecosystems," Johan Uddling, senior lecturer at the Department
of Biological and Environmental Sciences at the University of Gothenburg and
lead researcher on the project, said in a press statement.

Among conservatives -- and some scientists -- there has been a long-held hope
that climate change could actually stimulate plant growth in the short term,
as the atmosphere becomes more rich with carbon dioxide. Sen. James Inhofe
(R-OK) has said that climate change has "contributed to increasing
agricultural productivity," arguing that "CO2 is a fertilizer." And while some
studies have supported Inhofe's claim, others -- like this most recent one --
have found the opposite to be true.

Advertisement

"The findings of the study are unequivocal. The nitrogen content in the crops
is reduced in atmospheres with raised carbon dioxide levels in all three
ecosystem types. Furthermore, we can see that this negative effect exists
regardless of whether or not the plants' growth increases, and even if
fertiliser is added. This is unexpected and new," Uddling said.

The study found that for both wheat and rice, increased carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere led to less nutritious crops. Wheat and rice are two of the most
important crops globally -- alongside maize, wheat and rice provide over 50
percent of the world's plant-derived energy, according to the International
Development Research Center.

Past studies have also seen reductions in nitrogen content for plants grown in
a high-carbon environment, but have traditionally attributed it to a kind of
dilution -- the idea being that as carbon stimulates plant growth and the rate
of photosynthesis increases, nitrogen uptake simply wasn't able to keep up.
That theory, Uddling said, has now been called into question.

"The findings of this study show that this interpretation is simplified and
partly incorrect. We are seeing reduced nitrogen content even when growth has
not been affected. Moreover, the effect is there in trials with powerful
fertilizer, which indicates that it is not down to limited access to nitrogen
in the soil," Uddling said. "Future studies should look at what is causing the
effect, but it appears to be linked to plants' capacity to absorb nitrogen
rather than to changed levels in the soil."

# Agriculture, #Carbon Dioxide, #Climate, #Climate Change

                    
                                                * About
                            * Masthead
                            * Careers
                            * Pitch Us
                            * Tips
                            * Contact Us
                            * Newsletter
                            * Membership
                            * Donate
                            * Advertise
                    

Think Progress Footer Logo

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * Youtube
                            * Instagram
                    

(C) 2019 ThinkProgress

Powered by WordPress.com VIP

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

