

Jump to navigation

__Menu

NRDC

Main menu

                    
                                                * Our Work
                              * Areas of Work
                                * Climate Change
                                * Communities
                                * Energy
                                * Food
                                * Health
                                * Oceans
                                * Water
                                * The Wild
                              * How We Work
                                * Advocacy
                                * Business
                                * Litigation
                                * Partnerships
                                * Science
                              * Where We Work
                                * International
                                * United States
                              * About Blocks
                                * About
                    

The Natural Resources Defense Council works to safeguard the earth - its
people, its plants and animals, and the natural systems on which all life
depends.

                    
                                                    * Support NRDC
                                * Follow Us
                    
                                  * Twitter Twitter
                                  * Facebook Facebook
                                  * YouTube YouTube
                                  * instagram instagram
                                  * RSS RSS Feed
                    
                              * View all from our work
                            * Our Experts
                            * Our Stories
                            * Get Involved
                            * About Us
                              * Mission
                              * Leadership
                              * Programs
                              * Financials
                              * Our Sustainability
                              * Media Center
                              * Careers
                              * Contact Us
                    

Donate

Monthly One-time

## Search

Search

facebook twitter

Scroll to the top __

Our Stories › Personal Action

# How You Can Stop Global Warming

                    
                                                * Español
                    

Healing the planet starts in your garage, in your kitchen, and at your dining-
room table.

July 17, 2017 Melissa Denchak

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/full_content/public/media-

uploads/clis6_797583_2400.jpg?itok=Ru9P8VLh)

Raymond Forbes LLC/Stocksy

Nations around the world are upping their game in the fight against climate
change, even as President Trump recently announced the U.S.'s withdrawal from
the Paris Agreement. And despite this reckless move, American mayors, state
leaders, county officials, governors, major companies, and millions of
citizens across our country have pledged that they're "still in" when it comes
to the agreement, and supporting the goal of limiting future warming to well
below 2 degrees Celsius.

Even better, a new initiative by former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg
gives the urban layer of this movement a boost. He’s asked mayors from the 100
most populous cities in the country to share their plans for making their
buildings and transportation systems run cleaner and more efficiently. The 20
that show the greatest potential for cutting the dangerous carbon pollution
that’s driving climate change will share a total of $70 million in technical
assistance funding provided by Bloomberg Philanthropies and partners.

It’s important to remember the equally vital contributions that can be made by
private citizens—which is to say, by you. “Change only happens when
individuals take action,” Aliya Haq, deputy director of NRDC’s Clean Power
Plan initiative, says. “There’s no other way, if it doesn’t start with
people.”

The goal is simple. Carbon dioxide is the climate’s worst enemy. It’s released
when oil, coal, and other fossil fuels are burned for energy—the energy we use
to power our homes, cars, and smartphones. By using less of it, we can curb
our own contribution to climate change while also saving money. Here are a
dozen easy, effective ways each one of us can make a difference:

#### 1. Speak up!

What’s the single biggest way you can make an impact on global climate change?
“Talk to your friends and family, and make sure your representatives are
making good decisions,” Haq says. By voicing your concerns—via social media
or, better yet, directly to your elected officials—you send a message that you
care about the warming world. Encourage Congress to enact new laws that limit
carbon emissions and require polluters to pay for the emissions they produce.
“The main reason elected officials do anything difficult is because their
constituents make them,” Haq says. You can help protect public lands, stop
offshore drilling, and more here.

#### 2. Power your home with renewable energy.

Choose a utility company that generates at least half its power from wind or
solar and has been certified by Green-e Energy, an organization that vets
renewable energy options. If that isn’t possible for you, take a look at your
electric bill; many utilities now list other ways to support renewable sources
on their monthly statements and websites.

#### 3. Weatherize, weatherize, weatherize.

“Building heating and cooling are among the biggest uses of energy,” Haq says.
Indeed, heating and air-conditioning account for almost half of home energy
use. You can make your space more energy efficient by sealing drafts and
ensuring it’s adequately insulated. You can also claim federal tax credits for
many energy-efficiency home improvements.

#### 4. Invest in energy-efficient appliances.

Since they were first implemented nationally in 1987, efficiency standards for
dozens of appliances and products have kept 2.3 billion tons of carbon dioxide
out of the air. That’s about the same amount as the annual carbon pollution
coughed up by nearly 440 million cars. “Energy efficiency is the lowest-cost
way to reduce emissions,” Haq says. When shopping for refrigerators, washing
machines, and other appliances, look for the Energy Star label. It will tell
you which are the most efficient.

#### 5. Reduce water waste.

Saving water reduces carbon pollution, too. That's because it takes a lot of
energy to pump, heat, and treat your water. So take shorter showers, turn off
the tap while brushing your teeth, and switch to WaterSense-labeled fixtures
and appliances. The EPA estimates that if just one out of every 100 American
homes were retrofitted with water-efficient fixtures, about 100 million
kilowatt-hours of electricity per year would be saved—avoiding 80,000 tons of
global warming pollution.

#### 6. Actually eat the food you buy—and make less of it meat.

Approximately 10 percent of U.S. energy use goes into growing, processing,
packaging, and shipping food—about 40 percent of which just winds up in the
landfill. “If you’re wasting less food, you’re likely cutting down on energy
consumption,” Haq says. And since livestock products are among the most
resource-intensive to produce, eating meat-free meals can make a big
difference, too.

#### 7. Buy better bulbs.

LED lightbulbs use up to 80 percent less energy than conventional
incandescents. They’re also cheaper in the long run: A 10-watt LED that
replaces your traditional 60-watt bulb will save you $125 over the lightbulb’s
life.

#### 8. Pull the plug(s).

Taken together, the outlets in your home are likely powering about 65
different devices—an average load for a home in the U.S. Audio and video
devices, cordless vacuums and power tools, and other electronics use energy
even when they're not charging. This "idle load" across all U.S. households
adds up to the output of 50 large power plants in the U.S. So don't leave
fully charged devices plugged into your home's outlets, unplug rarely used
devices or plug them into power strips and timers, and adjust your computers
and monitors to automatically power down to the lowest power mode when not in
use.

#### 9. Drive a fuel-efficient vehicle.

Gas-smart cars, such as hybrids and fully electric vehicles, save fuel and
money. And once all cars and light trucks meet 2025’s clean car standards,
which means averaging 54.5 miles per gallon, they’ll be a mainstay. For good
reason: Relative to a national fleet of vehicles that averaged only 28.3 miles
per gallon in 2011, Americans will spend $80 billion less at the pump each
year and cut their automotive emissions by half. Before you buy a new set of
wheels, compare fuel-economy performance here.

#### 10. Maintain your ride.

If all Americans kept their tires properly inflated, we could save 1.2 billion
gallons of gas each year. A simple tune-up can boost miles per gallon anywhere
from 4 percent to 40 percent, and a new air filter can get you a 10 percent
boost.

#### 11. Rethink planes, trains, and automobiles.

Choosing to live in walkable smart-growth cities and towns with quality public
transportation leads to less driving, less money spent on fuel, and less
pollution in the air. Less frequent flying can make a big difference, too.
“Air transport is a major source of climate pollution,” Haq says. “If you can
take a train instead, do that.”

#### 12. Shrink your carbon profile.

You can offset the carbon you produce by purchasing carbon offsets, which
represent clean power that you can add to the nation’s energy grid in place of
power from fossil fuels. But not all carbon offset companies are alike. Do
your homework to find the best supplier.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/1up_promo/public/trumpseos_actionaction.jpg?itok=hWnGYCik)

## Stand up to Trump’s climate-denial agenda

### Take Action

## Related Stories

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/perrin_climate_teaser1200x630.jpg?itok=BuHIIa1v)

Drawing Out the Science

### There’s Actually Some Good News in That Scary IPCC Report

Looking for a silver lining in the harrowing United Nations climate change
report? Here it is: We can determine the impact of climate change by the
political, economic, and social choices we make today.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/futurefest_2018-2-teaser.jpg?itok=E5-lExr5)

onEarth Story

### Trump Is Trying to Pull the Wool Over Our Eyes About Climate Change—These

Knitters Aren’t Having It

The Tempestry Project invites you to spin a colorful yarn about rising
temperatures.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/alaska1_1200.jpg?itok=vszyEilH)

Western Dispatch

### These Alaska Residents Are Watching Their Hometowns Slide Into Rising

Waters

At least 31 villages now face imminent threats from climate change and may
have to relocate, at a cost of as much as $200 million each.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/clis11_cmw42d_900x600.jpg?itok=Doi6i3mq)

Q&A

### Global Warming 101

Everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid
to ask.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/parispersonalaction_richardmia_900x600.jpg?itok=ISnG_lGj)

Personal Action

### How to Talk to a Paris Accord Skeptic

We know that you know that Trump’s assessment of the Paris Agreement is way
off base. Here’s how to convince those who don’t.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/clims7_stt0009105_900x600.jpg?itok=IaaAv5aC)

Explainer

### Are the Effects of Global Warming Really that Bad?

Short answer: Yes. Even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough
to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/clims17_trumpparisexit_rm_735996_ds_900x600.jpg?itok=xj6-5_wt)

Policy Primer

### Is America Actually Out of the Paris Agreement?

The agreement’s authors built in a time line for withdrawal that President
Trump will have to follow—slowing him down from irreparably damaging our
climate.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/enrs26going-

solar-2400.jpg?itok=Si2RZ-1t)

Personal Action

### Should You Go Solar?

Harnessing power generated by the sun reduces your reliance on fossil fuels,
but it can come with a price tag. How to decide if it’s worth it to you.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/cppstory1_1200x630.jpg?itok=U2JJJFF0)

Policy Primer

### What Is the Clean Power Plan?

In short, it’s the first-ever plan to curb carbon pollution from U.S. power
plants. Here’s how it works and why it matters.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/enrs20_000034953910_900x600.jpg?itok=Xz8-unY6)

Explainer

### Your Guide to Going Electric

Considering making the switch? Here's everything you need to know about
driving electric cars and hybrids.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/personalaction_5waystohonorearthday_151506470_1200x630.jpg?itok=j-v7uInd)

Personal Action

### 5 Ways to Make This Earth Day Really Count

Organize a park cleanup, support our national parks, or bid in a charity eBay
auction (we’ve got our eyes on Questlove’s drumsticks).

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/coms_howtoblockbigpolluters_900x600.jpg?itok=5WP061GG)

Personal Action

### Block Big Polluters

A step-by-step guide to protecting your community from dirty development
projects.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/coms5_000057193658_900x600_5.jpg?itok=J1A9Oii8)

Personal Action

### 5 Ways City Dwellers Can Spur Climate Action

What is your city doing about climate change? Ask your local leaders these
five questions.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/enrs17_172143121_530x530.jpg?itok=4IJIAKU1)

Personal Action

### Easy Ways to Save Energy at Home

Small steps can add up to big reductions in your electricity use—and your
utility bill.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/fods16_6106-05977845a_900x600.jpg?itok=hbYjioVI)

Personal Action

### Composting Is Way Easier Than You Think

With minimal effort, you can turn those banana peels and apple cores into
gold. Let us break it down.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/enrs28_3519_2400.jpg?itok=-mjy2LnH)

Action Figure

### Spreading Solar Power in Rural Pakistan

Shazia Khan’s mission is to bring solar energy to people with no access to
electric utilities.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/coms_communityactivism_2400.jpeg?itok=lC1lUI3b)

Personal Action

### The Resistance Is in Your Backyard

Turn your city into a climate sanctuary, rally on Main Street, and other ways
to make change globally by acting locally.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/warming-

map-thumb.png?itok=k0IjU4NB)

Northeast Dispatch

### The Northeast Is the Fastest-Warming Region in the Lower 48

Another win for New England! Oh, wait . . .

## Support Our Work

$35 $50 $75 $100 $200 Other

Donate

## Join Us

Email *

Thanks for signing up. You'll receive your first NRDC action alert and update
email soon.

When you sign up you'll become a member of NRDC's Activist Network. We will
keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports.

                    
                                                * About Us
                            * Careers
                            * Contact Us
                            * Media Center
                            * Policy Library
                            * Sitemap
                            * En Español
                            * Privacy Policy
                    

Follow Us

                    
                                                * Twitter Twitter
                            * Facebook Facebook
                            * YouTube YouTube
                            * instagram instagram
                            * RSS RSS Feed
                    

(C) Natural Resources Defense Council 2019 Privacy Policy State Disclosures

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

