

![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header_nasem.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header_nap.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header-mobile.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header-print.png)
Login Register Cart Help

# Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8

(2007)

## **Chapter:** 6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is Constructed

Get This Book

Visit NAP.edu/10766 to get more information about this book, to buy it in
print, or to download it as a free PDF.

# Looking for other ways to read this?

![cover image](https://www.nap.edu/cover/11625/450)

## IN ADDITION TO READING ONLINE, THIS TITLE IS AVAILABLE IN THESE FORMATS:

PDF FREE Download Hardback $69.95 Add to Cart Ebook $54.99 Add to Cart

MyNAP members **SAVE 10%** off online.  
Not a MyNAP member yet? Register for a free account to start saving and
receiving special member only perks.

No thanks. I’ll keep reading

                    
                                                * Contents
                            *             * Chapter
                            *             * Page of 388
                            *             * Original Pages Text Pages
                            *             *             * Get This Book
                    

« Previous: 5 Generating and Evaluating Scientific Evidence and Explanations

Page 168 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

### **6**

**Understanding How Scientific** **Knowledge Is Constructed**

_Major Findings in the Chapter:_

                    
                                                * _The research base on children 's understanding of how scientific knowledge is constructed is limited. Most studies have been conducted in_ _laboratory settings and do not take into account instructional history_ _and children 's opportunity to learn about this aspect of science._
                    
                            * _Most children do not develop a sophisticated understanding of how_ _scientific knowledge is constructed._
                    
                            * _Methods of science dominate the school science curriculum, with little_ _emphasis on the role of theory, explanation, or models._
                    
                            * _Children 's understanding of science appears to be amenable to instruction. However, more research is needed that provides insight into_ _the experiences and conditions that facilitate their understanding of_ _science as a way of knowing._
                    

Science is not only a body of knowledge, but also a way of knowing. One
important underpinning for learning science is students' understanding of the
nature and structure of scientific knowledge and the process by which it is
developed. Our vision of K-8 science features this understanding as one of the
four strands. We have elevated this focus to the status of a strand for
several reasons. We view understanding of the nature and structure of
scientific knowledge and the process by which it is developed as a worthy end
in and of itself. In addition, emerging research evidence suggests that
students' grasp of scientific explanations of the natural world and their
ability to engage successfully in scientific investigations are advanced when
they under-

Page 169 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

stand how scientific knowledge is constructed. In this chapter we address how
children come to understand both "how we know" in science and "why we believe"
scientific evidence.

For more than a century, educators have argued that students should understand
how scientific knowledge is constructed (Rudolph, 2005). One rationale that is
often invoked, but not empirically tested, is that understanding science makes
for a more informed citizenry and supports democratic participation. That is,
citizens who understand how scientific knowledge is produced will be careful
consumers of scientific claims about public scientific issues (e.g., global
warming, ecology, genetically modified foods, alternative medicine) both at
the ballot box and in their daily lives.

A second justification among educators is that understanding the structure and
nature of science makes one better at doing and learning science (see review
by Sandoval, 2005). That is, if students come to see science as a set of
practices that builds models to account for patterns of evidence in the
natural world, and that what counts as evidence is contingent on making
careful observations and building arguments, then they will have greater
success in their efforts to build knowledge. Viewing these processes from a
distance--not merely enacting them--enhances students' ability to practice
science. Schauble and colleagues (1995), for example, found that fifth grade
students designed better experiments after instruction about the purpose of
experimentation.

We begin the chapter with an elaboration on science as a way of knowing,
sketching the goals of the enterprise, the nature and structure of scientific
knowledge, and the process by which it is constructed. This elaboration is
intended to provide a sense of the target we have for students' learning. That
is, it represents currently accepted ideas about the nature of scientific
knowledge that are important to teach in grades K-8.

Building on this model of science, we first turn to the cognitive research
literatures to examine the intellectual resources relevant to this strand that
children bring to kindergarten. In an earlier chapter (Chapter 3), we
discussed the developmental research on children's early "theory of mind,"
that is, their growing awareness of their own and other's minds and their
understanding of expertise. In this chapter, we first discuss how during the
K-8 years, they build on these understandings to develop some initial
epistemological ideas about what knowledge is and how it is constructed. Next,
we consider how they begin to think about what scientific knowledge is and how
it is constructed. In the field of science education, this research is often
found under the general heading of students' understanding of the nature of
science. Finally, we consider external influences on students' understanding
of science as a way of knowing, including teacher knowledge, the epistemic
model that may underlie the curriculum, and the literature--albeit extremely
small--that has been focused on classroom-based interventions in epistemic
advancements.

Page 170 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Before delving into this research, one major caveat is in order. Almost all of
the research investigating children's thinking relevant to this strand has
been conducted in the research laboratory, examining how their thinking
develops over time irrespective of instructional history or opportunities to
learn. It allows us to point to developmental trends and base-level
competencies that can be expected in a given age span in normally developing
children. However, inferences from this research base about the upper limits
of children's capability are inappropriate and are likely to yield
underestimates _._ Furthermore, as almost all of this research attends to
development and not opportunities to learn, it provides little insight into
the kinds of experiences and conditions that facilitate children 's
understanding of science and thinking about their own knowledge. A few studies
have begun to explore the effects of teaching approaches on the development of
epistemological understanding. We offer a limited discussion of this
literature here. Later, in Chapters 6 and 9, we discuss in more depth studies
that provide insight as to supportive classroom conditions and provide better
proxies for what is possible when those conditions exist.

#### **UNDERLYING MODEL OF THE NATURE AND** **DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENTIFIC

KNOWLEDGE**

Before considering the research that may elucidate the intellectual resources
and challenges that learning this strand might pose to children in the K-8
years, we briefly review approaches the field has taken to articulate the
underlying model of building scientific knowledge. In this explication, we
consider the goals of the enterprise, the nature and structure of scientific
knowledge, and how knowledge is developed, with a focus on what is most
relevant for student learning. (For a more complete discussion of our view of
the nature of science, see Chapter 2.) While we acknowledge there is no simple
correspondence with this model of science and the epistemic goals of the
curriculum at any particular grade level, consideration of both relevant
cognitive research and instructional design is informed by close consideration
of the normative model.

Osborne and colleagues (2003) have proposed taking a consensus view to
identify the ideas about science that should be part of the school science
curriculum. They conducted a study to examine the opinions of scientists,
science educators, individuals involved in promoting the public understanding
of science, and philosophers, historians, and sociologists of science. They
identified nine themes encapsulating key ideas about the nature of science
that were considered to be an essential component of school science
curriculum. These included science and certainty, analysis and interpretation
of data, scientific method and critical testing, hypothesis and pre-

Page 171 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

diction, creativity/science and questioning, cooperation and collaboration in
the development of scientific knowledge, science and technology, historical
development of scientific knowledge, and diversity of scientific thinking.

Sandoval reviewed Osborne and others' definitions of science epistemology
(e.g., Driver et al., 1996; Lederman et al., 2002; McComas and Olson, 1998)
and presented a more manageable list of four broad epistemological themes,
which we pause to discuss briefly. First, Sandoval asserts that viewing
scientific knowledge as constructed is of primary importance that underscores
a dialectical relationship between theory and evidence. Students, if they are
to understand what science is, must accept that it is something that people do
and create. From this flows the implication that science involves creativity
and that science is not science because it is "true" but because it is
persuasive.

The second theme is that scientific methods are diverse: there is no single
"method" which generically applies to all scientific inquiries (experiments
may be conducted in some fields, but not in others). Rather than relying on
one or several rote methods, science depends on ways of evaluating scientific
claims (e.g., with respect to systematicity, care, and fit with existing
knowledge).

Third, scientific knowledge comes in different forms, which vary in their
explanatory and predictive power (e.g., theories, laws, hypotheses; for more
on this, see Chapter 2). This is a theme often overlooked in traditional
analyses (including Osborne's) but one that is central to understanding the
constructive nature of science and the interaction of different knowledge
forms in inquiry. Fourth, Sandoval asserts that scientific knowledge varies in
certainty. Acknowledging variable certainty, Sandoval argues, invites students
to engage the ideas critically and to evaluate them using epistemological
criteria.

Another approach to defining the aspects of understanding the epistemology of
science that science curriculum should inhere is to consider the aspects of
epistemology that have been linked to enhancing the development of science
understanding. Although the literature does not offer a systematic treatment
of this notion, there are pockets of evidence that suggest a relationship
between aspects of epistemology and students' understanding and use of
scientific knowledge.

For example, there is evidence that when students come to view argumentation
as a central feature of science, this can have considerable positive effects
on their understanding and use of investigative strategies (see, e.g.,
Sandoval and Reiser, 2004; Toth, Suthers, and Lesgold, 2002). Songer and Linn
(1991) have also analyzed the effects of a dynamic versus a static view of
science and found that a dynamic view is conducive to knowledge integration.
Hammer (1994) has identified a relationship between views of knowledge (in
terms of coherence, authoritativeness, and degree to which knowl-

Page 172 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

edge is constructed) and achievement differences in science among
undergraduate physics students.

In addition, there is also evidence that students' epistemology of models--an
aspect of epistemology that receives little attention in the normative and
consensus views of the nature of science--has important implications for a
range of conceptual and practical outcomes. Gobert and colleagues have studied
the epistemology of models of students in the middle grades, high school, and
college, including their understanding of models as representations of causal
or explanatory ideas, that there can be multiple models of the same thing,
that models do not need to be exactly like the thing modeled, and that models
can be revised or changed in light of new data. They have documented
correlations between measures of students' sophistication in the epistemology
of models and their ability to draw inferences from texts and transfer causal
knowledge to new domains, as well as conceptual development (Gobert and
Discenna, 1997; Gobert and Pallant, 2001).

Similarly, Schwartz and White (2005) studied seventh grade student learning
using a software environment that allowed the students to design, test, and
revise models. They examined a battery of pre- and postmeasures of physics
content knowledge, inquiry, and knowledge of modeling. They found that
students' pretest modeling knowledge was the only variable that was a
significant predictor of success for all three posttest measures, and it was
the best predictor of both posttest content and modeling knowledge. While
these studies examine but a few slices of epistemology, they suggest that
certain features of epistemological understanding can offer students powerful
leverage for science learning. These studies also suggest an important way to
think about defining what students should learn about epistemology and the
nature of science and call attention to an area worthy of future study.

#### **UNDERSTANDING SCIENCE AND** **KNOWLEDGE IN THE K-8 YEARS**

In this section, we separate the research literature into that concerned with
the development of children's understanding of knowledge in general and that
more specifically concerned with the development of their understanding of
scientific knowledge. Changes across the K-8 grades reflect increasing
variability in students' opportunities to learn about knowledge construction
in science and increasing variability in their understanding of science as a
way of knowing. Also contributing to the complexity of this picture, multiple
literatures with fundamentally different methodological tactics and analytical
lenses have contributed contrasting models of the limitations and emerging
competences of K-8 students.

Page 173 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

##### **Understanding Knowledge Construction**

There are multiple lines of research, largely disjointed, that are relevant to
K-8 students' understanding of knowledge construction. This research
encompasses both a continuation of the developmental research literature and
the "epistemic cognition" literature investigating stages in older students'
stances toward knowledge and knowing.

One line of research in the developmental literature involves a continuation
of the theory of mind frame into the elementary school years _._ There is
evidence that 6-year-olds (in limited contexts) are beginning to develop a
view of mind as an "active interpreter." That is, they become more aware that
people actively construct their own understanding of the world and are aware
of the role of prior knowledge in seeing. At the same time, the literature
suggests, children continue to elaborate on their understanding of mind (and
different mental states) throughout elementary school.

Young children's understanding of the constructive nature of knowledge itself
has not been studied extensively, but the limited research suggests that upper
elementary school students tend to fall short of viewing knowledge as rooted
in a theoretical world view. Kuhn and Leadbeater (1988), for example,
fictionalized two conflicting historical accounts of the "Livian Wars." They
asked students to interpret the accounts in response to a variety of probe
questions that they were asked after reading the two accounts. Students were
asked to articulate differences between the accounts, consider reasons for the
differences, and discuss whether both accounts could be correct. They were
scored in terms of epistemological level, from treating the two pieces as
factual accounts that might differ only in specific facts reported, to
understanding that they reflect contrasting interpretations, filtered through
world views. They found that no sixth graders responded in terms of the higher
levels.

The work of Perry (1970/1999), consisting of longitudinal studies of Harvard
male undergraduates, constitutes an early and influential line of research on
stages in understanding knowledge construction. Researchers have made
substantial methodological and conceptual advances since Perry's time (see the
discussion of instructional intervention studies in the next section).
However, work that continues in the tradition of Perry maintains his general
findings that, over the early to late adolescent years, individuals display
shifts in their general stance toward knowledge and knowing. Specifically,
many young people enter early adolescence embracing an "absolutist" or dualist
view of knowledge and truth, one that assumes that there is one right answer
to every question and differences of opinion are explainable by misinformation
or faulty reasoning. At some point, usually during adolescence, youngsters
become aware that others may disagree with them on matters about which they
hold strong beliefs.

Page 174 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

As these young people begin to understand that knowing necessarily involves
interpretation and its consequent ambiguities, they may enter an
epistemological crisis, characterized by what Chandler, Boyes, and Ball (1990)
called "epistemic doubt." In this state, they struggle with the erosion of
their certainty and may lose confidence altogether that it is possible to be
certain about anything. The temporary result may be subjective relativism, a
stance epitomized in the quintessential adolescent remark, "Whatever."
Subjective relativism is the notion that as all beliefs are subjectively held,
it is impossible to verify any of them with certainty, so no one's beliefs or
opinions are better or worse than those of anyone else.

This relativism is regarded as an early reaction to the recognition that
knowledge is conjectural and uncertain, open to and requiring interpretation.
In later adolescence or early adulthood, some individuals may pass through
relativism to embrace a contextualist commitment to reasoned judgment,
although this move is by no means typical or inevitable. The individual
continues to understand that knowledge is neither certain nor complete but
comes nevertheless to accept that, with good judgment and careful reason, it
is possible over time to achieve successively closer approximations of the
truth.

Much of this research has been performed with college undergraduates, and the
homogeneity of the participants may in part account for the degree of general
agreement in the findings about the overall nature of change. However,
different models propose different numbers of sublevels along the way.
Moreover, there are some disagreements about the extent to which change is
regarded as universal or not, the ages at which shifts typically occur, and
also the extent to which it is regarded as stage-like and structurally
integrated, or composed of a series of relatively independent beliefs about
knowledge and learning. Some accounts emphasize change that is primarily
linear and hierarchical, whereas others propose that change is merely
adaptation to one's immediate or global environment and thus may not be
unidirectional.

Most of the models appear to assume that epistemology is trait-like, so that
it is a relatively stable feature of the individual. However, a few (e.g.,
Hammer and Elby, 2002; Sandoval, 2005) argue that epistemology is situational,
an interaction of the individual's cognitive and historical resources and
environmental features that cue or elicit patterns of those resources.

At first glance, some of these ideas appear to be inconsistent with research
that suggests that much earlier--indeed, by the time they begin elementary
school--children already are well aware that individuals can hold different
beliefs about the same objects and events. Beliefs are not simply copies of
reality; they are products of the activity of knowing--therefore, they are
subject to verification and are potentially disconfirmable by evidence
(Perner, 1991). If young elementary schoolchildren understand these

Page 175 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

concepts, how can adolescents be deemed to hold an "absolutist" position
toward knowledge? Chandler, Hallett, and Sokol (2002) suggest that, although
young children are aware of representational diversity, this does not mean
that they consider it a necessary or legitimate aspect of knowledge. Instead,
they are more likely to believe that there is one right answer and that other
interpretations are simply wrong or misinformed.

Chandler, Hallett, and Sokol (2002) propose that young children do not
understand that diversity of interpretations is "somehow intrinsic to the
knowing process;" that is, that interpretation is an unavoidable aspect of all
knowledge. Hence, the criteria for knowledge cannot easily be specified, and
all knowing is associated with an unavoidable degree of ambiguity.

##### **Understanding the Nature of Science** **and How It Is Constructed**

Multiple lines of research are relevant to the issue of children's
understanding of the nature of science and how it is constructed. And once
again, the relations between the lines of research are complex. Relevant lines
of research include the science-specific developmental literature, the
epistemic cognition literature focused on understanding of science as a way of
knowing, and survey-based data focused on children's beliefs about the nature
of scientific knowledge and how it is constructed. Finally, we consider how
science curricula, instructional interventions, and teachers' notions of
science may influence children's understanding of science as a way of knowing.

It is straightforward to imagine how holding either absolutist or relativist
epistemologies could lead to a distorted view of the nature of science.
Indeed, research directed more explicitly at young students' grasp of the
nature of scientific knowledge and practice has produced findings with
interesting parallels to the more general developmental literature. For
example, Carey and Smith (1993) point out that many students do not understand
that science is primarily a theory-building enterprise. They may learn about
observation, hypotheses, and experiment from their science textbooks, but they
rarely understand that theories underlie these activities and are responsible
for both the generation and interpretation of both hypotheses and experiments.
The commonsense epistemology that young students typically hold is
unreflective; to the extent that they think about it at all, children often
think of knowledge as stemming directly from sensory experience, even though
they do know that some knowledge is inferred rather than observed (Sodian and
Wimmer, 1987), and they are even aware that the same object may be interpreted
differently by different observers (Taylor, Cartwright, and Bowden, 1991).

Page 176 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Carey and Smith (1993) suggest that children may not make clear distinctions
between theory, specific hypotheses, and evidence, and they may expect to find
simpler and more direct relations between data and conclusions than are
warranted. Like the absolutists described in the developmental psychology
literature, they tend to regard differences in conclusions or observations as
being due to lack of information or misinformation, rather than legitimate
differences in perspective or interpretation. There is limited or no awareness
that one's beliefs may be connected into coherent frameworks, and that these
frameworks may have an influence on what one observes via the senses. For this
reason, Kitchener and King (1981) argue students fail to understand that
controversy is a part of science and that authorities are deemed, by
definition, to share a common set of true beliefs. We suggest, however, an
additional factor that may explain this finding, but that is not considered in
this body of research. Children are rarely taught about controversy in
science, so why would they come to view scientific knowledge as contested?

Carey et al. (1989) asked seventh graders a series of questions about the
goals and practice of science and about the relationships between scientists'
ideas, experiments, and data. Students' responses to these interviews were
coalesced into three global perspectives about the nature of science, ranging
from Level 1, in which scientists were regarded simply as collecting facts
about the world, to Level 3, in which scientists were seen as concerned with
building ever more powerful and explanatorily adequate theories about the
world. A second interview study (Grosslight, Unger, Jay, and Smith, 1991)
probed middle school students' understanding of models and modeling and
achieved similar results. Many children regarded models merely as copies of
the world, a Level 1 perspective. Level 2 children understood that models
involve both the selection and omission of features, but emphasis remained on
the models themselves rather than on the scientists' ideas behind the model.
Finally, in Level 3 epistemology, models were regarded as tools developed for
the purpose of testing theories.

Almost all seventh graders in these studies were at Levels 1 or 2, described
by the researchers as "knowledge unproblematic" because from this view,
disagreements about the nature of reality are considered due to ignorance or
misinformation and knowledge is regarded as relatively straightforward. In
contrast, in "knowledge problematic" epistemologies, seldom or never achieved
by the students in these studies, knowledge is regarded as being organized
into theories about the world that are actively constructed via a process of
critical inquiry and that are often successively revised over extended periods
of time.

The science education research on learners' and teachers' views about the
nature of science is mixed (McComus and Olson, 1998; Lederman et al., 2002;
Lederman, 1999; Osborne et al., 2003). When data are gathered em-

Page 177 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

ploying survey instruments that probe learners' views of science outside any
specific context of inquiry, the results indicate that even high school and
undergraduate students do not develop accurate views about the theory revision
and responsiveness to evidence.

Similarly, Driver et al. (1996) interviewed same-age pairs of students at ages
9, 12, and 16 about the purposes of scientific work, their understanding of
the nature and status of scientific knowledge, and their understanding of
science as a social enterprise. They classified students' responses about
epistemology into three overall levels, with the lowest levels reflecting
little acknowledgment of interpretation and successive levels indicating the
importance of forms of thinking that do not rely solely on sensory input. The
reasoning considered at the lowest level was reasoning grounded in phenomena;
at the next, empirical reasoning based on relationships between variables; and
finally, the highest level was reasoning that uses imagined models. Like the
Carey and Unger studies, Driver et al. (1996) characterized children as moving
from perspectives that emphasize unproblematic, sensory-based knowledge in
which truth is considered a relatively simple objective to attain, to views in
which science is acknowledged to depend on active interpretations of staged
events (experiments), mental manipulations, and coherent, connected bodies of
knowledge that may include many areas of uncertainty.

Much of this research literature suggests that K-8 students have a limited
understanding of how scientific knowledge is constructed. However, it is not
clear to what extent one can attribute such limitations to developmental
stage, as opposed to adequacy of instructional opportunity or other
experiences. In the words of Carey and Smith (1993, p. 243): "Two questions of
urgent importance to educators now arise. First, in what sense are these
levels developmental? Second (and distinctly), do these levels provide
barriers to grasping a constructivist epistemology if such is made the target
of the science education?"

Consider first the model of science as a way of knowing underlying the science
children experience in the science curriculum, their primary source of
information about the nature of the discipline. As noted in other chapters, in
the upper elementary school years, the process of scientific knowledge
construction is typically represented as experiment, with negligible
acknowledgment of the role of interpretation or, more generally, the active
role of the scientist in the process of knowledge construction. In the early
grades, the typical emphasis on description of phenomenology through the basic
science process skills of observation, categorization, measurement, etc., also
reflects a distorted image of science, far removed from a constructivist
epistemology.

In the same vein, science aspires to construct conceptual structures, with
robust explanatory and predictive power, yet this is seldom either explicit or
implicit in the K-8 science curriculum. An analysis of science

Page 178 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

curriculum by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
indicates that all curricular content is typically represented as of equal
importance, with little attention to its interconnections or functionality.
According to Roseman, Kesidou, Stern, and Caldwell (1999), authors of the AAAS
report, the science texts evaluated by AAAS included many classroom activities
that either were irrelevant to learning key science ideas or failed to help
students relate their activitiy to science ideas.

Science curriculum has long been criticized as reflecting an impoverished and
misleading model of science as a way of knowing (e.g., Burbules and Linn,
1991; Hewson and Hewson, 1988). Methods of science dominate the school science
curriculum, with little emphasis on the role of theory, explanation, or
models. More contemporary views of science (Giere, 1991, 1999; Solomon, 2001;
Longino, 1990) "as a multidimensional interaction among the models of
scientists, empirical observation of the real world, and their predictions"
are seldom included (Osborne et al., 2003, p. 715).

Although there are notable exceptions to this pattern, most K-8 curricula
would appear to at least exacerbate the epistemological shortcomings with
which children enter school. In the words of Reif and Larkin (1991, p. 733):
"Science taught in schools is often different from actual science and from
everyday life. Students' learning difficulties are thus increased because
scientific goals are distorted and scientific ways of thinking are
inadequately taught."

Another factor that needs to be considered in understanding and attribution of
children's shortcomings in this regard is teachers' understanding of science
as a way of knowing (Akerson, Abd-El-Khalick, and Lederman, 2000). The
epistemic cognition literature has documented shortcomings in students at all
levels of study, including college and beyond. It is not surprising that
shortcomings in the understanding of science as a way of knowing have been
identified in K-8 teachers.

A small literature of classroom-based design studies indicates that these
limitations may be at least to some degree ameliorable by instruction. Design
studies, in which researchers create conditions favorable to students'
learning about the scientific enterprise, show that elementary and middle
school students can develop their understanding of how scientific knowledge
develops (Carey et al., 1989; Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick, 2002), including a
more sophisticated understanding of the nature and purpose of scientific
models (Gobert and Pallant, 2001; Schwartz and White, 2005). With appropriate
supports for learning strategies of investigation, children can generate
meaningful scientific questions and design and conduct productive scientific
investigations (e.g., Metz, 2004; Smith et al., 2000).

For example, in the small elementary school in which she was the lone science
teacher, Gertrude Hennessey was able to systematically focus the lessons on
core ideas built cumulatively across grades 1-6. She chose to

Page 179 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

emphasize generating, communicating, and evaluating theories via the
intelligibility, plausibility, fruitfulness, and conceptual coherence of the
alternatives (see Table 6-1). Research on her sixth grade students'
understanding of the nature of science suggested that they had a much better
sense of the constructive, knowledge problematic nature of the enterprise than
did sixth graders from a comparable school (Smith et al., 2000).

In another example, students showed improved understanding of the process of
modeling after they engaged in the task of designing a model that works like a
human elbow (Penner et al., 1997). In this study, students in first and second
grade in two classrooms participated in a model-building task over three
consecutive 1-hour sessions. They began by discussing different types of
models they had previously seen or made. They considered the characteristics
of those models, and how models are used for understanding phenomena. They
were then introduced to the task of designing a model that functions like
their elbow. After discussing how their own elbows work, children worked in
pairs or triads to design and build models that illustrated the functional
aspects of the human elbow. After generating an initial model, each group
demonstrated and explained their model to the class followed by discussion of
the various models. Students were then given an opportunity to modify their
models or start over. In interviews conducted after the session, students
improved in their ability to judge the functional rather than perceptual
qualities of models compared with nonmodeling peers. They also demonstrated an
understanding of the process of modeling in general that was similar to that
of children 3 to 4 years older.

Researchers have also identified important curricular features that support
the development of a more sophisticated epistemology. Curricula can facilitate
the epistemological development of students when they focus on deep science
problems, provide students opportunities to conduct inquiry, and structure
explicit discussion of epistemological issues (see, e.g., Bell and Linn, 2000;
Davis, 1998; Smith and Wenk, in press). It is also important to note that
students' understanding of epistemology does not grow unproblematically from
inquiry experiences. In order to advance their understanding of epistemology,
learners engaged in inquiry need explicit cues to reflect on their experiences
and observations and consider the epistemological implications (Khishfe and
Abd-El-Khalick, 2002).

#### **CONCLUSIONS**

The research base related to children's understanding of knowledge in general
and of scientific knowledge specifically is limited. Much of the work on
knowledge has been carried out with college-age populations, although some
studies in developmental psychology have looked at children's under

Page 180 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

**TABLE 6-1** One Progression of Increasingly Sophisticated Metaconceptual
Activities in Grades 1-6

Grade

|

Students' Role

|

Teacher's Role

---|---|--- 

1

|

                    
                                                * Explicitly state their own views about the topic under consideration
                    
                            * Begin to consider the reasoning used to support their views
                    
                            * Being to differentiate what they think from why they think it
                    

|

                    
                                                * Finds a variety of ways in which students can externally represent their thinking about the topic
                    
                            * Provides many experiences for students to begin to articulate the reasoning used to support ideas/ beliefs
                    

2

|

                    
                                                * Begin to address the necessity of understanding other (usually peer) positions before they can discuss or comment on those positions
                    
                            * Toward the end of the year, begin to recognize inconsistency in the thoughts of others, but not necessarily in their own thinking
                    

|

                    
                                                * Continues to provide an educational environment in which students can safely express their thoughts, without reproaches from others
                    
                            * Introduces concept of consistency of thinking
                    
                            * Models consistent and inconsistent thinking (students can readily point out when teacher is being inconsistent)
                    

3

|

                    
                                                * Explore the idea that thoughts have consequences, and that what one thinks may influence what one chooses to see
                    
                            * Begin to differentiate _understanding_ what a peer is saying from _believing_ what a peer is saying
                    
                            * Begin to comment on how their current ideas have changed from past ideas and to consider that current ideas may also need to be revised over time
                    

|

                    
                                                * Fosters metacognitive discourse among learners in order to illuminate students' internal representations
                    
                            * Provides lots of examples from their personal work (which is saved from year to year) of student ideas
                    

Page 181 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Grade

|

Student' Role

|

Teacher's Role

---|---|--- 

4-6

|

                    
                                                * Begin to consider the implications and limitations of their personal thinking
                    
                            * Begin to look for ways of revising their personal thinking
                    
                            * Begin to evaluate their own/others' thinking in terms of intelligibility, plausibility, and fruitfulness of ideas
                    
                            * Continue to articulate criteria for acceptance of ideas (i.e., consistency and generalizability)
                    
                            * Continue to employ physical representations of their thinking
                    
                            * Begin to employ analogies and metaphors, discuss their explicit use, and differentiate physical models from conceptual models
                    
                            * Articulate and defend ideas about "what learning should be like"
                    

|

                    
                                                * Provides historical examples of very important people changing their views and explanations over time
                    
                            * Begins to use students' external representations of their thinking as a way of evaluating their ideas/ beliefs (in terms of intelligibility, plausibility, and fruitfulness) in order to (a) create, when necessary, dissatisfaction in the minds of the learner to facilitate conceptual exchange or (b) look for ways of promoting conceptual capture in the mind of the learner
                    

SOURCE: Smith et al. (2000).

standing of how knowledge is constructed. Many researchers assume that
epistemology is trait-like, although some argue that it is situational--an
interaction of cognitive and historical resources with environmental features
that cue or elicit those resources.

Looking across the various lines of research, most children in grades K-8 do
not further develop the rudimentary knowledge and skills that are so evident
during the preschool years. Young children tend to move from one level of
understanding to the next slowly, if at all, and by middle school few students
reach higher levels of understanding, at which knowledge is viewed as
problematic and claims are necessarily subjected to scrutiny for their
evidentiary warrants. In large measure, this pervasive pattern probably
reflects more about the opportunities to learn that children encounter in
their

Page 182 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

education than a measure of what they could do under different conditions.
Evidence from design studies, discussed in this chapter and to which we return
in Chapter 9, suggests that, under optimal curricular and instructional
conditions, children can develop very sophisticated views of knowledge. Yet
the contrast is remarkable between the capabilities of preschool children and
modal patterns of development in older children and the lack of sophisticated
reasoning about knowledge in early adolescents.

We argue that in carefully designed, supportive environments, elementary and
middle school children are capable of understanding and working with knowledge
in sophisticated ways. Instruction in K-8 science can significantly advance
their understanding of the nature and structure of scientific knowledge and
the process by which it is constructed. Design studies, in which researchers
create conditions favorable to students' learning about the scientific
enterprise, suggest that elementary students can develop higher levels of how
scientific knowledge develops. With appropriate supports for learning
strategies of investigation, children can engage in designing and conducting
investigations that enable them to understand science as a way of knowing
(Gobert and Pallant, 2001; Klahr and Li, 2005; Metz, 2004; Schwartz and White,
2005; Smith et al., 2000; Toth, Klahr, and Chen, 2000). The core elements of
this scientific activity involve articulating hypotheses, laws, or models,
designing experiments or empirical investigations that test these ideas,
collecting data, and using data as evidence to evaluate and revise them. We
will discuss this literature in depth in Chapter 9.

Current science education does not typically offer the kind of educational
environments that have been shown to support children's understanding of
scientific knowledge. Rather, there is a tendency to overemphasize methods,
often experimental methods, as opposed to presenting science as a process of
building theories and models, checking them for internal consistency and
coherence, and testing them empirically. This lack of attention to theory,
explanation, and models may exacerbate the difficulties children have with
understanding how scientific knowledge is constructed. It may, in fact,
strengthen their misconceptions, such as the view that scientific knowledge is
unproblematic, relatively simple to obtain, and flows easily from direct
observation. While curricula may be one source of this problem, teachers' lack
of understanding of science as a way of knowing may also play a role. The role
of teachers and teacher knowledge in science education is taken up in greater
detail in Chapter 10.

#### **REFERENCES**

Akerson, V.L., Abd-El-Khalick, F., and Lederman, N.G. (2000). Influence of a
reflective explicit activity-based approach on elementary teachers'
conceptions of nature of science. _Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
37_ (4), 295-317.

Page 183 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Bell, P., and Linn, M.C. (2000). Beliefs about science: How does science
instruction contribute? In B.K. Hofer and P.R. Pintrich (Eds.), _Personal
epistemology: The_ _psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing._
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Burbules, N.C., and Linn, M.C. (1991). Science education and the philosophy of
science: Congruence or contradiction? _International Journal of Science
Education, 3_ (3), 227-241.

Carey, S., Evans, R., Honda, M., Jay, E., and Unger, C. (1989). "An experiment
is when you try it and see if it works": A study of grade 7 students'
understanding of the construction of scientific knowledge. _International
Journal of Science_ _Education, 11_ (5), 514-529.

Carey, S., and Smith, C. (1993). On understanding the nature of scientific
knowledge. _Educational Psychologist, 28_ (3), 235-251.

Chandler, M., Boyes, M., and Ball, L. (1990). Relativism and stations of
epistemic doubt. _Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 50_ , 370-395.

Chandler, M.J., Hallett, D., and Sokol, B.W. (2002). Competing claims about
competing knowledge claims. In B.K. Hofer and P.R. Pintrich (Eds.), _Personal
epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing_ (pp.
145-168) _._ Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Davis, E.A. (1998). _Scaffolding students ' reflection for science learning._
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., and Scott, P. (1996). _Young people 's
images of science._ Buckingham, England: Open University Press.

Giere, R.N. (1991) _Understanding scientific reasoning_. New York: Holt
Reinhart and Winston.

Giere, R.N. (1999). _Science without laws_. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Gobert, J., and Discenna, J. (1997). _The relationship between students '
epistemologies_ _and model-based reasoning._ (ERIC Document Reproduction
Service No. ED409164). Kalamazoo: Western Michigan University, Department of
Science Studies.

Gobert, J., and Pallant, A. (2001). _Making thinking visible: Promoting
science learning through modeling and visualizations_. Presented at the Gordon
Research Conference, Mt. Holyoke College, Hadley, MA, August 5-10.

Grosslight, L., Unger, C., Jay. E., and Smith, C. (1991). Understanding models
and their use in science: Conceptions of middle and high school students and
experts. _Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28,_ 799-822.

Hammer, D. (1994). Epistemological beliefs in introductory physics. _Cognition
and_ _Instruction, 12_ (2), 151-183.

Hammer, D., and Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In
B.K. Hofer and P.R. Pintrich (Eds.), _Personal epistemology: The psychology of
beliefs_ _about knowledge and knowing_ (pp. 169-190). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Hewson, P., and Hewson, M.,(1988). On appropiate conception of teaching
science: A view from studies of science learning. _Science Education, 72_ (5),
529-540.

Page 184 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Khishfe, R., and Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2002). Influence of explicit and
reflective versus implicit inquiry-oriented instruction on sixth graders'
views of nature of science. _Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39_ ,
551-578.

Kitchener, K.S., and King, P.M. (1981). Reflective judgment: Concepts of
justification and their relationship to age and education. _Journal of Applied
and Developmental Psychology, 2_ , 89-116.

Klahr, D., and Li, L. (2005). Cognitive research and elementary science
instruction: From the laboratory, to the classroom, and back. _Journal of
Science Education_ _and Technology, 14_ (2), 217-238.

Kuhn, D., and Leadbeater, B. (1988). The connection of theory and evidence.
The interpretation of divergent evidence. In H. Beilin, D. Kuhn, E. Amsel, and
M. O'Loughlin (Eds.), _The development of scientific thinking skills_. St.
Louis, MO: Academic Press.

Lederman, N.G. (1999). Teachers' understanding of the nature of science and
classroom practice: Factors that facilitate or impede the relationship.
_Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36_ , 916-929.

Lederman, N.G, Abd-el-Khalick, F., Bell, R.L., and Schwartz, R.S. (2002).
Views of nature of science questionnaire: Towards valid and meaningful
assessment of learners' conceptions of the nature of science. _Journal of
Research in Science_ _Teaching, 39_ (6), 497-521.

Longino, H. (1990). _Science as social knowledge_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

McComas, W.F., and Olson, J.K. (1998). The nature of science in international
science education standards documents. In W.F. McComas (Ed.), _The nature of
science_ _in science education: Rationales and strategies_ (pp. 41-52).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.

Metz, K.E. (2004). Children's understanding of scientific inquiry: Their
conceptualization of uncertainty in investigations of their own design.
_Cognition and Instruction,_ _22_ (2), 219-290.

Osborne, J.F., Collins, S., Ratcliffe, M., Millar, R., and Duschl, R. (2003).
What "ideas-about-science" should be taught in school science? A Delphi study
of the expert community. _Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40_ (7),
692-720.

Penner, D., Giles, N.D., Lehrer, R., and Schauble, L. (1997). Building
functional models: Designing an elbow. _Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 34_ (2), 125-143.

Perner, J. (1991). _Understanding the representational mind_. Cambridge, MA:
Bradford Books/MIT Press.

Perry, W.G. (1970/1999). _Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the
college_ _years: A scheme._ New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston.

Reif, F., and Larkin, J.H. (1991). Cognition in scientific and everyday
domains: Comparison and learning implications. _Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 28_ (9), 733-760.

Roseman, J., Kesidou, S., Stern, L., and Caldwell, A. (1999). Heavy books
light on learning: AAAS Project 2061 evaluates middle grades science
textbooks. _Science_ _Books and Films, 35_ , 243-247.

Rudolph, J.L. (2005). Epistemology for the masses: The origins of the
"scientific method" in American schools. _History of Education Quarterly, 45_
(2), 341-376.

Page 185 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

Sandoval, W.A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and
their influence on learning through inquiry. _Science Education, 89_ ,
634-656.

Sandoval, W.A., and Reiser, B.J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry:
Integrating conceptual and epistemic scaffolds for scientific inquiry.
_Science Education, 88_ , 345-372.

Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R., Schulze, S., and John, J. (1995).
Students' understanding of the objectives and procedures of experimentation in
the science classroom. _Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4_ (2), 131-166.

Schwarz, C., and White, B.Y. (2005). Metamodeling knowledge: Developing
students' understanding of scientific modeling. _Cognition and Instruction,
23_ (2), 165-205.

Smith, C.L., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., and Hennessey, M.G. (2000). Sixth-grade
students' epistemologies of science: The impact of school science experiences
on epistemological development. _Cognition and Instruction, 18(_ 3), 285-316.

Smith, C., and Wenk, L. (in press). Relations among three aspects of first-
year college students' epistemologies of science. _Journal of Research in
Science Teaching_.

Sodian, B., and Wimmer, H. (1987). Children's understanding of inference as a
source of knowledge. _Child Development_ , _58_ , 424-433.

Solomon, M. (2001). _Social empiricism._ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford
Books.

Songer, N.B., and Linn, M.C. (1991). How do students' views of the scientific
enterprise influence knowledge integration? _Journal of Research in Science
Teaching,_ _28_ (9), 761-784.

Taylor, M., Cartwright, B., and Bowden, T. (1991). Perspective-taking and
theory of mind: Do children predict interpretive diversity as a function of
differences in observer's knowledge? _Child Development, 62,_ 1334-1351.

Toth, E.E., Klahr, D., and Chen, Z. (2000). Bridging research and practice: A
cognitively-based classroom intervention for teaching experimentation skills
to elementary school children. _Cognition and Instruction_ , _18_ (4),
423-459.

Toth, E., Suthers, D., and Lesgold, A. (2002). Mapping to know: The effects of
evidence maps and reflective assessment on scientific inquiry skills. _Science
Education, 86_ (2), 264-286.

Page 168 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

168](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 169 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

169](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 170 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

170](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 171 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

171](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 172 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

172](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 173 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

173](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 174 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

174](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 175 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

175](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 176 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

176](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 177 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

177](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 178 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

178](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 179 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

179](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 180 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

180](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 181 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

181](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 182 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

182](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 183 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

183](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 184 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

184](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 185 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is
Constructed." National Research Council. 2007. _Taking Science to School:
Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8_. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/11625.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

185](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Next: 7 Participation in Scientific Practices and Discourse »

![The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and

Medicine](/images/hdr/logo-nasem-wht-lg.png) The National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  
500 Fifth St., NW | Washington, DC 20001

(C) 2019 National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Terms of Use and Privacy Statement

Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8 Get This
Book

×

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Buy Hardback | $69.95 Buy Ebook | $54.99

MyNAP members save 10% online.  
Login or Register to save!

Download Free PDF

What is science for a child? How do children learn about science and how to do
science? Drawing on a vast array of work from neuroscience to classroom
observation, _Taking Science to School_ provides a comprehensive picture of
what we know about teaching and learning science from kindergarten through
eighth grade. By looking at a broad range of questions, this book provides a
basic foundation for guiding science teaching and supporting students in their
learning. _Taking Science to School_ answers such questions as:

                    
                                                * When do children begin to learn about science? Are there critical stages in a child's development of such scientific concepts as mass or animate objects?
                            * What role does nonschool learning play in children's knowledge of science?
                            * How can science education capitalize on children's natural curiosity?
                            * What are the best tasks for books, lectures, and hands-on learning?
                            * How can teachers be taught to teach science?
                    

The book also provides a detailed examination of how we know what we know
about children's learning of science--about the role of research and evidence.
This book will be an essential resource for everyone involved in K-8 science
education--teachers, principals, boards of education, teacher education
providers and accreditors, education researchers, federal education agencies,
and state and federal policy makers. It will also be a useful guide for
parents and others interested in how children learn.

## Contents

                    
                                                *             * Front Matter i–xvi
                            * Executive Summary 1–8
                            * Part I - Introduction: 1 Science Learning Past and Present 9–25
                            * 2 Goals for Science Education 26–50
                            * Part II - How Children Learn Science: 3 Foundations for Science Learning in Young Children 51–92
                            * 4 Knowledge and Understanding of the Natural World 93–128
                            * 5 Generating and Evaluating Scientific Evidence and Explanations 129–167
                            * 6 Understanding How Scientific Knowledge Is Constructed 168–185
                            * 7 Participation in Scientific Practices and Discourse 186–210
                            * Part III - Supporting Science Learning: 8 Learning Progressions 211–250
                            * 9 Teaching Science as Practice 251–295
                            * 10 Supporting Science Instruction 296–330
                            * Part IV - Future Directions for Policy, Practice, and Research: 11 Conclusions and Recommendations 331–356
                            * Appendix A: Overview of Learning Progressions for Matter and the Atomic-Molecular Theory 357–365
                            * Appendix B: Biographical Sketches of Committee Members and Staff 366–372
                            * Index 373–388
                    
                            1. ×
                    

## Welcome to OpenBook!

You're looking at OpenBook, NAP.edu's online reading room since 1999. Based on
feedback from you, our users, we've made some improvements that make it easier
than ever to read thousands of publications on our website.

Do you want to take a quick tour of the OpenBook's features?

No Thanks Take a Tour »

                    
                                                2. ×
                    

Show this book's **table of contents** , where you can jump to any chapter by
name.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                3. ×
                    

...or use these buttons to go back to the **previous** chapter or skip to the
**next** one.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                4. ×
                    

Jump up to the **previous** page or down to the **next** one. Also, you can
type in a page number and press `Enter` to go directly to that page in the
book.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                5. ×
                    

Switch between the **Original Pages** , where you can read the report as it
appeared in print, and **Text Pages** for the web version, where you can
highlight and search the text.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                6. ×
                    

To **search** the entire text of this book, type in your search term here and
press `Enter`.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                7. ×
                    

**Share** a link to this book page on your preferred social network or via
email.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                8. ×
                    

View our **suggested citation** for this chapter.

« Back Next »

                    
                                                9. ×
                    

Ready to take your reading offline? Click here to **buy** this book in print
or **download** it as a free PDF, if available.

« Back Next »

Stay Connected!

### Get Email Updates

×

Do you enjoy reading reports from the Academies online **for free**? Sign up
for email notifications and we'll let you know about new publications in your
areas of interest when they're released.

Send me updates!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

