

Jump to navigation

__Menu

NRDC

Main menu

                    
                                                * Our Work
                              * Areas of Work
                                * Climate Change
                                * Communities
                                * Energy
                                * Food
                                * Health
                                * Oceans
                                * Water
                                * The Wild
                              * How We Work
                                * Advocacy
                                * Business
                                * Litigation
                                * Partnerships
                                * Science
                              * Where We Work
                                * International
                                * United States
                              * About Blocks
                                * About
                    

The Natural Resources Defense Council works to safeguard the earth - its
people, its plants and animals, and the natural systems on which all life
depends.

                    
                                                    * Support NRDC
                                * Follow Us
                    
                                  * Twitter Twitter
                                  * Facebook Facebook
                                  * YouTube YouTube
                                  * instagram instagram
                                  * RSS RSS Feed
                    
                              * View all from our work
                            * Our Experts
                            * Our Stories
                            * Get Involved
                            * About Us
                              * Mission
                              * Leadership
                              * Programs
                              * Financials
                              * Our Sustainability
                              * Media Center
                              * Careers
                              * Contact Us
                    

Donate

Monthly One-time

## Search

Search

facebook twitter

Scroll to the top __

Our Stories › Guide

# Global Warming 101

                    
                                                * Español
                    

Everything you wanted to know about our changing climate but were too afraid
to ask.

March 11, 2016 Amanda MacMillan

##### Jump to Section:

                    
                                                * What Is Global Warming?
                            * What Causes Global Warming?
                            * How Is Global Warming Linked to Extreme Weather?
                            * What Are the Other Effects of Global Warming?
                            * Where Does the United States Stand in Terms of Global-Warming Contributors?
                            * Is the United States Doing Anything To Prevent Global Warming?
                            * Is Global Warming Too Big of a Problem for Me to Help Tackle?
                    

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/full_content/public/media-

uploads/clis11_cmw42d_2400.jpg?itok=Foaue_b0)

Håkan Jansson/Alamy

#### Q: What is global warming?

**A:** Here's a simple definition of global warming. (And yes, it's really
happening.) Over the past 50 years, the average global temperature has
increased at the fastest rate in recorded history. And experts see the trend
is accelerating: All but one of the 16 hottest years in NASA's 134-year record
have occurred since 2000.

Climate change deniers have argued that there has been a "pause" or a
"slowdown" in rising global temperatures, but several recent studies,
including a 2015 paper published in the journal Science, have disproved this
claim. And scientists say that unless we curb global-warming emissions,
average U.S. temperatures could increase by up to 10 degrees Fahrenheit over
the next century.

#### Q: What causes global warming?

**A:** Global warming occurs when carbon dioxide (CO2) and other air
pollutants and greenhouse gases collect in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight
and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth's surface. Normally, this
radiation would escape into space--but these pollutants, which can last for
years to centuries in the atmosphere, trap the heat and cause the planet to
get hotter. That's what's known as the greenhouse effect.

In the United States, the burning of fossil fuels to make electricity is the
largest source of heat-trapping pollution, producing about two billion tons of
CO2 every year. Coal-burning power plants are by far the biggest polluters.
The country's second-largest source of carbon pollution is the transportation
sector, which generates about 1.7 billion tons of CO2 emissions a year.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/1up_promo/public/clean_car_1200x630.jpg?itok=8vXZaz4y)

## Tell the EPA and DOT to stop Trump's attack on clean car standards

### Take Action

Curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions, as well
as the use of alternatives to fossil fuels worldwide. The good news is that
we've started a turnaround: CO2 emissions in the United States actually
decreased from 2005 to 2014, thanks in part to new, energy-efficient
technology and the use of cleaner fuels. And scientists continue to develop
new ways to modernize power plants, generate cleaner electricity, and burn
less gasoline while we drive. The challenge is to be sure these solutions are
put to use and widely adopted.

#### Q: How is global warming linked to extreme weather?

**A:** Scientists agree that the earth's rising temperatures are fueling
longer and hotter heat waves, more frequent droughts, heavier rainfall, and
more powerful hurricanes. In 2015, for example, scientists said that an
ongoing drought in California--the state's worst water shortage in 1,200 years
--had been intensified by 15 percent to 20 percent by global warming. They
also said the odds of similar droughts happening in the future had roughly
doubled over the past century. And in 2016, the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine announced that it's now possible to confidently
attribute certain weather events, like some heat waves, directly to climate
change.

The earth's ocean temperatures are getting warmer, too--which means that
tropical storms can pick up more energy. So global warming could turn, say, a
category 3 storm into a more dangerous category 4 storm. In fact, scientists
have found that the frequency of North Atlantic hurricanes has increased since
the early 1980s, as well as the number of storms that reach categories 4 and
5. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina--the costliest hurricane in U.S. history--struck
New Orleans; the second-costliest, Hurricane Sandy, hit the East Coast in
2012.

The impacts of global warming are being felt across the globe. Extreme heat
waves have caused tens of thousands of deaths around the world in recent
years. And in an alarming sign of events to come, Antarctica has been losing
about 134 billion metric tons of ice per year since 2002. This rate could
speed up if we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace, some experts
say, causing sea levels to rise several meters over the next 50 to 150 years.

#### Q: What are the other effects of global warming?

**A:** Each year, scientists learn more about the consequences of global
warming, and many agree that environmental, economic, and health consequences
are likely to occur if current trends continue. Here's just a smattering of
what we can look forward to:

                    
                                                * Melting glaciers, early snowmelt, and severe droughts will cause more dramatic water shortages and increase the risk of wildfires in the American West.
                            * Rising sea levels will lead to coastal flooding on the Eastern Seaboard, especially in Florida, and in other areas such as the Gulf of Mexico.
                            * Forests, farms, and cities will face troublesome new pests, heat waves, heavy downpours, and increased flooding. All those factors will damage or destroy agriculture and fisheries.
                            * Disruption of habitats such as coral reefs and Alpine meadows could drive many plant and animal species to extinction.
                            * Allergies, asthma, and infectious disease outbreaks will become more common due to increased growth of pollen-producing ragweed, higher levels of air pollution, and the spread of conditions favorable to pathogens and mosquitoes.
                    

#### Q: Where does the United States stand in terms of global-warming

contributors?

**A:** In recent years, China has taken the lead in global-warming pollution,
producing about 28 percent of all CO2 emissions. The United States comes in
second. Despite making up just 4 percent of the world's population, we produce
a whopping 16 percent of all global CO2 emissions--as much as the European
Union and India (third and fourth place) combined. And America is still number
one, by far, in cumulative emissions over the past 150 years. Our
responsibility matters to other countries, and it should matter to us, too.

#### Q: Is the United States doing anything to prevent global warming?

**A:** We've started. But in order to avoid the worst effects of climate
change, we need to do a lot more--together with other countries--to reduce our
dependence on fossil fuels and start using clean energy instead.

In 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pledged to reduce carbon
pollution from our power plants by nearly a third by 2030, relative to 2005
levels, through its Clean Power Plan. But fast-forward to 2017, and under the
Trump Administration, the EPA proposed repealing this critical tool for
curbing climate change. Likewise, while under the Obama administration, the
U.S. Department of Transportation proposed carbon pollution and fuel economy
standards intended to cut emissions through the 2020s, under Trump
administration, the DOT is working to roll back those clean vehicle safeguards
that protect the climate and our health.

Fortunately, state leaders--including in car country itself--recognize that
clean transportation must remain a priority if we are to address the costly
risks of climate change and protect public health. And regional efforts around
the country are helping to boost the electric car market, which saw an
increase in sales for 2017 over 2016. Our clean energy economy is growing too,
despite federal efforts to derail it. In 2016, wind employment grew by 32
percent and solar jobs increased by 25 percent.

Globally, at the United Nations Conference on Climate Change in Paris, 195
countries--including the United States, at the time--agreed to pollution-
cutting provisions with a goal of preventing the average global temperature
from rising more than 1.5 degrees Celsius above preindustrial times.
(Scientists say we must stay below a two-degree increase to avoid catastrophic
climate impacts.)

To help make the deal happen, the Obama administration pledged $3 billion to
the Green Climate Fund, an international organization dedicated to helping
poor countries adopt cleaner energy technologies. Under the terms of the Paris
agreement, participating nations will meet every five years, starting in 2020,
to revise their plans for cutting CO2 emissions. Beginning in 2023, they will
also have to publicly report their progress.

While in 2017, President Trump announced the country's withdrawal from the
Paris climate agreement and to eliminate "harmful and unnecessary policies
such as the Climate Action Plan," Americans are forging ahead without him.
Through initiatives like the United States Climate Alliance, the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative, We Are Still In, and Climate Mayors, state,
business, and local leaders have pledged to honor and uphold the goals of the
Paris Agreement. More than 25 cities in 17 states, with populations totaling
more than 5 million have adopted resolutions that will enable them to get 100
percent of their electricity from renewable sources like wind and solar.

Even better, a new initiative by former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg
gives the urban layer of this movement a boost. He's asked mayors from the 100
most populous cities in the country to share their plans for making their
buildings and transportation systems run cleaner and more efficiently. The 20
that show the greatest potential for cutting the dangerous carbon pollution
that's driving climate change will share a total of $70 million in technical
assistance funding provided by Bloomberg Philanthropies and partners.

#### Q: Is global warming too big of a problem for me to help tackle?

**A:** Wondering how to stop global warming? Reduce your own carbon footprint
by following a few easy steps. Make conserving energy a part of your daily
routine and your decisions as a consumer. When you shop for new appliances
like refrigerators, washers, and dryers, look for products with the
government's Energy Star label; they meet a higher standard for energy
efficiency than the minimum federal requirements. When you buy a car, look for
one with the highest gas mileage and lowest emissions. You can also reduce
your emissions by taking public transportation or carpooling when possible.

And while new federal and state standards are a step in the right direction,
much more needs to be done. Voice your support of climate-friendly and climate
change preparedness policies, and tell your representatives that transitioning
from dirty fossil fuels to clean power should be a top priority--because it's
vital to building healthy, more secure communities.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/1up_promo/public/02_climate_clean_energy_header.jpg?itok=kA1uJDLC)

## Demand Climate Action

### Learn More

## Related Stories

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/hurricaneguide_gettyimages-851080664_1200.jpg?itok=c9prmRne)

Guide

### Hurricanes and Climate Change: Everything You Need to Know

The most widespread, damaging storms on earth are getting worse, and climate
change is a big reason why. Here’s a look at what causes hurricanes and how to
address the threat of a wetter, windier world.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/climate1_1200teaser.jpg?itok=FRY9Phs8)

Guide

### The IPCC Climate Change Report: Why It Matters to Everyone on the Planet

The U.N. report warns that dire impacts from climate change will arrive sooner
than many expected. Here’s why we need to follow the report’s advice, and why
every ton of emissions reductions can make a difference.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/clis6_797583_900x600.jpg?itok=-t1rt61J)

Explainer

### How You Can Stop Global Warming

Healing the planet starts at home—in your garage, in your kitchen, and at your
dining-room table.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/clims7_stt0009105_900x600.jpg?itok=IaaAv5aC)

Explainer

### Are the Effects of Global Warming Really that Bad?

Short answer: Yes. Even a seemingly slight average temperature rise is enough
to cause a dramatic transformation of our planet.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/coms5_000057193658_900x600_5.jpg?itok=J1A9Oii8)

Personal Action

### 5 Ways City Dwellers Can Spur Climate Action

What is your city doing about climate change? Ask your local leaders these
five questions.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/health4_26_airpollguide_istock_2796602_900x600px.jpg?itok=1pWlySSP)

Guide

### Air Pollution: Everything You Need to Know

How smog, soot, greenhouse gases, and other top air pollutants are affecting
the planet—and your health.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/HEAs12_9307204_900x600.jpg?itok=v5bNgNAM)

Personal Action

### Climate Change Is In the Air

As temperatures and carbon levels rise, even breathing has become a challenge.
Here’s what you can do to help clear the air.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/qa_benlongstreth_climatelitigation_e6rj77_rm_ds_1200x630.jpg?itok=hjBN7KmV)

Q&A

### Can I Participate in a Class-Action Lawsuit Against Climate Change

Inaction?

NRDC senior attorney Ben Longstreth explains how plaintiffs for these cases
get chosen—and how you can help advance the cause in or out of the courtroom.

![](https://assets.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/styles/3up_promo/public/nrdc_banks_1200_x_630_001.jpg?itok=1-4Kj5m5)

Explainer

### If the Government Won’t Act on Climate, Maybe Banks Will

Gun-control activists want to use financial levers to curtail firearm sales.
Can we do the same for carbon emissions?

## Support Our Work

$35 $50 $75 $100 $200 Other

Donate

## Join Us

Email *

Thanks for signing up. You'll receive your first NRDC action alert and update
email soon.

When you sign up you'll become a member of NRDC's Activist Network. We will
keep you informed with the latest alerts and progress reports.

                    
                                                * About Us
                            * Careers
                            * Contact Us
                            * Media Center
                            * Policy Library
                            * Sitemap
                            * En Español
                            * Privacy Policy
                    

Follow Us

                    
                                                * Twitter Twitter
                            * Facebook Facebook
                            * YouTube YouTube
                            * instagram instagram
                            * RSS RSS Feed
                    

(C) Natural Resources Defense Council 2019 Privacy Policy State Disclosures

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

