

Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-
overview.html

(C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National Geographic
Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

* * *

Reference

# What is global warming, explained

##

The planet is heating up—and fast.

Causes and Effects of Climate Change

Reference

# What is global warming, explained

##

The planet is heating up—and fast.

Causes and Effects of Climate Change

4 Minute Read

* * *

By **Christina Nunez**

* * *

PUBLISHED January 22, 2019

Glaciers are melting, sea levels are rising, cloud forests are dying, and
wildlife is scrambling to keep pace. It has become clear that humans have
caused most of the past century's warming by releasing heat-trapping gases as
we power our modern lives. Called greenhouse gases, their levels are higher
now than at any time in the last 800,000 years.

We often call the result global warming, but it is causing a set of changes to
the Earth's climate, or long-term weather patterns, that varies from place to
place. While many people think of global warming and climate change as
synonyms, scientists use “climate change” when describing the complex shifts
now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems—in part because some
areas actually get cooler in the short term.

Climate change encompasses not only rising average temperatures but also
extreme weather events, shifting wildlife populations and habitats, rising
seas, and a range of other impacts. All of those changes are emerging as
humans continue to add heat-trapping greenhouse gases to the atmosphere,
changing the rhythms of climate that all living things have come to rely on.

What will we do—what _can_ we do—to slow this human-caused warming? How will
we cope with the changes we've already set into motion? While we struggle to
figure it all out, the fate of the Earth as we know it—coasts, forests, farms,
and snow-capped mountains—hangs in the balance.

## **Understanding the greenhouse effect**

The "greenhouse effect" is the warming that happens when certain gases in
Earth's atmosphere trap heat. These gases let in light but keep heat from
escaping, like the glass walls of a greenhouse, hence the name.

Sunlight shines onto the Earth's surface, where the energy is absorbed and
then radiate back into the atmosphere as heat. In the atmosphere, greenhouse
gas molecules trap some of the heat, and the rest escapes into space. The more
greenhouse gases concentrate in the atmosphere, the more heat gets locked up
in the molecules.

Scientists have known about the greenhouse effect since 1824, when Joseph
Fourier calculated that the Earth would be much colder if it had no
atmosphere. This natural greenhouse effect is what keeps the Earth's climate
livable. Without it, the Earth's surface would be an average of about 60
degrees Fahrenheit (33 degrees Celsius) cooler.

View Images

A polar bear stands sentinel on Rudolf Island in Russia’s Franz Josef Land
archipelago, where the perennial ice is melting.

Photograph by Cory Richards

In 1895, the Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius discovered that humans could
enhance the greenhouse effect by making carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. He
kicked off 100 years of climate research that has given us a sophisticated
understanding of global warming.

Levels of greenhouse gases have gone up and down over the Earth's history, but
they had been fairly constant for the past few thousand years. Global average
temperatures had also stayed fairly constant over that time—until the past 150
years. Through the burning of fossil fuels and other activities that have
emitted large amounts of greenhouse gases, particularly over the past few
decades, humans are now enhancing the greenhouse effect and warming Earth
significantly, and in ways that promise many effects, scientists warn.

## **Aren't temperature changes natural?**

Human activity isn't the only factor that affects Earth's climate. Volcanic
eruptions and variations in solar radiation from sunspots, solar wind, and the
Earth's position relative to the sun also play a role. So do large-scale
weather patterns such as El Niño.

But climate models that scientists use to monitor Earth’s temperatures take
those factors into account. Changes in solar radiation levels as well as
minute particles suspended in the atmosphere from volcanic eruptions, for
example, have contributed only about two percent to the recent warming effect.
The balance comes from greenhouse gases and other human-caused factors, such
as land use change.

The short timescale of this recent warming is singular as well. Volcanic
eruptions, for example, emit particles that temporarily cool the Earth's
surface. But their effect lasts just a few years. Events like El Niño also
work on fairly short and predictable cycles. On the other hand, the types of
global temperature fluctuations that have contributed to ice ages occur on a
cycle of hundreds of thousands of years.

For thousands of years now, emissions of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere
have been balanced out by greenhouse gases that are naturally absorbed. As a
result, greenhouse gas concentrations and temperatures have been fairly
stable, which has allowed human civilization to flourish within a consistent
climate.

View Images

Greenland is covered with a vast amount of ice—but the ice is melting four
times faster than thought, suggesting that Greenland may be approaching a
dangerous tipping point, with implications for global sea-level rise.

Photograph by Michael Melford, Nat Geo Image Collection

Now, humans have increased the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by
more than a third since the Industrial Revolution. Changes that have
historically taken thousands of years are now happening over the course of
decades.

## **Why does this matter?**

The rapid rise in greenhouse gases is a problem because it’s changing the
climate faster than some living things can adapt to. Also, a new and more
unpredictable climate poses unique challenges to all life. ****

Historically, Earth's climate has regularly shifted between temperatures like
those we see today and temperatures cold enough to cover much of North America
and Europe with ice. The difference between average global temperatures today
and during those ice ages is only about 9 degrees Fahrenheit (5 degrees
Celsius), and the swings have tended to happen slowly, over hundreds of
thousands of years.

But with concentrations of greenhouse gases rising, Earth's remaining ice
sheets such as Greenland and Antarctica are starting to melt too. That extra
water could raise sea levels significantly, and quickly. By 2050, sea levels
are predicted to rise between one and 2.3 feet as glaciers melt.

As the mercury rises, the climate can change in unexpected ways. In addition
to sea levels rising, weather can become more extreme. This means more intense
major storms, more rain followed by longer and drier droughts—a challenge for
growing crops—changes in the ranges in which plants and animals can live, and
loss of water supplies that have historically come from glaciers.

Continue Reading

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

