

![ScienceDaily](/images/sd-logo.png)

* * *

Your source for the latest research news

Follow **___** _Subscribe ____

**Just In:**

                    
                                                * How Old Are Your Organs? Mix of Young, Old
                            * New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies
                            * Alzheimer's Protein: Plaques, Cell Death in Mice
                            * Magnetism Deep Within Earth's Mantle
                            * Surprising Enzymes in Giant Ocean Viruses
                            * Bees Can Link Symbols to Numbers: Study
                            * Hoard of the Rings: Ancient Cereal-Based Product
                            * Honey Bee Colonies Down by 16 Percent
                            * Spider Glue Genes: New Biomaterials?
                            * Is There a Limit to Human Endurance?
                    

advertisement

Follow all of ScienceDaily's **latest research news** and **top science
headlines**!

Reference Terms

from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

* * *

# Global warming controversy

The global warming controversy is an ongoing dispute about the effects of
humans on global climate and about what policies should be implemented to
avoid possible undesirable effects of climate change.

The current scientific consensus on climate change is that recent warming
indicates a fairly stable long-term trend, that the trend is largely human-
caused, and that serious damage may result at some future date if steps are
not taken to halt the trend.

Mainstream scientific organizations worldwide (Royal Society, American
Geophysical Union, Joint Science Academies, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, American Meteorological Society, and American Association for the
Advancement of Science) concur with the assessment that most of the observed
warming over the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the human-caused
increase in greenhouse gas concentrations.

However, there is also a small but vocal number of scientists in climate and
climate-related fields that disagree with the consensus view.

**Note:** The above text is excerpted from the Wikipedia article "Global
warming controversy", which has been released under the GNU Free Documentation
License.

advertisement

* * *

For more information, see the following related content on ScienceDaily:

Related Stories

* * *

### Climate Change Label Leads to Climate Science Acceptance

June 21, 2017  Labels matter when it comes to acceptance of climate science,
suggests new research. For example, explain authors of a new report, the US
public doubts the existence of 'global warming' ... read more __

* * *

### Global Warming of 1.5°C or 2°C: The Lower Limit Would Reduce Flood Hazards

May 2, 2018  A research group has simulated the scenarios of limiting global
warming to 2°C versus 1.5°C with global hydrological models. An important
result: High flows and flood hazards will increase ... read more __

* * *

### Geoengineering Risks Losers as Well as Winners for Climate and Wildfire

Risks

Apr. 9, 2018  Artificially altering the climate system to limit global
warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius could increase the risks of wildfires in some
areas, new research ... read more __

* * *

### Global Temperature Targets Will Be Missed Within Decades Unless Carbon

Emissions Reversed

Jan. 22, 2018  New projections by researchers could be the catalyst the world
has sought to determine how best to meet its obligations to reduce carbon
emissions and better manage global warming as defined by the ... read more __

* * *

### Increased Leaf Abundance Is a Double-Edged Sword

May 25, 2017  A new global assessment reveals that increases in leaf
abundance are causing boreal areas to warm and arid regions to cool. The
results suggest that recent changes in global vegetation have had ... read
more __

* * *

### Warning from the Past: Future Global Warming Could Be Even Warmer

June 23, 2016  Future global warming will not only depend on the amount of
emissions from human-made greenhouse gasses, but will also depend on the
sensitivity of the climate system and response to feedback ... read more __

* * *

### Climate Predictions Should Include Impacts of CO2 on Life

June 29, 2018  Climate change predictions are not taking account of the full
range of possible effects of rising carbon dioxide levels, researchers ...
read more __

* * *

### Paris 1.5°C Target May Be Smashed by 2026

May 8, 2017  What appears to be a recent change to a positive phase of the
Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation is likely to accelerate global warming,
breaking through the agreed Paris target of 1.5°C by as early ... read more __

* * *

### Climate Change Paper Studies Carbon Uptake in Ecosystems

Jan. 24, 2017  A new report delves into one of the great uncertainties in
predicting future climate: carbon uptake in ... read more __

* * *

### Added Arctic Data Shows Global Warming Didn't Pause

Nov. 20, 2017  Missing Arctic temperature data, not Mother Nature, created
the seeming slowdown of global warming from 1998 to 2012, according to a new
... read more __

* * *

advertisement

* * *
                    
                                                * RELATED TOPICS
                              * Earth & Climate
                                * __Global Warming
                                * __Climate
                                * __Environmental Issues
                                * __Environmental Awareness
                                * __Environmental Policy
                                * __Weather
                            * RELATED TERMS
                              * __Attribution of recent climate change
                              * __Consensus of scientists regarding global warming
                              * __Global warming
                              * __IPCC Report on Climate Change - 2007
                              * __Scientific opinion on climate change
                              * __Temperature record of the past 1000 years
                    

advertisement

* * *

* * *

Earth & Climate News

June 6, 2019

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190606101831_1_180x120.jpg)

### New Findings on Earth's Magnetic Field

June 6, 2019  The well-known sources of the magnetic field that surrounds
Earth are the deep inside core and Earth's crust. Earth's mantle, on the other
hand, has been considered to be ... read more __

![](/images/2019/06/190604140109_1_180x120.jpg)

### Carbon Dioxide Levels in Atmosphere Hit Record High in May

June 4, 2019  Atmospheric carbon dioxide continued its rapid rise in 2019,
with the average for May peaking at 414.7 parts per million (ppm) at NOAA's
Mauna Loa Atmospheric ... read more __

![](/images/2019/05/190529145054_1_180x120.jpg)

### Early Humans Used Northern Migration Routes to Reach Eastern Asia

May 29, 2019  Northern and Central Asia have been neglected in studies of
early human migration, with deserts and mountains being considered
uncompromising barriers. However, a new study ... read more __

![](/images/2019/05/190529145104_1_180x120.jpg)

### Earth Recycles Ocean Floor Into Diamonds

May 29, 2019  Most diamonds are made of cooked seabed. The diamond on your
finger is most likely made of recycled seabed cooked deep in the Earth. Traces
of salt trapped in many diamonds ... read more __

Latest Headlines

updated 12:56 pm ET

* * *

### New Global Warming Model Highlights Strong Impact of Social Learning

June 6, 2019  A new climate modeling approach suggests that social processes
strongly affect global warming predictions, and mitigation efforts should
account for this ... read more __

* * *

### Microplastic Throughout Monterey Bay

June 6, 2019  A new study shows that microplastic particles are not only
common from the surface to the seafloor, but they're also being eaten by
animals and incorporated into marine food webs. The most abundant ... read
more __

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190606150328_1_180x120.jpg)

### Study Provides New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies

June 6, 2019  The Canadian Rocky Mountains were formed when the North
American continent was dragged westward during the closure of an ocean basin
off the west coast and collided with a ... read more __

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190606101817_1_180x120.jpg)

### Toxic Metals Found in Reproductive Organs of Critically Endangered Eels

June 6, 2019  European eels consume their own skeletons as they swim 6,000
kilometers to their spawning grounds. The process is depositing toxic metals
in the eels' reproductive organs, ... read more __

* * *

### Extreme Heat to Hit One Third of the African Urban Population

June 5, 2019  An international team of researchers has combined demographic
projections and climate scenarios across Africa for the first time. Their
results reveal the number of people who will potentially be ... read more __

* * *

### Diabetics Exposed to Common Household Chemicals Have Lower Heart Disease

Rates, Study Finds

June 4, 2019  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention deemed exposure
to perfluoroalkyl substances -- a class of chemicals used in cookware,
cleaning ... read more __

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190604131131_1_180x120.jpg)

### Ant Reactions to Natural Habitat Disruptions Tell Us a Lot About Their

Evolution

June 4, 2019  Concordia University biology professor Jean-Philippe Lessard
reviews the ant traits system developed by Alan Andersen and ... read more __

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190605105958_1_180x120.jpg)

### Human Impact on the Activities and Social Behaviour of Urban Capuchin

Monkeys

June 5, 2019  To better understand how primates adapt to the increasing
presence of humans, researchers monitored a group of 17 capuchin ... read more
__

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190605100335_1_180x120.jpg)

### How Deep-Ocean Vents Fuel Massive Phytoplankton Blooms

June 5, 2019  A new study suggests vents in the seafloor may affect life near
the ocean's surface and the global carbon cycle more than previously thought.
It's the first to show how iron ... read more __

* * *

![](/images/2019/06/190604131141_1_180x120.jpg)

### Building Blocks of the Earth

June 4, 2019  Geologists gain new insights regarding the Earth's composition
by analyzing meteorites. They conclude that the building blocks that brought
volatile elements to Earth have a ... read more __

* * *
                    
                                                * Climate Change and Human Behavior: Feedback
                            * Microplastic Throughout Monterey Bay
                            * New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies
                            * Toxic Metals in Critically Endangered Eels
                            * Extreme Heat Threatens African Urban Population
                            * Diabetics: Household Chemicals and Heart Disease
                            * Ant Reactions to Natural Habitat Disruptions
                            * Human Impact On Urban Capuchin Monkeys
                            * How Deep-Ocean Vents Fuel Phytoplankton Blooms
                            * Building Blocks of the Earth
                    

* * *

more stories __

**Print Email** Share

* * *

advertisement

* * *

Most Popular Stories

this week

* * *

HEALTH

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101143_1_75x50.jpg)Research Confirms Gut-Brain

Connection in Autism

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190603102549_1_75x50.jpg)Brush Your Teeth --

Postpone Alzheimer's

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190520190110_1_75x50.jpg)Anxiety Might Be Alleviated

by Regulating Gut Bacteria

PHYSICAL & TECH

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529113108_1_75x50.jpg)'Fettuccine' May Be Most

Obvious Sign of Life on Mars, Researchers Report

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190528095206_1_75x50.jpg)Comet Inspires Chemistry

for Making Breathable Oxygen on Mars

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190603124621_1_75x50.jpg)Physicists Can Predict the

Jumps of Schrodinger's Cat (and Finally Save It)

ENVIRONMENT

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530141522_1_75x50.jpg)New Way to Protect Against

High-Dose Radiation Damage Discovered

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101120_1_75x50.jpg)Godzilla Is Back and He's

Bigger Than Ever: The Evolutionary Biology of the Monster

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529221040_1_75x50.jpg)New Evidence Links Ultra-

Processed Foods With a Range of Health Risks

advertisement

* * *

Strange & Offbeat Stories

* * *

HUMAN QUIRKS

##### Improved Human Brain Organoids to Boost Neurological Disease Research

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605121652_1_75x50.jpg)Was Mona Lisa's Smile a

Lie?

##### Americans Consumer 70,000 Particles of Microplastics Per Year

BIZARRE THINGS

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150317_1_75x50.jpg)A Polar-Bear-Inspired

Material for Heat Insulation

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150222_1_75x50.jpg)Decoding Beethoven's Music

Style Using Data Science

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605171400_1_75x50.jpg)Bees Can Link Symbols to

Numbers, Study Finds

ODD CREATURES

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150332_1_75x50.jpg)Bird Personalities

Influenced by Both Age and Experience, Study Shows

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150247_1_75x50.jpg)Danger Avoidance Can Be

Genetically Encoded for Four Generations, Say Biologists

##### Two New Species of 'Tweezer-Beaked Hopping Rats' Discovered in

Philippines

advertisement

* * *

Toggle navigation Menu __ SD

                    
                                                * SD
                              * Home Page
                              *               * Top Science News
                              *               * Latest News
                    
                            * Home 
                              * Home Page
                              *               * Top Science News
                              *               * Latest News
                            * Health 
                              * View all the latest **top news** in the health sciences,
                    

or browse the topics below:

Health & Medicine

                    
                                                    * Allergy
                                * Alternative Medicine
                                * Birth Control
                                * Cancer
                                * Diabetes
                                * Diseases
                                * Heart Disease
                                * HIV and AIDS
                                * Obesity
                                * Stem Cells
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Mind & Brain

                    
                                                    * ADD and ADHD
                                * Addiction
                                * Alzheimer's
                                * Autism
                                * Depression
                                * Headaches
                                * Intelligence
                                * Psychology
                                * Relationships
                                * Schizophrenia
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Living Well

                    
                                                    * Parenting
                                * Pregnancy
                                * Sexual Health
                                * Skin Care
                                * Men's Health
                                * Women's Health
                                * Nutrition
                                * Diet and Weight Loss
                                * Fitness
                                * Healthy Aging
                                * ... _more topics_
                    
                            * Tech 
                              * View all the latest **top news** in the physical sciences  & technology,
                    

or browse the topics below:

Matter & Energy

                    
                                                    * Aviation
                                * Chemistry
                                * Electronics
                                * Fossil Fuels
                                * Nanotechnology
                                * Physics
                                * Quantum Physics
                                * Solar Energy
                                * Technology
                                * Wind Energy
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Space & Time

                    
                                                    * Astronomy
                                * Black Holes
                                * Dark Matter
                                * Extrasolar Planets
                                * Mars
                                * Moon
                                * Solar System
                                * Space Telescopes
                                * Stars
                                * Sun
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Computers & Math

                    
                                                    * Artificial Intelligence
                                * Communications
                                * Computer Science
                                * Hacking
                                * Mathematics
                                * Quantum Computers
                                * Robotics
                                * Software
                                * Video Games
                                * Virtual Reality
                                * ... _more topics_
                    
                            * Enviro 
                              * View all the latest **top news** in the environmental sciences,
                    

or browse the topics below:

Plants & Animals

                    
                                                    * Agriculture and Food
                                * Animals
                                * Biology
                                * Biotechnology
                                * Endangered Animals
                                * Extinction
                                * Genetically Modified
                                * Microbes and More
                                * New Species
                                * Zoology
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Earth & Climate

                    
                                                    * Climate
                                * Earthquakes
                                * Environment
                                * Geography
                                * Geology
                                * Global Warming
                                * Hurricanes
                                * Ozone Holes
                                * Pollution
                                * Weather
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Fossils & Ruins

                    
                                                    * Ancient Civilizations
                                * Anthropology
                                * Archaeology
                                * Dinosaurs
                                * Early Humans
                                * Early Mammals
                                * Evolution
                                * Lost Treasures
                                * Origin of Life
                                * Paleontology
                                * ... _more topics_
                    
                            * Society 
                              * View all the latest **top news** in the social sciences  & education,
                    

or browse the topics below:

Science & Society

                    
                                                    * Arts & Culture
                                * Consumerism
                                * Economics
                                * Political Science
                                * Privacy Issues
                                * Public Health
                                * Racial Disparity
                                * Religion
                                * Sports
                                * World Development
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Business & Industry

                    
                                                    * Biotechnology & Bioengineering
                                * Computers & Internet
                                * Energy & Resources
                                * Engineering
                                * Medical Technology
                                * Pharmaceuticals
                                * Transportation
                                * ... _more topics_
                    

Education & Learning

                    
                                                    * Animal Learning & Intelligence
                                * Creativity
                                * Educational Psychology
                                * Educational Technology
                                * Infant & Preschool Learning
                                * Learning Disorders
                                * STEM Education
                                * ... _more topics_
                    
                            * Quirky 
                              * Top News
                              *               * Human Quirks
                              * Odd Creatures
                              * Bizarre Things
                              * Weird World
                    

__

Free Subscriptions

* * *

Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters,
updated daily and weekly. Or view hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:

                    
                                                * __Email Newsletters
                            * __RSS Feeds
                    

Follow Us

* * *

Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:

                    
                                                * __Facebook
                            * __Twitter
                            * __Google+
                            * __LinkedIn
                    

Have Feedback?

* * *

Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and
negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?

                    
                                                * __Leave Feedback
                            * __Contact Us
                    

About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy |
Editorial Policy | Terms of Use

Copyright 2019 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights
controlled by their respective owners.

Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide
medical or other professional advice.

Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its
staff, its contributors, or its partners.

Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral
programs, where indicated.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

