

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

                    
                                                * Cart 0
                            * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
                            * |Stay Informed
                    

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

                    
                                                * The Sciences
                            * Mind
                            * Health
                            * Tech
                            * Sustainability
                            * Education
                            * Video
                            * Podcasts
                            * Blogs
                            * Publications
                            * Subscribe
                            * Current Issue
                            * Cart0
                            * Sign In
                            * Stay Informed
                    
                            * Share
                            * Latest
                    
                            *             *             *             * Sustainability
                    

# Bad Hair Day: Are Aerosols Still Bad for the Ozone Layer?

Are the new propellant chemicals any better than the CFCs banned in the 1970s?

                    
                                                *             * Share on Facebook
                    
                            * Share on Twitter
                    
                            * Share on Reddit
                    
                            * Share on LinkedIn
                    
                            * Share via
                    
                            * Print
                    

Advertisement

**Dear EarthTalk: What 's the deal nowadays with aerosol spray cans? I thought
that the ozone-depleting chemicals used in them were eliminated back in the
1970s. Is this true? If so, what is now used as a propellant? Are aerosols
still bad for the ozone layer?** _  
-- Sheila, Abilene, TX_

The aerosol spray can has a storied history in the United States. First
invented in the 1920s by U.S. Department of Agriculture scientists to
pressurize insect spray, American soldiers eventually used the technology to
help ward off Malaria in the South Pacific during World War II. The aerosol
spray cans today, while much smaller and more refined, are direct descendents
of those original military grade clunkers. Use of the cans for consumer
applications took off during the ensuing decades, until the mid-1970s when
ozone depletion first came to the public's attention.

As a result, consumer aerosol products made in the U.S. have not contained
ozone-depleting chemicals--also known as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)--since the
late 1970s, first because companies voluntary eliminated them, and later
because of federal regulations. Clean Air Act and U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) regulations further restricted the use of CFCs for
non-consumer products. All consumer and most other aerosol products made or
sold in the U.S. now use propellants--such as hydrocarbons and compressed
gases like nitrous oxide--that do not deplete the ozone layer. Aerosol spray
cans produced in some other countries might still utilize CFCs, but they
cannot legally be sold in the U.S.

According to the industry trade group, the National Aerosol Association,
aerosol manufacturers in Europe and other parts of the world initially did not
follow the lead of U.S. industry in substituting alternative propellants for
CFCs. "The fact that aerosols made in underdeveloped countries may contain
CFCs has caused confusion in press reports and in the public mind about the
stratospheric ozone/aerosol link," reports the group. Other countries have
also switched out ozone-depleting propellants with non-depleting forms because
they signed 1987's Montreal Protocol, a landmark international agreement
signed by 191 countries with the goal of phasing out the production and use of
CFCs and other ozone depleting chemicals. Scientists report that that the
phase out of the chemicals is now about 90 percent complete.

Of course, just because those deodorant sprays and shaving cream cans aren't
depleting the ozone layer doesn't mean they are actually good for the
environment. They still contain hydrocarbons and/or compressed gases notorious
for their contribution to global warming. Every time you hit the button, then,
you are raising your carbon footprint, albeit ever so slightly.

Modern-day, CFC-free aerosol sprays also emit volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) that contribute to ground-level ozone levels, a key component of
asthma-inducing smog. The state of California is now regulating consumer
products that contain VOCs--and aerosol sprays are not the only targets:
Fingernail polish, perfumes, mouthwashes, pump hair sprays, and roll-on and
stick deodorants also emit them.

**CONTACTS** : National Aerosol Association, www.nationalaerosol.com.

**GOT AN ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTION?** Send it to: **EarthTalk** , c/o **E/The
Environmental Magazine** , P.O. Box 5098, Westport, CT 06881; submit it at:
www.emagazine.com/earthtalk/thisweek/, or e-mail: earthtalk@emagazine.com.
Read past columns at: www.emagazine.com/earthtalk/archives.php.

## Latest News

![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### My Next Chapter

7 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Computing

### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

8 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Physics

### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

8 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

8 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### Rethinking National Security

10 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Wellness

### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

11 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

                    
                                                * instagram
                            * soundcloud
                            * youtube
                            * twitter
                            * facebook
                            * rss
                    

Scientific american arabic

العربية

                    
                                                * Store
                            * About
                            * Press Room
                    
                            * FAQs
                            * Contact Us
                            * Site Map
                    
                            * Advertise
                            * SA Custom Media
                            * Terms of Use
                    
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Use of Cookies
                            * International Editions
                    

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

