

![Snopes.com](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/logo-

main-header.png) ![Snopes

Logo](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/logo-s-crop-

on.svg)

__

  * Support Snopes
  * Submit a Topic
  * Shop Snopes
  * What's New
  * Hot 50
  * Fact Checks
  * News
  * Videos
  * Archive
  * About Us
  * Randomizer

Support Us __

  1. Fact Check
  2. Politics

# Does Planned Parenthood Provide No Prenatal Care, Only Abortions?

## A video investigation purportedly showed that Planned Parenthood does not

offer health services for women such as prenatal care, only abortions.

Dan Evon

  * Published 25 January 2017

![](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

Image via Shutterstock

* * *

##### Misinformation is a real threat. Snopes.com needs your help.

Learn How

##### Stay Informed

The Daily Debunker brings you the top stories on Snopes.com.

Accept our Terms & Privacy Policy

Subscribe

Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday

### Claim

A video investigation showed that Planned Parenthood lies about providing
prenatal care.

See Example(s)

I just received a facebook post from a relative showing an entity named "Live
Action" calling Planned Parenthood facilities around the country to see if
prenatal services and abortions were being offered — all the PP clinics they
called said they offer abortion services only.

### Collected via e-mail, January 2017

### Rating

![](https://www.snopes.com/tachyon/2018/03/rating-mostly-false.png)

##### Mostly False

About this rating __

### What's True

Prenatal care makes up a small portion of Planned Parenthood's services, and
not all Planned Parenthood affiliates offer these services.

### What's False

Planned Parenthood offers a number of reproductive health services other than
abortion -- including prenatal care (and referrals to prenatal care providers)
\-- at multiple health centers across the U.S. and has not claimed to offer
prenatal care at all their centers.

##### Support the fact checking and investigative journalism you rely on at

Snopes.com.

Give with PayPal

or Learn More

### Origin

On 24 January 2017, the Facebook page “Live Action” published a video
purportedly showing “Prenatal Care Deception” at Planned Parenthood, which has
approximately 650 health centers operated by 57 affiliates across the U.S. The
gist of the video’s presentation was that Planned Parenthood lies about
providing reproductive and health services such as prenatal care, instead
focusing solely on providing abortions:

The majority of the above-displayed video centered on alleged audio recordings
of telephone calls to Planned Parenthood centers asking about prenatal
services. These calls were framed by two misleading and out-of-context quotes
from Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards present in an attempt to
make it seem as if her organization was falsely touting the number of prenatal
care services they provide.

This video quotes snippets of Richards’ saying: “Prenatal care. These are the
kinds of services that folks depend on Planned Parenthood for,” and “a
president who will fight for pre-natal care!” We could not find the specific
origins of the first snippet, but it’s clear that Richards was listing several
services that Planned Parenthood provides (and not claiming they offer only or
primarily prenatal care), as she said “these are the **kinds** of **services**
that folks depend on planned Parenthood for. But Live Action apparently
omitted the first portion of her statement.

The second snippet came from a 2016 speech in which Richards endorsed Hillary
Clinton for president. The portion of the speech included in the Live Action
video was less about what services Planned Parenthood offers and more about
what qualities the organization was looking for in a U.S. president:

> They want a president who believes access to health care isn’t a luxury —
it’s a human right.

>

> They want a president who understands that being pro-choice also means being
able to choose to have a child — and **a president who will fight for prenatal
care** , head start, health care for kids and first class public schools
because it takes a village!

>

> They want a president who will stand up to the gun lobby and demand safety
for kids in schools, folks in church, and women getting healthcare — no matter
what.

>

> They want a president who will demand nobody is paid less just because they
are a woman — we deserve 100 cents on the dollar!

>

> They want a president who believes that access to health care isn’t a luxury
it’s a human right. They also want a president who understands that being pro-
choice actually means being able to choose to have a child. And a president
who will fight for pre-natal care, and head start, and health care for kids,
and excellent public education. Because as someone so famously said, it takes
a village to raise a child.

The video also used a quote from Lori Lamerand, the CEO of Planned Parenthood
of Mid and South Michigan, to make it seem as if the organization were
unjustly touting their prenatal care services. According to the video,
Lamerand said: “Prenatal care! Um — and that — that is what we want to focus
on. That is what is so vital.”

But again, this quote was taken out of context from a speech Lamerand gave
during the Pink Bus Tour in 2011, and according to Planned Parenthood,
Lamerand “spoke about the vital services like birth control, pap smears, and
preventative cancer screenings, which Planned Parenthood provides to women who
otherwise might go without.”

The context of these quotes is important since Live Action shared this video
with the title “the Prenatal Care Deception.” In order to set up the
“deception,” Live Action needed to try to establish that Planned Parenthood
supposedly unjustly bragged about the prominence of their prenatal care
services before offering supposed audio recordings of calls with Planned
Parenthood representatives who stated that the organization did not in fact
provide these services.

Although Planned Parenthood does provide prenatal care services, those
services are not a primary part of their operation. According to
organization’s annual report for 2014-2015, they only provided 17,419
instances of prenatal care services (compared to 3,533,522 STD tests and
323,999 abortions.) Live Action offered no evidence that Planned Parenthood
lied about these numbers, or that Planned Parenthood claimed they provide
prenatal care services at all of their health centers.

Not only did Live Action present Planned Parenthood’s comments without proper
context, their investigation also presented a misleading picture about the
services provided by the organization. We can’t verify if every one of the
phone call recordings offered in the above-displayed video was genuine, but we
can say that the claim “only 5 [Planned Parenthood] facilities out of 97”
provide prenatal care is misleading at best.

First of all, Planned Parenthood operates more than 650 facilities in the
United States. In California alone, we found 13 Planned Parenthood clinics
that advertise prenatal services. Planned Parenthood Hudson Peconic (PPHP),
which operates health centers in Suffolk, Westchester, and Rockland counties,
New York, provides prenatal care in 6 of their 10 health centers.

We also found that many of the Planned Parenthood clinics that do not provide
prenatal care services do nonetheless state they offer resources to assist
those in need of finding such care: “If you choose to continue a pregnancy, we
will provide you with a list of resources to help you obtain prenatal care.”

(We also surveyed several Planned Parenthood offices ourselves. For example,
we called the Family First Health Center in Fresno, California, who confirmed
to us that they do in fact offer prenatal care services. We also contacted the
Planned Parenthood office in Tempe, Arizona (one of the first locations
mentioned in the video), who told us that they did not provide prenatal care
services themselves but directed us to a nearby facility, the Mountain Park
Health Center, that does.)

The Live Action video is based on the implication that Planned Parenthood
claimed to provide prenatal care services at all of their facilities, or that
the organization was misleading the public about how often it provides these
services. However, that simply isn’t the case:

> Mary Alice Carter, a spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood, pointed out the
group’s history of being targeted with selectively edited videos, and said
that the new video tried to hold the organization to a standard it had not set
for itself.

>

> “It is safe to say that not every single one of our health centers provides
prenatal care, and we’ve never said otherwise,” Ms. Carter said.

>

> According to an annual report published in 2015, the most recent period for
which information was available, eight Planned Parenthood affiliates of the 59
that existed at the time reported that they had provided 17,419 individual
prenatal services.

>

> Ms. Carter said that “100 percent” of the organization’s health centers
would provide what would be considered an initial prenatal visit, which would
include a referral for further prenatal services that would be available
elsewhere.

It should be noted that the organization’s web site states that “Planned
Parenthood health centers focus on prevention: 80 percent of our patients
receive services to prevent unintended pregnancy,” and that Live Action chose
to compare prenatal services (approximately 17,000 in 2014-2015) to abortions
(more than 300,000) for this video, which gave the misleading impression that
Planned Parenthood rarely provides reproductive health services other than
abortions. In reality, Planned Parenthood provides more STD screenings
(4,218,149), contraception services (2,945,059), and cancer screenings
(682,208) than they do abortions.

  * Published 25 January 2017
  * By

    * Dan Evon
    * Filed Under

    * planned parenthood

    * ##### Sources __

    * Bromwich, Jonah. “Anti-Abortion Group Releases Video Targeting Planned Parenthood.”  
_The New York Times_. 24 January 2017.

### Latest Fact Checks View all

![Did a Father Abandon His Family During an

Avalanche?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Did a Father Abandon His Family During an Avalanche?

6 June 2019

We'll say this much: This viral video certainly has a cinematic feel to it.

![Did Alabama Mayor Mark Chambers Call for Killing LGBTQ

People?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Did Alabama Mayor Mark Chambers Call for Killing LGBTQ People?

6 June 2019

Some are calling on Chambers to resign after the comment brought controversy
to his small community.

![Did the Virginia Shooter Wear a MAGA Hat and Have a ‘Trump 2020’ Bumper

Sticker?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Did the Virginia Shooter Wear a MAGA Hat and Have a 'Trump 2020' Bumper

Sticker?

6 June 2019

Motivations for the attack are still unclear.

![Are These ‘16 Easy Tests’ to Check Whether Food Is ‘Fake or

Real’?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Are These ‘16 Easy Tests' to Check Whether Food Is 'Fake or Real'?

6 June 2019

A viral video took off on Facebook in June 2019, but its claims about food
safety were far from unadulterated.

![Did Dutch Teen Noa Pothoven Die by

Euthanasia?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Did Dutch Teen Noa Pothoven Die by Euthanasia?

5 June 2019

A sensational error was repeated widely in English-language news reports.

View all

##### The store is open!

Shop Now

![Snopes Store

Ad](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/snopes-CTA-

sidebar-store-shirts.gif)

##### Misinformation is a real threat.Snopes.com needs your help.

Learn How

### Featured Video View all

## Disguising Hate: How Radical Evangelicals Spread Anti-Islamic Vitriol on

Facebook

Read More

### Latest Reporting View all

![Animal Rights Group Releases Disturbing Video from Fair Oaks

Farm](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Animal Rights Group Releases Disturbing Video from Fair Oaks Farm

5 June 2019

ARM: "Employees were observed slapping, kicking, punching, pushing, throwing,
and slamming calves ..."

![Leaked ‘Jeopardy’ Video Supposedly Shows James Holzhauer’s

Defeat](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Leaked 'Jeopardy' Video Supposedly Shows James Holzhauer's Defeat

3 June 2019

"Q: This cautionary sign appears before news articles containing information
some readers may not want to know." "A: What is a spoiler warning?"

![Did GOP Send Out a ‘Fake Census’ Asking for Campaign

Donations?](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Did GOP Send Out a 'Fake Census' Asking for Campaign Donations?

28 May 2019

The RNC has been mailing out fundraising forms disguised as "census" surveys
for years.

![Network of Islamophobic Facebook Pages Exposed by Snopes Goes

Dark](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Network of Islamophobic Facebook Pages Exposed by Snopes Goes Dark

26 May 2019

Facebook has still not responded to any of our requests for comment, however.

![Jenna Fischer Sex Tape? Trolls Spread Deepfake Video of ‘The Office’

Star](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/lazyload-

placeholder.png)

##### Jenna Fischer Sex Tape? Trolls Spread Deepfake Video of 'The Office'

Star

23 May 2019

Manipulated videos and images of character Pam Beasley from "The Office" were
spread on social media in May 2019.

View all

![Snopes Logo](https://www.snopes.com/content/themes/snopes/dist/images/logo-

main-header.png)

###### Navigate

  * Home
  * Search
  * Archive
  * FAQ
  * Submit a Topic

###### Sections

  * What's New
  * Hot 50
  * Fact Checks
  * News
  * Randomizer

###### Company

  * About Snopes
  * Support Us
  * Snopes Store
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookies

###### Coming SoonNEW

  * Membership
  * Discourse
  * On The Issues

* * *

© 1995 - 2019 by Snopes Media Group Inc.

This material may not be reproduced without permission.

Snopes and the Snopes.com logo are registered service marks of Snopes.com

* * *

  * Support Snopes
  * Submit a Topic
  * Shop Snopes
  * What's New
  * Hot 50
  * Fact Checks
  * News
  * Videos
  * Archive
  * About Us
  * Randomizer

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

