

Skip to content

![Climate News Network](https://files.climatenewsnetwork.net/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/11210707/cropped-Slice-11.png)

Climate News Network

                    
                                                * __Twitter
                            * __Facebook
                            * __RSS feed
                    

Menu

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Archive
                            * About us
                            * Training
                            * Translations
                            * Support us
                            * Contact us
                    

Emissions

# CO2 levels pass 3-million-year record

### April 8th, 2019, by Tim Radford

![](https://files.climatenewsnetwork.net/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/06175446/CO2-levels-800x533.jpg)

Fossil fuel burning is pushing CO2 levels ever higher. _Image: By Tony
Webster, via Wikimedia Commons_

**The modern world is about to pass a temperature peak dating back for
millions of years – because CO2 levels have already passed an ancient
record.**.

_LONDON, 8 April, 2019 –_ German scientists have confirmed, once again, that
carbon dioxide is reaching concentrations unprecedented on any human time
scale, with CO2 levels in the atmosphere already higher than they have been
for at least three million years.

And their computer simulations – backed up by analysis of ocean sediments that
tell a tale of changing temperatures and greenhouse gas levels – show that
before the century’s close the world will become warmer than at any time in
the last three million years.

The last time planetary temperatures reached a level higher than the target
set by 195 nations in Paris in 2015 was during a bygone geological period, the
Pliocene.

“It seems we are now pushing our home planet beyond any climatic conditions
experienced during the entire current geological period, the Quaternary,” said
Matteo Willeit of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research.

> **“Our results imply a strong sensitivity of the Earth system to relatively
small changes in atmospheric CO2. As fascinating as this is, it is also
worrying”**

“A period that started almost three million years ago and saw human
civilisation beginning only 11,000 years ago. So the modern change we see is
big, really big, even by the standards of Earth history.”

He and colleagues report in the journal Science Advances that they made a
numerical model of all the astronomical and geological data available for the
last few million years and fed in algorithms to represent the physics and
chemistry of planet Earth.

So they had a simulation of a rocky planet complete with active volcanoes that
emit carbon dioxide with their magma, on a journey many times around a slowly-
changing elliptical orbit that subtly changed the levels of sunshine that
slammed into the rocks, oceans and forests – patterns of change called the
Milankovitch cycles, long implicated in periodic shifts in planetary climate.

They also fed in data about sediments in the high latitudes: important because
ice sheets advance more easily over gravel than bedrock, and atmospheric dust
from such attrition makes ice surfaces darker and more vulnerable to melting.
The result: confirmation of one thing already observed and another much
feared.

**Carbon ratio leaps**

At a time in the astronomical cycle when Earthlings might expect a slow return
of the Ice Ages, human action over the last two centuries – the profligate
combustion of fossil fuels that emit greenhouse gases, the wholesale clearance
of the great forests that absorb atmospheric carbon – has already lifted
carbon dioxide ratios from a long-term average of around 280 parts per million
to more than 400 ppm.

Human action has also raised long-term average planetary temperatures by a
whole degree Celsius, with more warming on the way.

A new Ice Age seems increasingly unlikely, and other researchers have already
pointed to the Pliocene data as a soon-to-be-exceeded record.

Entirely different studies have shown the world to be on course to exceed the
2°C limit, so the research confirms other findings and delivers a test of the
reliability of evidence from the past. It also backs up the value of
simulation as an increasingly reliable form of climate forecasting.

**CO2 's key role**

“We know from the analysis of sediments on the bottom of our seas about past
ocean temperatures and ice volumes, but so far the role of CO2 in shaping the
glacial cycles has not been fully understood,” said Dr Willeit.

“It is a breakthrough that we can now show in computer simulations that
changes in CO2 levels were a main driver of the Ice Ages, together with
variations of how the Earth orbits around the sun, the so-called Milankovitch
cycles. These are actually not just simulations: we compared our results with
hard data from the deep sea, and they prove to be in good agreement,” he said.

“Our results imply a strong sensitivity of the Earth system to relatively
small changes in atmospheric CO2. As fascinating as this is, it is also
worrying.” _– Climate News Network_

![](https://mk0climatenewsyhoujp.kinstacdn.com/wp-content/plugins/patron-

button-and-widgets-by-codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)

Carbon Dioxide, emissions, Forests, fossil fuels, Greenhouse Gases, Warming

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff9638110cceeb2b9e8f08409920a632?s=96&d=mm&r=g)

### About Tim Radford

Tim Radford, a founding editor of Climate News Network, worked for The
Guardian for 32 years, for most of that time as science editor. He has been
covering climate change since 1988.

View all posts by Tim Radford »

« Europe’s food imports devour rainforests Ice melt makes Arctic soils slip
more often »

__

## **Our** daily service

Climate News Network is a free and objective service publishing a daily news
story on climate and energy issues.

Leave this field empty if you're human:

## **Support** Us

We're now on Patreon, which means you can help support us as we continue to
report on climate change.

## **Journalist** training materials

View and download training materials designed to help journalists communicate
climate change effectively.

###### Categories

                    
                                                * Education
                            * Land Use
                            * Negotiations
                            * Economics
                            * Emissions
                            * Energy
                            * Health
                            * Nature
                            * Oceans
                            * Polar
                            * General
                    

## **About** our funders

The Climate News Network is supported by the Ashden Trust, the JJ Charitable
Trust and the Mark Leonard Trust - three of the Sainsbury Family Charitable
Trusts. This support assures the Network’s continuation while we seek the
means to ensure its long-term sustainability.

We have also had generous support from the Lush Charity Pot.

We thank them all for their practical help, and for sharing our vision.

The site is open to everyone: this service is entirely free of charge and the
stories are there for all to use.

###### ![RSS](https://mk0climatenewsyhoujp.kinstacdn.com/wp-

includes/images/rss.png) LATEST STORIES

                    
                                                * Arctic sea ice loss affects the jet stream June 6, 2019
                            * Wilderness – saved today, sold tomorrow June 5, 2019
                            * Political lobbying buys off climate law June 4, 2019
                            * Compound heat waves have double impact June 3, 2019
                            * Unstable polar glaciers lose ice ever faster May 31, 2019
                    

# Climate News Network

                    
                                                * About us
                            * Contact us
                            * Support us
                    

(C) Climate News Network 2019. All rights reserved. Website by Square Eye Ltd.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

