

Skip to content

                    
                                                * Increase Font Size
                    

![Logo for BC Open Textbooks](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/2015/01/bccampus-logo.png)

Toggle Menu

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Read
                            * Sign in
                            * Search in book: Search
                    

### Contents

                    
                                                1. Preface
                            2. Acknowledgments
                            3. Main Body
                    
                              1. Chapter 1 Introduction to Geology
                              2. 1.1 What Is Geology? 
                              3. 1.2 Why Study Earth?
                              4. 1.3 What Do Geologists Do?
                              5. 1.4 Minerals and Rocks
                              6. 1.5 Fundamentals of Plate Tectonics
                              7. 1.6 Geological Time
                              8. Chapter 1 Summary
                              9. Chapter 2 Minerals
                              10. 2.1 Electrons, Protons, Neutrons, and Atoms
                              11. 2.2 Bonding and Lattices
                              12. 2.3 Mineral Groups
                              13. 2.4 Silicate Minerals
                              14. 2.5 Formation of Minerals
                              15. 2.6 Mineral Properties
                              16. Chapter 2 Summary
                              17. Chapter 3 Intrusive Igneous Rocks
                              18. 3.1 The Rock Cycle
                              19. 3.2 Magma and Magma Formation
                              20. 3.3 Crystallization of Magma
                              21. 3.4 Classification of Igneous Rocks
                              22. 3.5 Intrusive Igneous Bodies
                              23. Chapter 3 Summary
                              24. Chapter 4 Volcanism
                              25. 4.1 Plate Tectonics and Volcanism
                              26. 4.2 Magma Composition and Eruption Style
                              27. 4.3 Types of Volcanoes
                              28. 4.4 Volcanic Hazards
                              29. 4.5 Monitoring Volcanoes and Predicting Eruptions
                              30. 4.6 Volcanoes in British Columbia
                              31. Chapter 4 Summary
                              32. Chapter 5 Weathering and Soil
                              33. 5.1 Mechanical Weathering
                              34. 5.2 Chemical Weathering
                              35. 5.3 The Products of Weathering and Erosion
                              36. 5.4 Weathering and the Formation of Soil
                              37. 5.5 The Soils of Canada
                              38. 5.6 Weathering and Climate Change
                              39. Chapter 5 Summary
                              40. Chapter 6 Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks
                              41. 6.1 Clastic Sedimentary Rocks
                              42. 6.2 Chemical Sedimentary Rocks
                              43. 6.3 Depositional Environments and Sedimentary Basins
                              44. 6.4 Sedimentary Structures and Fossils
                              45. 6.5 Groups, Formations, and Members
                              46. Chapter 6 Summary
                              47. Chapter 7 Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks
                              48. 7.1 Controls over Metamorphic Processes
                              49. 7.2 Classification of Metamorphic Rocks
                              50. 7.3 Plate Tectonics and Metamorphism
                              51. 7.4 Regional Metamorphism
                              52. 7.5 Contact Metamorphism and Hydrothermal Processes
                              53. Chapter 7 Summary
                              54. Chapter 8 Measuring Geological Time
                              55. 8.1 The Geological Time Scale
                              56. 8.2 Relative Dating Methods
                              57. 8.3 Dating Rocks Using Fossils
                              58. 8.4 Isotopic Dating Methods
                              59. 8.5 Other Dating Methods
                              60. 8.6 Understanding Geological Time
                              61. Chapter 8 Summary
                              62. Chapter 9 Earth’s Interior
                              63. 9.1 Understanding Earth through Seismology
                              64. 9.2 The Temperature of Earth’s Interior
                              65. 9.3 Earth’s Magnetic Field
                              66. 9.4 Isostasy
                              67. Chapter 9 Summary
                              68. Chapter 10 Plate Tectonics
                              69. 10.1 Alfred Wegener — the Father of Plate Tectonics
                              70. 10.2 Global Geological Models of the Early 20th Century
                              71. 10.3 Geological Renaissance of the Mid-20th Century
                              72. 10.4 Plates, Plate Motions, and Plate-Boundary Processes
                              73. 10.5 Mechanisms for Plate Motion
                              74. Chapter 10 Summary
                              75. Chapter 11 Earthquakes
                              76. 11.1 What Is an Earthquake?
                              77. 11.2 Earthquakes and Plate Tectonics
                              78. 11.3 Measuring Earthquakes
                              79. 11.4 The Impacts of Earthquakes
                              80. 11.5 Forecasting Earthquakes and Minimizing Damage and Casualties
                              81. Chapter 11 Summary
                              82. Chapter 12 Geological structures
                              83. 12.1 Stress and Strain
                              84. 12.2 Folding
                              85. 12.3 Fracturing and Faulting
                              86. 12.4 Measuring Geological Structures
                              87. Chapter 12 Summary
                              88. Chapter 13 Streams and Floods
                              89. 13.1 The Hydrological Cycle
                              90. 13.2 Drainage Basins
                              91. 13.3 Stream Erosion and Deposition
                              92. 13.4 Stream Types
                              93. 13.5 Flooding
                              94. Chapter 13 Summary
                              95. Chapter 14 Groundwater
                              96. 14.1 Groundwater and Aquifers
                              97. 14.2 Groundwater Flow
                              98. 14.3 Groundwater Extraction
                              99. 14.4 Groundwater Quality
                              100. Chapter 14 Summary
                              101. Chapter 15 Mass Wasting
                              102. 15.1 Factors That Control Slope Stability
                              103. 15.2 Classification of Mass Wasting
                              104. 15.3 Preventing, Delaying, Monitoring, and Mitigating Mass Wasting
                              105. Chapter 15 Summary
                              106. Chapter 16 Glaciation
                              107. 16.1 Glacial Periods in Earth’s History
                              108. 16.2 How Glaciers Work
                              109. 16.3 Glacial Erosion
                              110. 16.4 Glacial Deposition
                              111. Chapter 16 Summary
                              112. Chapter 17 Shorelines
                              113. 17.1 Waves
                              114. 17.2 Landforms of Coastal Erosion
                              115. 17.3 Landforms of Coastal Deposition
                              116. 17.4 Sea-Level Change
                              117. 17.5 Human Interference with Shorelines
                              118. Chapter 17 Summary
                              119. Chapter 18 Geology of the Oceans
                              120. 18.1 The Topography of the Sea Floor
                              121. 18.2 The Geology of the Oceanic Crust
                              122. 18.3 Sea-Floor Sediments
                              123. 18.4 Ocean Water
                              124. Chapter 18 Summary
                              125. Chapter 19 Climate Change
                              126. 19.1 What Makes the Climate Change?
                              127. 19.2 Anthropogenic Climate Change
                              128. 19.3 Implications of Climate Change
                              129. Chapter 19 Summary
                              130. Chapter 20 Geological Resources
                              131. 20.1 Metal Deposits
                              132. 20.2 Industrial Minerals
                              133. 20.3 Fossil Fuels
                              134. 20.4 Diamonds
                              135. Chapter 20 Summary
                              136. Chapter 21 Geological History of Western Canada
                              137. 21.1 Geological History of Canada
                              138. 21.2 Western Canada during the Precambrian
                              139. 21.3 Western Canada during the Paleozoic
                              140. 21.4 Western Canada during the Mesozoic
                              141. 21.5 Western Canada during the Cenozoic
                              142. Chapter 21 Summary
                              143. Chapter 22 The Origin of Earth and the Solar System
                              144. 22.1 Starting with a Big Bang
                              145. 22.2 Forming Planets from the Remnants of Exploding Stars
                              146. 22.3 How to Build a Solar System
                              147. 22.4 Earth’s First 2 Billion Years
                              148. 22.5 Are There Other Earths?
                              149. Chapter 22 Summary
                            4. Glossary
                            5. About the Author
                            6. Appendix 1 List of Geologically Important elements and the Periodic Table
                            7. Appendix 2 Answers to Review Questions
                            8. Appendix 3 Answers to Exercises
                            9. Versioning History
                    

# Physical Geology

Main Body

# 16.1 Glacial Periods in Earth’s History

We are currently in the middle of a **glacial period** (although it’s less
intense now than it was 20,000 years ago) but this is not the only period of
glaciation in Earth’s history; there have been many in the distant past, as
illustrated in Figure 16.2. In general, however, Earth has been warm enough to
be ice-free for much more of the time than it has been cold enough to be
glaciated.

![major past glaciations](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/major-past-glaciations.png) Figure 16.2 The
record of major past glaciations during Earth’s history. [SE]

The oldest known glacial period is the Huronian. Based on evidence of glacial
deposits from the area around Lake Huron in Ontario and elsewhere, it is
evident that the Huronian Glaciation lasted from approximately 2,400 to 2,100
Ma. Because rocks of that age are rare, we don’t know much about the intensity
or global extent of this glaciation.

Late in the Proterozoic, for reasons that are not fully understood, the
climate cooled dramatically and Earth was seized by what appears to be its
most intense glaciation. The glaciations of the Cryogenian Period ( _cryo_ is
Latin for icy cold) are also known as the “Snowball Earth” glaciations,
because it is hypothesized that the entire planet was frozen — even in
equatorial regions — with ice on the oceans up to 1 km thick. A visitor to our
planet at that time might not have held out much hope for its inhabitability,
although life still survived in the oceans. There were two main glacial
periods within the Cryogenian, each lasting for about 20 million years: the
Sturtian at around 700 Ma and the Marinoan at 650 Ma. There is also evidence
of some shorter glaciations both before and after these. The end of the
Cryogenian glaciations coincides with the evolution of relatively large and
complex life forms on Earth. This started during the Ediacaran Period, and
then continued with the so-called explosion of life forms in the Cambrian.
Some geologists think that the changing environmental conditions of the
Cryogenian are what actually triggered the evolution of large and complex
life.

There have been three major glaciations during the Phanerozoic (the past 540
million years), including the Andean/Saharan (recorded in rocks of South
America and Africa), the Karoo (named for rocks in southern Africa), and the
Cenozoic glaciations. The Karoo was the longest of the Phanerozoic
glaciations, persisting for much of the time that the supercontinent Gondwana
was situated over the South Pole (~360 to 260 Ma). It covered large parts of
Africa, South America, Australia, and Antarctica (see Figure 10.4). As you
might recall from Chapter 10, this widespread glaciation, across continents
that are now far apart, was an important component of Alfred Wegener’s
evidence for continental drift. Unlike the Cryogenian glaciations, the
Andean/Saharan, Karoo, and Cenozoic glaciations only affected parts of Earth.
During Karoo times, for example, what is now North America was near the
equator and remained unglaciated.

Earth was warm and essentially unglaciated throughout the Mesozoic. Although
there may have been some alpine glaciation at this time, there is no longer
any record of it. The dinosaurs, which dominated terrestrial habitats during
the Mesozoic, did not have to endure icy conditions.

A warm climate persisted into the Cenozoic; in fact there is evidence that the
Paleocene (~50 to 60 Ma) was the warmest part of the Phanerozoic since the
Cambrian (Figure 16.3). A number of tectonic events during the Cenozoic
contributed to persistent and significant planetary cooling since 50 Ma. For
example, the collision of India with Asia and the formation of the Himalayan
range and the Tibetan Plateau resulted in a dramatic increase in the rate of
weathering and erosion. Higher than normal rates of weathering of rocks with
silicate minerals, especially feldspar, consumes carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and therefore reduces the greenhouse effect, resulting in long-term
cooling.

![Figure 16.3 The global temperature trend over the past 65 Ma \(the

Cenozoic\). From the end of the Paleocene to the height of the Pleistocene

Glaciation, global average temperature dropped by about 14°C. \(PETM is the

Palecene-Eocene thermal maximum\) \[SE after Routledge, 2013,

http://www.alpineanalytics.com/Climate/DeepTime.html

\]](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/cenozoic-t-2-300x131.png)Figure 16.3 The
global temperature trend over the past 65 Ma (the Cenozoic). From the end of
the Paleocene to the height of the Pleistocene Glaciation, global average
temperature dropped by about 14°C. (PETM is the Palecene-Eocene thermal
maximum) [SE after Routledge, 2013,
http://www.alpineanalytics.com/Climate/DeepTime.html ]

At 40 Ma, ongoing plate motion widened the narrow gap between South America
and Antarctica, resulting in the opening of the Drake Passage. This allowed
for the unrestricted west-to-east flow of water around Antarctica, the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (Figure 16.4), which effectively isolated the
southern ocean from the warmer waters of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian
Oceans. The region cooled significantly, and by 35 Ma (Oligocene) glaciers had
started to form on Antarctica.

![Figure 16.4 The Antarctic Circumpolar Current \(red arrows\) prevents warm

water from the rest of Earth’s oceans from getting close to Antarctica.

\[SE\]](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/Antarctic-Circumpolar.png)Figure 16.4 The
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (red arrows) prevents warm water from the rest
of Earth’s oceans from getting close to Antarctica. [SE]

Global temperatures remained relatively steady during the Oligocene and early
Miocene, and the Antarctic glaciation waned during that time. At around 15 Ma,
subduction-related volcanism between central and South America created the
connection between North and South America, preventing water from flowing
between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. This further restricted the transfer
of heat from the tropics to the poles, leading to a rejuvenation of the
Antarctic glaciation. The expansion of that ice sheet increased Earth’s
reflectivity enough to promote a positive feedback loop of further cooling:
more reflective glacial ice, more cooling, more ice, etc. By the Pliocene (~5
Ma) ice sheets had started to grow in North America and northern Europe
(Figure 16.5). The most intense part of the current glaciation — and the
coldest climate — has been during the past million years (the last one-third
of the Pleistocene), but if we count Antarctic glaciation, it really extends
from the Oligocene to the Holocene, and will likely continue into the future.

The Pleistocene has been characterized by significant temperature variations
(through a range of almost 10°C) on time scales of 40,000 to 100,000 years,
and corresponding expansion and contraction of ice sheets. These variations
are attributed to subtle changes in Earth’s orbital parameters (Milankovitch
cycles), which are explained in more detail in Chapter 21. Over the past
million years, the glaciation cycles have been approximately 100,000 years;
this variability is visible in Figure 16.5.

![Figure 16.5 Foram oxygen isotope record for the past 5 million years based

on O isotope data from sea-floor sediments. \[created by SE using from data at

http://www.lorraine-lisiecki.com/stack.html, Lisiecki and Raymo,

2005\]](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/Foram-oxygen-isotope-record.png)Figure 16.5
Foram oxygen isotope record for the past 5 million years based on O isotope
data from sea-floor sediments [Created by SE using from data at
http://www.lorraine-lisiecki.com/stack.html, Lisiecki and Raymo, 2005]

### Exercises

**Exercise 16.1 Pleistocene Glacials and Interglacials**

This diagram shows the past 500,000 years of the same data set as that shown
in Figure 16.5. The last five glacial periods are marked with snowflakes. The
most recent one, which peaked at around 20 ka, is known as the Wisconsin
Glaciation. Describe the nature of temperature change that followed each of
these glacial periods.

![Glacials and Interglacials](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/Glacials-and-Interglacials-.png)

The current interglacial (Holocene) is marked with an H. Point out the
previous five interglacial periods.

At the height of the last glaciation ( **Wisconsin Glaciation** ), massive ice
sheets covered almost all of Canada and much of the northern United States
(Figure 16.6). The massive **Laurentide Ice Sheet** covered most of eastern
Canada, as far west as the Rockies, and the smaller **Cordilleran Ice Sheet**
covered most of the western region. At various other glacial peaks during the
Pleistocene and Pliocene, the ice extent was similar to this, and in some
cases, even more extensive. The combined Laurentide and Cordilleran Ice Sheets
were comparable in volume to the current Antarctic Ice Sheet. ****

![Figure 16.6 The extent of the Cordilleran and Laurentide Ice Sheets near the

peak of the Wisconsin Glaciation, around 15 ka. \[re-drawn by SE based on a

map at:

https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/glaciation.html\]](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-

content/uploads/sites/110/2016/07/Cordilleran-and-Laurentide-Ice-Sheets.png)
Figure 16.6 The extent of the Cordilleran and Laurentide Ice Sheets near the
peak of the Wisconsin Glaciation, around 15 ka. [redrawn by SE based on a map
at: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/glaciation.html]

Previous: Chapter 16 Glaciation

Next: 16.2 How Glaciers Work

Back to top

## License

![Icon for the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International

License](https://opentextbc.ca/geology/wp-content/themes/pressbooks-

book/packages/buckram/assets/images/cc-by.svg)

16.1 Glacial Periods in Earth’s History by Steven Earle is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

## Share This Book

Powered by Pressbooks

                    
                                                * Open Source |
                            * Open Textbooks |
                            * Open Book Publishing |
                            * Learn More
                    

Pressbooks on Facebook Pressbooks on Twitter

![](//troy.bccampus.ca/piwik/piwik.php?idsite=129&rec=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

