

A Wood Mackenzie Business

                    
                                                * news
                            * Research
                            * Squared
                            * Events
                    
                            * **Sign up**
                            * Log in
                            * My account
                              * Profile
                              * Squared Membership
                              * Newsletter Settings
                              * WoodMac Research 
                              * Log Out
                    

menu

Search

                    
                                                * Solar
                              * All
                              * Solar Projects
                              * Utility-Scale Solar
                              * PV Modules
                              * Markets & Policy
                              * Solar Finances & VC
                              * BOS Inverters
                              * Manufacturing
                              * Residential Solar
                            * Grid Edge
                              * All
                              * Network Infrastructure
                              * Grid Optimization
                              * Smart Homes/Buildings
                              * Demand Response
                              * Software/Analytics
                              * Utilities
                              * Regulation & Policy
                              * Electric Vehicles
                              * Microgrids
                              * Off Grid/Energy Access
                            * Storage
                              * Check out all of our energy storage resources
                            * Wind
                              * All wind resources
                            * More
                              * All
                              * Fossil Fuels
                              * Biofuels
                              * Mobility
                              * Water
                              * Finance & VC
                              * Policy
                              * Efficiency
                              * Other Energy
                            * Trending
                              * Hybrid Energy
                              * New Energy Majors
                              * Grid Flexibility
                              * Solar Financing Unleashed
                              * Electrify Everything
                            * Podcasts
                              * The Energy Gang
                              * The Interchange
                            * Resources
                              * White Papers
                              * Webinars
                              * Videos
                              * Press Releases
                              * Industry Events
                              * W.A.G.E.
                    
                            * Sign up
                            * Log in
                    

#### GTM members benefits:

                    
                                                * Unlimited access to our free news articles
                            * Unlimited access to our free webinars, white papers, and videos
                            * Special offers and discounts on Events and Squared
                            * Updates on breaking news and current events
                    
                            * Profile
                            * Squared Membership
                            * Newsletter Settings
                            * WoodMac Research 
                            * Log Out
                    

Search

Policy & regulation are aligning with renewables cost declines to make
projects more profitable and portfolios more sustainable.

                    
                                                * All
                            * Solar Projects
                            * Utility-Scale Solar
                            * PV Modules
                            * Markets & Policy
                            * Solar Finances & VC
                            * BOS Inverters
                            * Manufacturing
                            * Residential Solar
                    

Trending Solar News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Is China Ready for Subsidy-Free Renewables?

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Hanwha Q Cells Trade Complaint Could Further Tighten US Solar Supply

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### A Facebook First: Tech Giant Invests Directly in a Renewable Project

The Grid Edge comprises technologies, solutions and business models advancing
the transition toward a decentralized, distributed and transactive electric
grid.

                    
                                                * All
                            * Network Infrastructure
                            * Grid Optimization
                            * Smart Homes/Buildings
                            * Demand Response
                            * Software/Analytics
                            * Utilities
                            * Regulation & Policy
                            * Electric Vehicles
                            * Microgrids
                            * Off Grid/Energy Access
                    

Trending Grid Edge News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * Grid Edge March 2019
                    

### Elon Musk at Model Y Reveal: 'This Is the Year of the Solar Roof and

Powerwall'

                    
                                                * June 2019
                    

### Canada's Algonquin to Acquire Bermuda Utility Belco

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Schneider Buys Stake in AutoGrid to Tap Its Software for Distributed

Energy and Microgrids

Batteries are helping to optimize the power grid and opening up new
applications and services for utilities and service providers.

                    
                                                * Check out all of our energy storage resources
                    

Trending Storage News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * June 2019
                    

### US Storage Market Sets Power Capacity Record With Q1 Deployments

                    
                                                * June 2019
                    

### Batteries Benefit From Ontario's Bizarre Energy Market

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Utah Aims to Shatter Records With 1,000MW Energy Storage Plant

The wind industry is in a period of intensifying competition and shifting
demand that requires a multi-faceted view of the global market.

                    
                                                * All wind resources
                    

Trending Wind News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * June 2019
                    

### Jones Act? Not a Problem for US Offshore Wind Market, Avangrid Says

                    
                                                * June 2019
                    

### Massachusetts Officials Recommend Another 1.6GW of Offshore Wind

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Germany's Onshore Wind Market Struggles to Rebound After Permitting

Setbacks

Power fundamentals are changing faster than ever. Stay tuned to GTM for the
latest.

                    
                                                * All
                            * Fossil Fuels
                            * Biofuels
                            * Mobility
                            * Water
                            * Finance & VC
                            * Policy
                            * Efficiency
                            * Other Energy
                    

Recommended News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Is China Ready for Subsidy-Free Renewables?

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### Hanwha Q Cells Trade Complaint Could Further Tighten US Solar Supply

                    
                                                * May 2019
                    

### A Facebook First: Tech Giant Invests Directly in a Renewable Project

Go deep on GTM's hottest topics. We curate our best reporting on the most
salient trends in the industry.

                    
                                                * Hybrid Energy
                            * New Energy Majors
                            * Grid Flexibility
                            * Solar Financing Unleashed
                            * Electrify Everything
                    

Trending News

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * Energy November 2018
                    

### Renewables May Prove Cheaper Than 96% of Coal Plants Worldwide by 2030

                    
                                                * Grid Edge August 2018
                    

### The Key to Unlocking 'Renewables as Baseload' Is the Control System

                    
                                                * Energy January 2019
                    

### A Look at Chevron's Dip Into Clean Energy Investing

Free intelligence and insights from industry experts and leading companies on
the global energy transformation.

                    
                                                * White Papers
                            * Webinars
                            * Videos
                            * Press Releases
                            * Industry Events
                            * W.A.G.E.
                    

Highlighted Resources

Highlighted Research

View All

                    
                                                * April 2019
                    

### Voice Assistant Platforms: Pursuing an Improved Utility Customer

Experience

                    
                                                * April 2019
                    

### 2019 Trends in Utility Renewable Energy Financing

                    
                                                * Thursday June 06, 2019 2:00 PM ET
                    

### Beyond the PPA: A Company's Guide to Renewable Energy Procurement

The Energy Gang

View All

![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/img/energy-

gang/energy-gang_300_300_c1.png)

June 2019 Comparing Presidential Candidates on Climate and Cleantech Listen

May 2019 Breaking Down Subsidies for Fossil Fuels: How Much Are We Really
Spending?

May 2019 Past Is Prologue: Trends That Got America to 2 Million Solar Systems

The Interchange

View All

![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/img/interchange/interchange_300_300_c1.png)

May 2019 Jay Inslee's Climate Plan Is Every Wonk's Dream Listen

May 2019 Are Uber and Lyft Bad for Energy and Climate?

May 2019 Big Companies Quietly Embracing the Energy Transition

**Solar**

# With Utility Vets at the Helm, NextLight Snags First Solar Deal

The power plant developer plans to sell solar electricity to PG&E and possibly
utilities in other western states. PV is more cost effective than solar
thermal in the near future, says one NextLight exec.

Ucilia Wang June 09, 2009

X

![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/images/avatars/uploads/avatar_14_38_43_80_c1.jpg)

**Ucilia Wang**

__

More articles from this author >

![With Utility Vets at the Helm, NextLight Snags First Solar

Deal](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/sunpower13_721_420_80_s_c1.jpg)

With Utility Vets at the Helm, NextLight Snags First Solar Deal

                    
                                                * 0
                            * When Pacific Gas and Electric Co. announced a deal to buy solar power from a proposed 230-megawatt project last Friday, it shone a spotlight on a two-year-old company with a different business model than many startups who have inked similar deals with the utility.
                    

The deal also raised the question: Who is NextLight?

NextLight Renewable Power, based in San Francisco, wants to be purely a power
plant developer and owner. The deal with PG&E is the first power purchase
agreement for the startup, which is funded by private equity firm Energy
Capital Partners, said Jim Woodruff, vice president of regulatory and
government affairs, in an interview Monday.

"We think the tech agnostic approach is a winning business model," Woodruff
said. "All the core skills that are necessary to develop power projects are
the same" for solar or other types of power plants.

The company boasts managers who have experience developing power plants and
transmission projects as well as negotiating renewable power purchases.

NextLight's CEO, Frank De Rosa, worked for PG&E for 23 years and held various
roles at the utility, including the director of renewable energy supply,
before founding NextLight in 2007. Woodruff worked for Southern California
Edison for more than 10 years, first as an in-house counsel and later as the
manager of regulatory and legislative issues for the utility's alternative
power business.

NextLight has been developing other solar power projects on public and private
land in western states, including a plan to install up to 150 megawatts of
generation capacity in Boulder City, Nevada.

The Boulder City Council is slated to vote on whether to lease 1,100 acres of
city land to NextLight tonight. The company would sell 3,000-megawatt hours of
energy per year to the city if the project is built, Woodruff said.

* * *

PG &E signed the deal with NextLight after it had inked many power purchase
agreements in recent years to buy solar power from startup companies with the
ambition to both develop their own technologies as well as owning and
operating solar farms.

Some of the projects seem to be moving along. A few have hit snags. The deal
to buy power from Finavera, an ocean power developer in Canada, fell apart
last year when the California Public Utilities Commission decided that the
contract would be too costly to ratepayers (see California Sinks Its First
Wave Energy Project).

OptiSolar, which was supposed to build a 550-megawatt solar farm to sell power
to PG&E, couldn't raise enough money to operate its solar panel factory and
develop solar farms.

First Solar, another solar panel maker based in Tempe, Ariz., bought
OptiSolar's project development business for $400 million in April this year.
First Solar would use its own, cadmium-telluride solar panels, instead of the
amorphous silicon solar panels OptiSolar was developing. PG&E has said that
the power contract would remain in place.

NextLight, on the other hand, would pick different solar technologies instead
of developing its own. The approach isn't new - SunEdison was doing this
before others joined the party.

But there is no guarantee that this approach would enable NextLight to deliver
energy more cheaply, and neither NextLight nor PG&E would discuss the
financial terms of their contract.

"Our priority is about diversification of the resources we use and the
companies we work with," said PG&E spokeswoman Jennifer Zerwer. "Contracting
for renewable via [power purchase agreements] is beneficial because it helps
grow that ecosystem of renewable development, and there is no risk to our
customers."

Rumors have been circulating about whether NextLight would use SunPower's
equipment for the 230-megawatt project, which is called AV Solar Ranch 1,
particularly since the project's website features a photo of SunPower panels
(see photo above).

Woodruff said NextLight hasn't selected a panel supplier. The company and PG&E
have agreed to use solar panels, but the utility wouldn't have a final say on
the supplier, Woodruff added.

Gordon Johnson, head of alternative energy research at Hapoalim Securities,
also cast doubt on the SunPower rumor. "Based on our checks, we do not believe
[SunPower] won the PPA with NextLight," Johnson wrote in a research note.

NextLight plans to start construction of the AV Solar Ranch project in the
third quarter of 2010 and complete it by 2013. The company said it would start
delivering power in 2011.

The project would be located on 2,100 acres in Antelope Valley in Los Angeles
County, Woodruff said. The company bought the property last year for an
undisclosed sum.

The company would need approval from the Los Angeles County to construct the
solar farm. The California Public Utilities Commission would need to approve
the power purchase contract between PG&E and NextLight.

NextLight also is developing a power project with up to 425 megawatts in
generation capacity in southern Arizona. The company already is in escrow for
a farmland for the Agua Caliente Solar Project, Woodruff said. The 3,800 acres
are located east of the city of Yuma.

The company is negotiating with a utility to buy power from Agua Caliente,
said Woodruff, who declined to name the utility.

NextLight hasn't decided whether to install solar panels or build a solar
thermal power plant for the Agua Caliente project. Solar thermal power plants
use mirrors to concentrate the sunlight for heating water or mineral oils to
generate steam. The steam is then piped to run electricity-generating
turbines.

But solar panels appear to be a more attractive option than solar thermal for
now, Woodruff said.

"We've concluded that, in the near term, PV is more cost effective," he said.

* * *

![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/images/wysiwyg/News/growthopp_64_60_80.jpg)

Join experts and influencers at Greentech Media's Growth Opportunities in the
New PV Market: Projects, Finance and Policy in San Francisco on July 13.

                    
                                                * california
                            * first solar
                            * pg&e;
                            * solar
                            * sunpower
                    

![Hawaii’s First-of-a-Kind Pathway to Performance-Based

Ratemaking](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Dispatches-

from-the-Grid-Edge-River_330_225_80_c1.jpg)

06.06.19 Dispatches from the Grid Edge

### Hawaii's First-of-a-Kind Pathway to Performance-Based Ratemaking

![Open-pit mines: The next play in energy

storage?](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Open_Pit_Mining_XL_330_225_80_c1.jpg)

06.06.19

### Energy Vault Funding Breathes Life Into Gravity Storage

![California Faces Tough Choices on Utility Wildfire Liability

Reform](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/California_Wildfire_XL_330_225_80_c1.jpg)

06.05.19 Regulation & Policy

### California Faces Tough Choices on Utility Wildfire Liability Reform

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. ![Tracker

Pixel for

Entry](https://www.greentechmedia.com/?ACT=119&site_id=1&entry_id=5536)

**Top Articles**

                    
                                                * MOST POPULAR
                            * MOST COMMENTS
                    
                            * ![The old guard.](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Nuclear_Generation_Power_XL_105_105_80_c1.jpg)
                    

**Why Advanced Nuclear Reactors May Be Here Sooner Than Many Imagine**

                    
                                                * ![Utah Aims to Shatter Records With 1,000MW Energy Storage Plant](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Utah_Salt_lake_city_XL_105_105_80_c1.jpg)
                    

**Utah Aims to Shatter Records With 1,000MW Energy Storage Plant**

                    
                                                * ![In many regards, batteries are safer to install than rooftop solar, the author says.](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Powerwall_2_Tesla_XL_105_105_80_c1.jpg)
                    

**10 Mistakes I've Made Selling and Installing Battery Storage Systems**

                    
                                                * ![The old guard.](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Nuclear_Generation_Power_XL_93_69_80_c1.jpg) 1020
                    

**Why Advanced Nuclear Reactors May Be Here Sooner Than Many Imagine**

                    
                                                * ![Utah Aims to Shatter Records With 1,000MW Energy Storage Plant](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Utah_Salt_lake_city_XL_93_69_80_c1.jpg) 74
                    

**Utah Aims to Shatter Records With 1,000MW Energy Storage Plant**

                    
                                                * ![Avangrid's first U.S. offshore project will be more than 25 times larger than Block Island.](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_assets.greentechmedia.com/content/images/articles/Offshore_Wind_Block_Island_XL_GE_Haliade_93_69_80_c1.jpg) 18
                    

**Jones Act? Not a Problem for US Offshore Wind Market, Avangrid Says**

**White Papers**

### Analysis of Net Energy Metering Policy Changes in the United States

DOWNLOAD >

### Voice Assistant Platforms: Pursuing an Improved Utility Customer

Experience

DOWNLOAD >

Enjoyed reading our articles? For FREE unlimited access*, please sign up or
log in.

Please keep me informed by email about GTM products, services and events. I
have read and agree to the Terms of Services and Privacy Policy Sign Up For
Free

*Does not include exclusive GTM Squared content

Already a member? Log in. Already a member? Log in Log in

Forgot password?

Remember me Log in

Log in

Back to GTM Home

Not a member? Sign up

*Does not include exclusive GTM Squared content

#### We also post our resources on social media

Follow us!

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    
                            * News
                            * Research
                            * Squared
                            * Events
                            * Podcasts
                            * Webinars
                            * White Papers
                            * Videos
                            * Press Release
                            * Media Inquiries
                            * In The News
                            * Our Team
                            * Careers
                            * Contact
                            * About us
                            * Advertising
                            * Creative Strategies
                            * Careers
                            * Contact
                    

A Wood Mackenzie Business © 2019 Greentech Media or its affiliated companies.
All rights reserved.

                    
                                                * Sitemap
                            * Terms & Conditions
                            * Privacy Policy
                    

Close
![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_s3.amazonaws.com/assets.greentechmedia.com/images/uploads/GEIS19_roadblock_updated_768_420_80.jpg)

Close
![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_s3.amazonaws.com/assets.greentechmedia.com/images/uploads/Version_2-2_\(3\)_768_420_80.jpg)

Close
![](//assets.greentechmedia.com/assets/content/cache/made/assets/content/cache/remote/https_s3.amazonaws.com/assets.greentechmedia.com/images/uploads/311x120_Keyword_Popout_@2x_311_120_80_c1.jpg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

