

# Zef

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For other uses, see Zef (disambiguation).

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b4/Ambox_important.svg/40px-

Ambox_important.svg.png)

|

**This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss
these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these
template messages)_

|

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Zef" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·**
JSTOR _( October 2010)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

![Wiki letter

w.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/6c/Wiki_letter_w.svg/40px-

Wiki_letter_w.svg.png)

|

This article's **lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its
contents**. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible
overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on
the article's talk page. _( June 2013)_

---|--- 

_(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/Xeni_Jardin%2C_Yo-

Landi_%28die_Antwoord%29_%26_Philip_Nelson_%28cropped%29.jpg/220px-

Xeni_Jardin%2C_Yo-

Landi_%28die_Antwoord%29_%26_Philip_Nelson_%28cropped%29.jpg)

Yolandi Visser wearing a zef T-shirt

**Zef** ( Afrikaans: [ˈzɛf]) is a South African counter-culture movement. Kyle
Hans Brockmann has compared zef counter-culture to many similar anarchic sub-
cultures in the northern hemisphere.

## Contents

  * 1 Origin of the term
  * 2 Zef music and culture
  * 3 Associated artists
  * 4 References

## Origin of the term[edit]

Yolandi Visser of Die Antwoord said, "It's associated with people who soup
their cars up and rock gold and shit. Zef is, you're poor but you're fancy.
You're poor but you're sexy, you've got style."[1][2][3]

The concept of "zef" originated in the 1960s and 1970s as a derogatory term to
refer to working class whites, including residents of caravan parks.[4] It is
a shortening of the name of the Ford Zephyr motorcar that was popular
worldwide from the 1950s to the 1970s. In South Africa, these cars were often
customized with enhanced engines, tires and wheels.[5] Frikkie Lombard, editor
of the _Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal_ , has explained zef as "something
which is usually considered to be common, but nowadays has credibility."[5]

## Zef music and culture[edit]

The music group Die Antwoord self-identifies as "zef" in style. In a 2010
interview, Ninja of Die Antwoord responded to the controversy arising from his
claim that zef represented South Africa.[6] Critics suggested it might rather
just represent (Afrikaans) _white_ South Africa. He commented that "racism is
somewhat obsolete and a thing of the past for South Africans." In the same
interview, Ninja describes that zef is a style of music and a style of
subculture, comparing it to hip-hop in its role in society. In a featurette
for Die Antwoord's role in the film _Chappie_ , Ninja states that zef means
"that you literally don't care what anyone else thinks of you; like, you
represent yourself in your music, in how you dress, in how you think, how you
speak." [7]

In 2013, a "satirical blog" originally titled _Zef Kinners_ briefly became a
viral success in South Africa (and then faced legal claims) after it was
started as a student school project, posting photos of people the blog
considered to exemplify zef. The blog's creator commented, "Jack Parow and Die
Antwoord are not zef. That's the safe version of zef. Zef has a dirty
face."[8]

Authors Ross Truscott and Maria Brock have perceived the "rise of zef culture"
to be an expression of "Afrikaner self-parody" growing out of a sense of
"national melancholia" in post-apartheid South Africa. They note similarities
to earlier touchstones of South African culture such as the anti-apartheid
Voëlvry Movement, the satirical magazine _Bitterkomix_ , and the alternative
rock band Fokofpolisiekar.[9][10] Similarly, playwright/academic Anton Krueger
has posited that the "embrace of the vulgarity embodied by Zef" is in part an
"outlet" for a post-apartheid "sense of shame".[4]

Other performers who have been identified as exponents of zef include Voëlvry
leader Koos Kombuis,[11] comic performers Corné and Twakkie (Louw Venter and
Rob van Vuuren) of _The Most Amazing Show_ , and the comedy group Zef Sketse,
known for their 2006 TV series _Kompleks_.[4]

## Associated artists[edit]

  * Die Antwoord
  * Jack Parow
  * Little Big
  * Tommy Cash

## References[edit]

  1. **^** Hoby, Hermione (12 September 2010). "Die Antwoord: 'Are we awful or the best thing in the universe?'". _The Observer_.
  2. **^** Bosch, Marius (5 February 2010). "S.African Afrikaans rappers takes Internet by storm". _Reuters_.
  3. **^** Culhane, Dylan (September 2009). "Die Antwoord – Zef So Fresh". _Vice_. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Krueger, Anton (2012). "Part II:Zef/Poor White Kitsch Chique: Die Antwoord's Comedy of Degradation". _Safundi_. **13** (3–4): 399–408. doi:10.1080/17533171.2012.715484.
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fourie, Magdel (16 February 2010) "The Dummies guide to Zef", News24.
  6. **^** Die Antwoord Extended Uncut Interview. Youtube. Retrieved on 12 January 2012 [ _unreliable source?_ ]
  7. **^** CHAPPIE Movie – Die Antwoord Featurette. Youtube. Retrieved on 6 July 2015
  8. **^** Mkele, Yolisa (30 April 2013) "Fifty Shades of Zef", _The Times_.
  9. **^** Truscott, Ross (2011). "National melancholia and Afrikaner self-parody in post-apartheid South Africa". _Psychoanalysis, Culture & Society_. **16** (1): 90–106. doi:10.1057/pcs.2010.42.
  10. **^** Brock, Maria; Truscott, Ross (2012). ""What's the difference between a melancholic apartheid moustache and a nostalgic GDR telephone?"". _Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology_. **18** (3): 318–328. doi:10.1037/a0029073.
  11. **^** Marx, Hannelie; Milton, Viola Candice (2011). "Bastardised whiteness: 'zef'-culture,Die Antwoordand the reconfiguration of contemporary Afrikaans identities". _Social Identities_. **17** (6): 723–745. doi:10.1080/13504630.2011.606671. (It quotes an Afrikaans source as describing Kombuis the "grandfather of zef".)

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zef&oldid=885994352"

Categories:

  * Afrikaans words and phrases
  * Fashion aesthetics
  * South African culture
  * South African English
  * White South African culture
  * Working-class culture

Hidden categories:

  * All articles lacking reliable references
  * Articles lacking reliable references from November 2014
  * Articles needing additional references from October 2010
  * All articles needing additional references
  * Wikipedia introduction cleanup from June 2013
  * All pages needing cleanup
  * Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from June 2013
  * All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify
  * Articles with multiple maintenance issues
  * Use dmy dates from January 2019

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Español
  * Français
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Русский
  * Suomi

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 3 March 2019, at 17:36 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

