

FactCheck.org® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center

![Become a Facebook fan](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook-mini.png)

![Follow us on Twitter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

twitter.png)

![Get the RSS feed](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-rss.png)

![Follow us on Tumblr](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

tumblr.png)

![Sign up for the email

newsletter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-email.png)

![Help us hold politicians accountable.

](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-donate.png)

Skip to content

FactCheck.org®

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Articles 
                              * Featured
                              * The Wire
                              * SciCheck
                              * Debunking False Stories
                              * 2018 Election
                            * Ask a Question 
                              * Ask FactCheck
                              * Ask SciCheck
                            * Donate
                            * Archives 
                              * President Trump
                              * Nancy Pelosi
                              * Mitch McConnell
                              * Chuck Schumer
                              * Kevin McCarthy
                              * 2020 Election
                              * Russia investigation
                              * climate change
                              * immigration
                              * View All
                            * About Us 
                              * Our Mission
                              * Our Process
                              * Our Funding
                              * Our Staff
                              * Undergraduate Fellows
                              * Awards
                              * Request a Correction
                              * Contact Us
                            * Search
                            * More 
                              * Viral Claims
                              * FactCheck On the Air
                              * Mailbag
                              * Quiz Archive
                              * Party Lines
                    

FactCheck.org is celebrating 15 years of holding politicians accountable.

SciCheck › The Wire

# Ice Caps at Record Low, Not High

By Vanessa Schipani

Posted on January 30, 2018

* * *

In a recent interview with the British station ITV, President Donald Trump
falsely implied the globe's ice caps are at "record" high levels. But ice caps
generally have been declining worldwide.

Trump made his claim in an interview with Piers Morgan, host of the ITV show
"Good Morning Britain," that aired on Jan. 28.

> **Piers Morgan, Jan. 28:** Do you believe in climate change? Do you believe
it exists?

>

> **Trump:** There is a cooling and there is a heating and I mean, look – it
used to not be climate change. It used to be global warming. Right?

>

> **Morgan** : Right.

>

> **Trump:** That wasn’t working too well, because it was getting too cold all
over the place. The ice caps were going to melt, they were going to be gone by
now, but now they’re setting records, so OK, they’re at a record level.

Trump doesn't specify whether he means record high ice cap levels or record
low, though from the context he suggests high. He also doesn't specify which
ice caps he's referring to or what time periods. We reached out to the White
House for clarification and support for Trump's claim. The White House has yet
to get back to us.

![](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/SciCHECKsquare_4-e1430162915812.png)Technically,
the term "ice cap" refers to a type of glacier that covers less than 50,000
square kilometers (19,305 square miles).

But, as Reuters points out, "Many people use the term 'ice cap' to refer to
polar sea ice or vast ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica."

The two swaths of ice in Greenland and Antarctica contain 99 percent of the
world's freshwater ice. If they melted entirely, it would lead to hundreds of
feet of sea level rise, says the National Snow and Ice Data Center, which is
based at the University of Colorado, Boulder.

According to NASA, both of these ice sheets have declined in mass since 2002.
And "[b]oth ice sheets have seen an acceleration of ice mass loss since 2009,"
the agency adds.

![](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/Greenland.jpg)However, the
Greenland ice sheet has melted considerably faster, at a rate of about 286
gigatonnes per year on average (see chart to left). That's compared with about
127 gigatonnes per year on average for the Antarctic ice sheet (see chart
below). (One gigaton is equal to 1 billion metric tons, or 1.1 billion U.S.
tons, which can fill 400,000 Olympic-size swimming pools.)

Scientists distinguish ice on these land masses from sea ice, which floats on
the ocean's surface near the poles. Sea ice around Greenland, or Arctic sea
ice, has also seen a general decline, according to NASA.

![](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/Screen-

Shot-2018-01-30-at-4.13.27-PM.png)Sea ice levels at the poles fluctuate
seasonally -- in summer, they're at their lowest levels of the year, and in
winter they're at their highest. Scientists can measure decline in these ice
sheets over time by evaluating whether winter and summer levels are smaller or
larger than previously recorded.

For the Arctic, that summer minimum occurs around September, and the winter
maximum occurs around March. For the Antarctic, it's the opposite.

September Arctic sea ice has trended downward over the past few decades, from
a high of 7.9 million square kilometers in 1980 to a low of 3.4 million sq km
in 2012, says NASA. In September 2017, it was at 4.8 million sq km.

In March 2017, the agency's satellites also recorded the lowest winter Arctic
sea ice levels and the lowest summer Antarctic sea ice levels since
measurements began in 1979.

But unlike the data on Arctic sea ice levels, the data on Antarctic sea ice
doesn't yet show that the sea ice is generally declining.

“It is tempting to say that the record low we are seeing this year is global
warming finally catching up with Antarctica,” said Walt Meier, a sea ice
scientist at NASA, back in March 2017.

“However, this might just be an extreme case of pushing the envelope of year-
to-year variability," he added. "We’ll need to have several more years of data
to be able to say there has been a significant change in the trend.”

Still, ice caps around the world are far from hitting record high levels, as
Trump implied. The trend points downward.

In his interview with ITV, Trump also made two other claims we've written
about before.

First, Trump’s statement that the globe has seen cooling and heating of late
isn’t supported by the evidence.

As we wrote in a previous article, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration has said that 2016 set a new record high annual temperature
(along with 2005, 2010, 2014, and 2015) and marked "the 40th consecutive year
(since 1977) that the annual temperature has been above the 20th century
average.”

Last year continued that trend. At likely the third warmest year on record,
2017 marked the 41st consecutive year above the 20th century average.

Second, Trump's claim that terminology switched from "global warming" to
"climate change" because "it was getting too cold all over the place" is also
false.

As we've written before, scientists still use both terms -- "global warming"
and "climate change" -- which refer to different phenomena.

"Global warming" refers to a rise in the planet's average temperature due to
increasing greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere from burning fossil
fuels. Global warming then causes other changes in the planet's climate, such
as sea level rise and the melting of ice caps. "Climate change" refers to all
of these climatic changes.

Share the Facts

2018-01-30 23:23:59 UTC

FactCheck.org

![FactCheck.org](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/2013/04/TransparentWebLogo.png)

-1

-1

-1

![FactCheck.org rating logo](https://dhpikd1t89arn.cloudfront.net/custom-

rating/custom-ratings-bdcfdb67-bfaa-4ea6-a2e3-23ed61521ad3) FactCheck.org
Rating:

Ice sheets have declined

"The ice caps were going to melt, they were going to be gone by now, but now
they’re setting records, so OK, they’re at a record level."

Donald Trump

President of the United States

https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/president-trump

![](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/Trump-new-widget.png)

“Good Morning Britain" interview

Sunday, January 28, 2018

2018-01-28

Read More

info

                    
                                                * Categories
                              * SciCheck
                              * The Wire
                            * Location
                              * International
                            * Issue
                              * Antarctica
                              * climate change
                              * global warming
                              * Greenland
                              * sea ice
                            * People
                              * Donald Trump
                    

* * *

Previous StoryTrump Takes Undue Credit on Black Unemployment

Next StoryFactChecking Trump's State of the Union

* * *

##### Ask FactCheck

**Q: Did the comedian Steve Harvey author a post in support of President
Donald Trump circulating on social media?** **  
**

**A: No. It was written by an anonymous, 80-year-old American, according to
the conservative website that first published it in 2016.**

Read the full question and answer

View the Ask FactCheck archives

Have a question? Ask us.

Donate Now

Because facts matter.

![SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-scicheck.png)

##### SciCheck

###### Fact-checking science-based claims.

![Facebook Initiative](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook.png)

##### Facebook Initiative

###### Debunking false stories.

![State of the Union](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

sotu.png)

##### State of the Union

###### Our fact-checking video collaboration.

![Trump Transcripts](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

trump.png)

##### Trump Transcripts

###### Annotated transcripts of Trump’s remarks.

![Health Watch](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

healthwatch.png)

##### Health Watch

###### Fact-checking the health care debate.

![2018 Players

Guide](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/PlayersGuide2018-square.png)

##### 2018 Players Guide

###### The special interest groups behind the TV ads.

![Sign Up](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-signup.png)

##### Sign Up

###### Get free email alerts.

![Ask SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

askscicheck.png)

##### Ask SciCheck

###### Answers to your science questions.

![Viral Spiral](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

viralspiral.png)

##### Viral Spiral

###### Don’t get spun by internet rumors.

![NewsFeed

Defenders](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/factchecksidebar_icon-1.png)

##### NewsFeed Defenders

###### A media literacy game to detect misinformation.

![On the Air](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-ota.png)

##### On the Air

###### Our staff on TV and radio.

![Party Lines](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-partylines.png)

##### Party Lines

###### Misleading political talking points.

![FlackCheck.org](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

flackcheck.png)

##### FlackCheck.org

###### Our sister site for political literacy.

![Mailbag](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-mailbag.png)

##### Mailbag

###### Letters from our readers.

                    
                                                * Archives
                            * Privacy
                            * Copyright Policy
                            * Contact Us
                    

(C) Copyright 2019 FactCheck.org ®  
A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of
Pennsylvania

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

