

__NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please
upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE »

**Sections** Home __Search Skip to content Skip to navigation View mobile
version

## The New York Times

###### Archives|TERMITE GAS EXCEEDS SMOKESTACK POLLUTION

__Search

Subscribe Now Log In __0 __Settings

__Close search

## Site Search Navigation

Search NYTimes.com

__Clear this text input

Go

https://nyti.ms/29Km9xS

                    
                                                1. Loading...
                    

See next articles

See previous articles

## Site Navigation

## Site Mobile Navigation

Advertisement

### Archives | 1982

# TERMITE GAS EXCEEDS SMOKESTACK POLLUTION

By WALTER SULLIVANOCT. 31, 1982

Continue reading the main story Share This Page

Continue reading the main story

About the Archive

This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print archive,
before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve these articles as
they originally appeared, The Times does not alter, edit or update them.

Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other
problems. Please send reports of such problems to
archive_feedback@nytimes.com.

![The article as it originally

appeared.](https://s1.nyt.com/timesmachine/pages/1/1982/10/31/258652_360W.png)

__

##### View page in TimesMachine

October 31, 1982, Page 001025Buy Reprints The New York Times Archives

For several years scientists have been warning that carbon dioxide added to
the atmosphere by increased burning of fuel is likely to alter world climates,
like a greenhouse, by inhibiting the escape of heat into outer space.

Now researchers report that termites, digesting vegetable matter on a global
basis, produce more than twice as much carbon dioxide as all the world's
smokestacks.

Termite gas production has become particularly high, the researchers say,
because widespread clearing of land has offered them abundant food in the
debris of felled forests. By digesting this debris, they are adding not only
carbon dioxide but also methane to the atmosphere. Other researchers have
found that methane in the atmosphere is increasing 2 percent a year.

The high level of termite gas production is reported in the Nov. 5 issue of
the journal Science. The authors measured termite gas production inside
laboratory jars. In Guatemala forests, they enclosed a huge arboreal termite
nest in a Teflon bag to confirm that the insects were prolific producers of
methane.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

As pointed out Wednesday by one of the researchers, James P. Greenberg of the
National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., termites are far
more abundant than most people realize. He estimated that there were three
quarters of a ton of termites for every person on earth. Balance of Natural
Cycle

Continue reading the main story

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Another author of the report, Patrick R. Zimmerman of the atmospheric center
in Boulder, said that plant respiration and decay added 10 to 15 times as much
carbon dioxide to the air as termites. While the contribution of fuel burning
is even less, it is superimposed on what, until recently, had been a balanced
cycle of gas production and absorption by plants, the seas and other
reservoirs.

## Newsletter Sign Up

Continue reading the main story

###

Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

Sign Up

You will receive emails containing news content, updates and promotions from
The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time.

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York
Times's products and services.

### Thank you for subscribing.

### An error has occurred. Please try again later.

### You are already subscribed to this email.

View all New York Times newsletters.

                    
                                                * See Sample
                            * Manage Email Preferences
                            * Not you?
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Opt out or contact us anytime
                            * Opt out or contact us anytime
                    

The findings concerning carbon dioxide and methane production by termites do
not offer much comfort regarding the long-term trend in atmospheric gases. The
output from insects does not appear likely to increase greatly, while
combustion of fuel is rising steadily as developing nations industrialize.

Other authors of the Science article were Dr. Paul J. Crutzen, director of the
Max Planck Institute for Atmospheric Chemistry in Mainz, West Germany, and
S.O. Wandiga of the University of Nairobi in Kenya.

The steady rise in methane was reported by Dr. Reinhold A. Rasmussen and Dr.
M. Aslam Khan Khalil of the Oregon Graduate Center last year. They said human
activity was also releasing increasing amounts of other gases that threatened
climate, including carbon dioxide and fluorocarbons, which are used in
refrigeration.

The possible significance of increased methane in the atmosphere touched off a
debate in 1971 on whether supersonic transports might alter the stratosphere.
Dr. S. Fred Singer, then at the University of Maryland, suggested that other
human activities, including intensive cattle-fattening, were more important.
He cited an estimate that bovine flatulence added 85 million tons of methane
to the atmosphere each year. The new estimate for termites is 150 tons.

A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 1982, on Page
1001025 of the National edition with the headline: TERMITE GAS EXCEEDS
SMOKESTACK POLLUTION. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story

##

                    
                                                *             *             *             * ## What's Next
                    

Loading...

Go to Home Page »

## Site Index The New York Times

## Site Index Navigation

### News

                    
                                                * World
                            * U.S.
                            * Politics
                            * N.Y.
                            * Business
                            * Tech
                            * Science
                            * Health
                            * Sports
                            * Education
                            * Obituaries
                            * Today's Paper
                            * Corrections
                    

### Opinion

                    
                                                * Today's Opinion
                            * Op-Ed Columnists
                            * Editorials
                            * Op-Ed Contributors
                            * Letters
                            * Sunday Review
                            * Video: Opinion
                    

### Arts

                    
                                                * Today's Arts
                            * Art & Design
                            * Books
                            * Dance
                            * Movies
                            * Music
                            * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                            * Television
                            * Theater
                            * Video: Arts
                    

### Living

                    
                                                * Automobiles
                            * Crossword
                            * Food
                            * Education
                            * Fashion & Style
                            * Health
                            * Jobs
                            * Magazine
                            * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                            * Real Estate
                            * T Magazine
                            * Travel
                            * Weddings & Celebrations
                    

### Listings & More

                    
                                                * Reader Center
                            * Classifieds
                            * Tools & Services
                            * N.Y.C. Events Guide
                            * Multimedia
                            * Photography
                            * Video
                            * NYT Store
                            * Times Journeys
                            * Subscribe
                            * Manage My Account
                            * NYTCo
                    

### Subscribe

                    
                                                * Subscribe
                            * __Home Delivery
                            * __Digital Subscriptions
                            * __Crossword
                            * Email Newsletters
                            * Gift Subscriptions
                            * Group Subscriptions
                            * Education Rate
                            * Mobile Applications
                            * Replica Edition
                    

## Site Information Navigation

                    
                                                * (C) 2019 The New York Times Company
                            * Home
                            * Search
                            * Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
                            * Contact Us
                            * Work With Us
                            * Advertise
                            * Your Ad Choices
                            * Privacy
                            * Terms of Service
                            * Terms of Sale
                    

## Site Information Navigation

                    
                                                * Site Map
                            * Help
                            * Site Feedback
                            * Subscriptions
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

