

×

### THE DAILY NEWSLETTER

Sign up to our daily email newsletter

![New Scientist](/wp-content/themes/new-scientist/assets/img/logo.svg)

Subscribe and save

Menu

                    
                                                * news
                            * technology
                            * space
                            * physics
                            * health
                            * environment
                            * mind
                            * video
                            * travel
                            * events
                            * jobs
                    

Sign in Search

Sign in

Log in with facebook Log in with google

Email

Password

Forgotten Password?

Sign up for free|Educational access

### Sign up for more online articles

A selection of top articles hand-picked by our editors available only to
registered users.

Get increased access now

### Manage your subscription

Check your subscription package, update your details, renew or upgrade.

Manage your subscription here

Activate subscription

# Climate myths: Human CO2 emissions are too tiny to matter

Earth 16 May 2007

By Catherine Brahic

![Carbon dioxide sources and sinks](http://www.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2007/05/dn11638-4_738.jpg)

Carbon dioxide sources and sinks

![Carbon dioxide levels as measured at Mauna Loa in Hawaii

](http://www.newscientist.com/wp-content/uploads/2007/05/dn11638-2_640.jpg)

Carbon dioxide levels as measured at Mauna Loa in Hawaii

(Image: Robert A. Rohde, Global Warming Art)

![Past and future carbon dioxide concentrations

](http://www.newscientist.com/wp-content/uploads/2007/05/dn11638-3_550.jpg)

Past and future carbon dioxide concentrations

(Image: IPCC/Philippe Rekacewicz/Emmanuelle Bournay/UNEP/GRID-Arendal)

**See all climate myths in our special feature.**

##### Advertisement

Ice cores show that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have remained
between 180 and 300 parts per million for the past half-a-million years. In
recent centuries, however, CO2 levels have risen sharply, to at least 380 ppm
(see _Greenhouse gases hit new high_ )

So what's going on? It is true that human emissions of CO2 are small compared
with natural sources. But the fact that CO2 levels have remained steady until
very recently shows that natural emissions are usually balanced by natural
absorptions. Now slightly more CO2 must be entering the atmosphere than is
being soaked up by carbon "sinks".

The consumption of terrestrial vegetation by animals and by microbes (rotting,
in other words) emits about 220 gigatonnes of CO2 every year, while
respiration by vegetation emits another 220 Gt. These huge amounts are
balanced by the 440 Gt of carbon dioxide absorbed from the atmosphere each
year as land plants photosynthesise.

Similarly, parts of the oceans release about 330 Gt of CO2 per year, depending
on temperature and rates of photosynthesis by phytoplankton, but other parts
usually soak up just as much – and are now soaking up slightly more.

## Ocean sinks

Human emissions of CO2 are now estimated to be 26.4 Gt per year, up from 23.5
Gt in the 1990s, according to an Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
report in February 2007 (pdf format). Disturbances to the land – through
deforestation and agriculture, for instance – also contribute roughly 5.9 Gt
per year.

About 40% of the extra CO2 entering the atmosphere due to human activity is
being absorbed by natural carbon sinks, mostly by the oceans. The rest is
boosting levels of CO2 in the atmosphere.

How can we be sure that human emissions are responsible for the rising CO2 in
the atmosphere? There are several lines of evidence. Fossil fuels were formed
millions of years ago. They therefore contain virtually no carbon-14, because
this unstable carbon isotope, formed when cosmic rays hit the atmosphere, has
a half-life of around 6000 years. So a dropping concentration of carbon-14 can
be explained by the burning of fossil fuels. Studies of tree rings have shown
that the proportion of carbon-14 in the atmosphere dropped by about 2% between
1850 and 1954. After this time, atmospheric nuclear bomb tests wrecked this
method by releasing large amounts of carbon-14.

## Volcanic misunderstanding

Fossil fuels also contain less carbon-13 than carbon-12, compared with the
atmosphere, because the fuels derive from plants, which preferentially take up
the more common carbon-12. The ratio of carbon-13 to carbon-12 in the
atmosphere and ocean surface waters is steadily falling, showing that more
carbon-12 is entering the atmosphere.

Finally, claims that volcanoes emit more CO2 than human activities are simply
not true. In the very distant past, there have been volcanic eruptions so
massive that they covered vast areas in lava more than a kilometre thick and
appear to have released enough CO2 to warm the planet after the initial
cooling caused by the dust (see _Wipeout_ ). But even with such gigantic
eruptions, most of subsequent warming may have been due to methane released
when lava heated coal deposits, rather than from CO 2 from the volcanoes (see
also _Did the North Atlantic 's 'birth' warm the world?_ ).

Measurements of CO2 levels over the past 50 years do not show any significant
rises after eruptions. Total emissions from volcanoes on land are estimated to
average just 0.3 Gt of CO2 each year – about a hundredth of human emissions
(pdf document).

While volcanic emissions are negligible in the short term, over tens of
millions of years they do release massive quantities of CO2. But they are
balanced by the loss of carbon in ocean sediments subducted under continents
through tectonic plate movements. Ultimately, this carbon will be returned to
the atmosphere by volcanoes.

More on these topics:

                    
                                                * climate change
                    

##### Advertisement

Trending Latest Video Free

                    
                                                1. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            2. Dragonfish have 'invisible' teeth to help them sneak up on their prey
                            3. Cause of polycystic ovary syndrome discovered at last
                            4. Stem cell patch may help repair damage caused by heart attacks
                            5. The planets might control the sun's activity - and it's not astrology
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            4. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            5. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                    
                            1. Mixed reality in military aircraft of the future
                            2. How the young can rejuvenate the old
                            3. Skeletons: the frame of life
                            4. The delightful and dangerous world of liquids
                            5. Exploring the solar system
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            4. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                            5. Bizarre pentaquark turns out to be a new kind of subatomic 'molecule'
                    

![](https://images.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/06103349/nsc_190608_301-300x395.jpg)

                    
                                                * Download
                            * Buy In Print
                    

##### Advertisement

### Sign up to our newsletter

Enter your email address to get started

                    
                                                * Contact us
                            * Help
                            * About us
                            * Privacy & cookies
                            * Terms & conditions
                            * Advertise
                            * Write for us
                            * Events
                            * Science jobs
                            * Syndication
                            * RSS feeds
                            * Gift subscriptions
                            * Student subscriptions
                            * Educational subscriptions
                            * Corporate subscriptions
                    

### Get the app

### FOLLOW US

(C) Copyright New Scientist Ltd.

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

