

Go to Main Content (Accesskey 2)  
Go to Site Menu (Accesskey 3)

![NASA Logo, National Aeronautics and Space

Administration](https://www.giss.nasa.gov/gfx/2013/nasa.png)

# National Aeronautics and Space Administration

## Goddard Institute for Space Studies

## Goddard Space Flight Center

Sciences and Exploration Directorate  
Earth Sciences Division

## Science Briefs

### Do Variations in the Solar Cycle Affect Our Climate System?

By David Rind -- January 2009

There have been many arguments as to whether or not the eleven-year sunspot
cycle affects our weather and climate. With our increased ability to monitor
the sun, we are now aware that there is a small change in the total solar
irradiance accompanying shifts from solar maximum conditions (with many
sunspots) to solar minimum (with, basically, none). There is also a more
substantial change in the ultraviolet (UV) portion of the solar spectrum, with
direct impacts primarily in the stratosphere (above ~10km).

![Line plot of total solar irradiance over the past three solar

cycles](fig1_s.jpg)

**Figure 1.** Total solar irradiance over the past three solar cycles, since
1975, varying between 1365 and 1367 W/m 2. (Click for large JPEG or PDF.)

The effect of these changes on our temperature record has been noted by some
researchers, and, like the change in solar irradiance, it too appears to be
small. But there is little agreement on just how that change arises.
Furthermore, there are claims that the sunspot cycle is associated with
changes in storm tracks and rainfall. How could this happen with so little
change in total energy?

To understand the processes involved, we recently completed an extensive
series of climate model experiments, involving 1600 simulated years with
varying UV and total solar irradiance (TSI). Our experiments show that the
solar cycle influences tropospheric rainfall patterns in a manner consistent
with some observations, with increased solar activity favoring precipitation
north of the equator (for example, the South Asian monsoon) and decreased
precipitation both near the equator and at northern mid-latitudes. The word
"favoring" is used advisedly; in the experiments it is a "weighting of the
dice", an increase in the likelihood of these effects while accounting for
less than one standard deviation of the variability (a result found in
observations as well). Locally it can account for 15-20% of rainfall totals.
The influence also seems to have been modified by global warming, and so its
effectiveness may change with time. The impact of the solar cycle on
precipitation in the model experiments arises from two different mechanisms,
the first involving UV changes, the second total solar irradiance.

The increase of incident solar UV during solar maximum conditions leads to
increased generation of stratospheric ozone in the mid-to-upper stratosphere,
which ultimately results in greater ozone in the tropical lower stratosphere.
This helps warm that region via both short- and long-wave absorption. In
response to this more stable vertical profile for tropical tropospheric
processes, tropical convection preferentially shifts off the equator, favoring
monsoonal effects during Northern Hemisphere summer and on the annual average.

![Line plot of total solar output over the past three solar

cycles](fig2_s.gif)

**Figure 2, at right.** Results show the percentage of the 1600 years of
experiments during which solar maximum conditions produced increased (green)
or decreased (brown) precipitation at different latitudes on the annual
average. The top panel shows the experiments which used climatological
(unchanging) SSTs; here the influence comes primarily from the solar UV
variations affecting the stratosphere. The bottom panel is for the experiments
with historically-varying SSTs, in which TSI changes have influenced the
surface. Precipitation decreases occur greater than 50% of the time south of
the equator in both figures, but decreases in mid-latitudes result primarily
from the UV changes (top figure). Recent variations in SSTs due to other
sources (such as greenhouse gases) appear to have minimized the mid-latitude
response. (Click for large GIF or PDF.)

In addition, the solar-plus-ozone change leads to increased tropical
stratospheric warming in the mid-to-upper stratosphere during solar maximum
conditions. Higher latitudes during Southern Hemisphere winter receive no such
augmentation, and the increased latitudinal temperature gradient results in
stronger stratospheric west winds. Via the interaction of these wind changes
and planetary waves propagating up from the troposphere, the circulation in
the stratosphere weakens, a response characterized by greater relative
upwelling in the Southern Hemisphere extratropics, and more downwelling in the
northern extratropics. This downwelling has a tendency to extend into the
troposphere, limiting convection and rainfall during Northern Hemisphere
summer at these latitudes, producing drier conditions. This effect is seen in
some paleoclimate records and has been attributed to solar influence.

Total solar irradiance changes, though of small magnitude, do appear to affect
sea surface temperatures (SSTs), most obviously at latitudes where cloud cover
is small and irradiance is abundant, such as the Northern Hemisphere
subtropics during summer. The increased SSTs then help intensify circulations
spiraling away from the subtropics, again favoring reduced rainfall near the
equator and to the south, as well as northern mid-latitudes. Hence, both the
UV and TSI forcings produce similar effects, with the latter helping to
sharpen the response.

SSTs however have been influenced by other forcings, such as greenhouse gases,
over the last few decades, and these transient changes will obviously affect
the solar cycle influence. Similarly, increased carbon dioxide in the
stratosphere has led to gradual cooling conditions, which affects the UV
influence on the stratospheric circulation. So while the solar influence may
have produced a broadly similar hydrologic response for many centuries, it now
competes with potentially stronger perturbations. Its effect may well decrease
with time.

#### Reference

Rind, D., J. L. Lean, J. Lerner, P. Lonergan, and A. Leboissetier, 2008:
Exploring the stratospheric/tropospheric response to solar forcing. J.
Geophys. Res., **113** , D24103, doi:10.1029/2008JD010114.

Note: PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader or compatible viewing
software to be viewed.

#### Contact

Please address all inquiries about this research to Dr. David Rind.

### Site Menu

                    
                                                * GISS Home
                            * News & Features
                              * Recent News & Features
                              * 2018 News & Features
                              * 2017 News & Features
                              * 2016 News & Features
                              * 2015 News & Features
                              * NASA Releases
                              * Science Briefs
                              * Other Features
                              * News/Feature Video
                            * Projects & Groups
                              * Projects Overview
                              * Global Climate Modeling
                              * Astrobiology / NExSS
                              * Climate Impacts
                              * ISCCP
                              * SWING2
                            * Datasets
                              * Datasets Overview
                              * Surface Temperature
                              * Model E Simulations
                              * Model Forcings
                              * ROCKE-3D Simulations
                              * ISCCP Data Products
                              * GACP Data Products
                            * Publications
                              * Publications Overview
                              * Early On-Line
                              * Accepted & In Press
                              * 2019 Publications
                              * 2018 Publications
                              * 2017 Publications
                              * 2016 Publications
                              * 2015 Publications
                              * Authors
                              * Annual Best
                              * Most Cited
                              * Dissertations
                              * Help
                            * Software
                              * Software Overview
                              * GCM Model E
                              * GCM Model II
                              * Panoply Data Viewer
                              * G.Projector
                              * Mars24 Sunclock
                            * Education
                              * Education Overview
                              * Graduate Study
                              * Postdoc Research
                              * CCRI
                              * Internships
                              * Ask a Scientist
                            * Events
                              * Events Overview
                              * Past Events
                            * About GISS
                              * About GISS
                              * Management Staff
                              * Personnel Directory
                              * Visitors' Info
                              * Employment
                    

![NASA Logo, National Aeronautics and Space

Administration](https://www.giss.nasa.gov/gfx/2013/nasa.png)

![Goddard Space Flight Center](https://www.giss.nasa.gov/gfx/2013/gsig.png)

                    
                                                * NASA Official:  Gavin A. Schmidt
                            * Website Curator:  Robert B. Schmunk
                            * Page updated: 2018-04-10 16:53
                    
                            * NASA Privacy Policy & Important Notices
                            * Contact Us
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

