
                    
                                                * Ratings
                            * Topics
                            * Solutions
                            * Company
                            * Join
                            * My Feed
                    

Search

* * *
                    
                                                * Ratings
                            * Topics
                            * Solutions
                            * Company
                            * Join
                            * My Feed
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * All 
                            * Politics 
                            * Entertainment 
                            * Retail 
                            * Technology 
                            * Media 
                            * Lifestyle 
                            * more...
                    

Politics & current affairs

All topics

* * *
                    
                                                * All 
                            * Arts & culture 
                            * Automotive & transport 
                            * Business & finance 
                            * Digital & technology 
                            * Economy & work 
                            * Education & parenting 
                            * Entertainment & celebrity 
                            * Food & drink 
                            * Health, medicine, & beauty 
                            * International 
                            * Legal 
                            * Lifestyle 
                            * Media 
                            * Personal relationships 
                            * Philosophy & religion 
                            * Politics & current affairs 
                            * Retail & consumer 
                            * Science & environment 
                            * Sport 
                            * Travel & countries 
                            * Utilities & appliances
                    

# How left or right-wing are the UK's newspapers?

In:

MediaPolitics & current affairs

March 07, 2017, 12:00 a.m.

In:

MediaPolitics & current affairs

March 07, 2017, 12:00 a.m.

![](//d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/userprofile/954/Matt%20Smith%20small.png)

Matthew Smith

Lead data journalist

### Complaints that the British press has a right-wing bias have long been

made by left-wingers - but is this a state of affairs the public recognises?

_This article originally appeared in The Times_

A long-held complaint from many of Britain's left-wingers is the right wing
bias of much of the UK's national press. Just this week Owen Jones described
the UK press as _" largely run by a very small group of very right-wing media
moguls who defend the status quo of which they are part. If you are on the
Left and want to change society, the media will always come and get you"._

But how far are perceptions of the press's right-wing bias held by the public
at large? YouGov has now uncovered the Britons' view on where mainstream
national newspapers sit on the left-right political spectrum.

Of the eight national newspapers we asked about, five were seen to be
predominantly right-wing, whilst two were seen as predominantly left-wing. The
Independent, although no longer a physical presence in Britain's newsstands,
was seen as a broadly centrist publication.

![](https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/inlineimage/2017-03-06/Newspapers%20left%20right%20wing-01.png)

_(Please note that these results exclude those who said they didn 't know what
the newspaper's ideology was - a rate of between 39% and 49% for each
newspaper)_

In news that will surprise very few, the Daily Mail is seen as Britain's most
right-wing newspaper. Britain's most read newspaper is described by 44% of
Brits as "very right-wing", far ahead of any other paper. In total, 81%
considered the paper to be right-wing to one degree or another.

At the other end of the spectrum the Guardian is seen as Britain's most left-
wing newspaper, closely followed by the Mirror. Whilst Britons were about
equally likely to see both publications as slightly left-of-centre or fairly
left-wing, slightly more considered the Guardian to be "very left-wing", at
16% compared to The Mirror's 11%.

The Independent was the only newspaper that was seen as broadly centrist,
albeit with a leftist bent. Just over a third (37%) of people consider it to
sit in the political centre - more than double the rate for any other
newspaper - whilst a further 26% said they thought it was slightly left-of-
centre.

As for The Times, the majority of people consider the paper to be either
slightly right of centre or fairly right-wing (28 per cent in each case),
although it is seen as the least right-wing of the right-wing papers.

#### **Personal ideology has relatively little impact on perception of

newspapers ' ideology**

As part of the survey, we also asked Britons to say how left or right-wing
they are themselves. Whatever their ideology, the public were broadly in
agreement about whether a paper was left or right-wing, the main difference
being that left-wingers tended to see right-wing papers as more right-wing
than right-wingers did (and vice versa).

![](https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/inlineimage/2017-03-06/Newspaper%20and%20personal%20ideology%20v2-01.png)

What exceptions there are were most likely to come from those with views
closer to the extremes of the political spectrum (i.e. those who described
themselves as fairly or very left/right-wing).

Doubtless many people will be surprised to see anyone describe the Daily Mail
as very left-wing, or likewise the Guardian as very right-wing. However, it
was often these more staunchly left and right-wing Britons who felt this way.

The most extreme examples of this were in the case of the Mirror, which 29% of
fairly/very left-wingers believe to be fairly/very _right_ -wing, and the Sun
which nearly a quarter (23%) of fairly/very right-wingers consider the paper
to be fairly/very _left_ -wing.

Ultimately how much this all matters would normally depend on your view of
whether the press leads or simply reflects public opinion. But the newly
released National Readership Survey figures for 2016 will make grim reading
for those who worry a right-wing media bias. The results show that collective
circulation of right-wing papers is leaving that of the left-wing papers for
dust.

Whether or not many of the papers are actually right-wing, there is certainly
a strong perception that they are and the circulation levels mean they have a
lot more people getting their news every day from "right-wing" publications
than "left-wing" ones.

Our research and the National Readership Survey highlight the tricky media
landscape for those on the left. As Owen Jones himself goes on to say in his
video, the left needs to find a strategy that will cut through to the people
despite the dominance of the "right-wing" press.

Photo: PA

**See the full results here**

Share this article

                    
                                                *             *             *             *             * Leave a comment
                    

Related Content

Looking for a specific topic

Search for music artists, politicians, brands and more

##### What the world thinks

* * *

###### About YouGov

At the heart of our company is a global online community, where millions of
people and thousands of political, cultural and commercial organizations
engage in a continuous conversation about their beliefs, behaviours and
brands.

                    
                                                *             *             *             * ###### Company
                    
                            * About YouGov
                            * Contact Us
                            * Investor relations
                            * Modern slavery act
                    

###### Global Sites

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * Canada
                            * Denmark
                            * Finland
                            * France
                            * Germany
                            * Hong Kong
                            * India
                            * Indonesia
                            * Italy
                            * Malaysia
                            * Mexico
                            * Middle East
                            * Norway
                            * Pakistan
                            * Philippines
                            * Poland
                            * Singapore
                            * Spain
                            * Sweden
                            * Taiwan
                            * Thailand
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                            * Vietnam
                    

At the heart of our company is a global online community, where millions of
people and thousands of political, cultural and commercial organizations
engage in a continuous conversation about their beliefs, behaviours and
brands.

Company

                    
                                                * About YouGov
                            * Contact Us
                            * Investor relations
                            * Modern slavery act
                    

Global Sites

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * Canada
                            * Denmark
                            * Finland
                            * France
                            * Germany
                            * Hong Kong
                            * India
                            * Indonesia
                            * Italy
                            * Malaysia
                            * Mexico
                            * Middle East
                            * Norway
                            * Pakistan
                            * Philippines
                            * Poland
                            * Singapore
                            * Spain
                            * Sweden
                            * Taiwan
                            * Thailand
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                            * Vietnam
                    

* * *

Copyright (C) 2018 YouGov PLC. All Rights Reserved.

                    
                                                * Privacy
                            * Terms and Conditions
                            * Cookie Policy
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

