

×

### THE DAILY NEWSLETTER

Sign up to our daily email newsletter

![New Scientist](/wp-content/themes/new-scientist/assets/img/logo.svg)

Subscribe and save

Menu

                    
                                                * news
                            * technology
                            * space
                            * physics
                            * health
                            * environment
                            * mind
                            * video
                            * travel
                            * events
                            * jobs
                    

Sign in Search

Sign in

Log in with facebook Log in with google

Email

Password

Forgotten Password?

Sign up for free|Educational access

### Sign up for more online articles

A selection of top articles hand-picked by our editors available only to
registered users.

Get increased access now

### Manage your subscription

Check your subscription package, update your details, renew or upgrade.

Manage your subscription here

Activate subscription

# The history of ice on Earth

Earth 24 May 2010

![Don't forget your woolly mittens ](http://www.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2010/05/dn18949-1_300.jpg)

By Michael Marshall

Primitive humans, clad in animal skins, trekking across vast expanses of ice
in a desperate search to find food. That's the image that comes to mind when
most of us think about an ice age.

But in fact there have been many ice ages, most of them long before humans
made their first appearance. And the familiar picture of an ice age is of a
comparatively mild one&colon; others were so severe that the entire Earth
froze over, for tens or even hundreds of millions of years.

In fact, the planet seems to have three main settings&colon; "greenhouse",
when tropical temperatures extend to the poles and there are no ice sheets at
all; "icehouse", when there is some permanent ice, although its extent varies
greatly; and "snowball", in which the planet's entire surface is frozen over.

Why the ice periodically advances – and why it retreats again – is a mystery
that glaciologists have only just started to unravel. Here's our recap of all
the back and forth they're trying to explain.

##### Advertisement

## Snowball Earth

**2.4 to 2.1 billion years ago**

The Huronian glaciation is the oldest ice age we know about. The Earth was
just over 2 billion years old, and home only to unicellular life-forms.

The early stages of the Huronian, from 2.4 to 2.3 billion years ago, seem to
have been particularly severe, with the entire planet frozen over in the first
"snowball Earth". This may have been triggered by a 250-million-year lull in
volcanic activity, which would have meant less carbon dioxide being pumped
into the atmosphere, and a reduced greenhouse effect.

## Deep freeze

**850 to 630 million years ago**

During the 200 million years of the Cryogenian period, the Earth was plunged
into some of the deepest cold it has ever experienced – and the emergence of
complex life may have caused it.

One theory is that the glaciation was triggered by the evolution of large
cells, and possibly also multicellular organisms, that sank to the seabed
after dying. This would have sucked CO2 out of the atmosphere, weakening the
greenhouse effect and thus lowering global temperatures.

There seem to have been two distinct Cryogenian ice ages&colon; the so-called
Sturtian glaciation between 750 and 700 million years ago, followed by the
Varanger (or Marinoan) glaciation, 660 to 635 million years ago. There's some
evidence that Earth became a snowball at times during the big freezes, but
researchers are still trying to work out exactly what happened.

## Mass extinction

**460 to 430 million years ago**

Straddling the late Ordovician period and the early Silurian period, the
Andean-Saharan ice age was marked by a mass extinction, the second most severe
in Earth's history.

The die-off was surpassed only by the gargantuan Permian extinction 250
million years ago. But as the ecosystem recovered after the freeze, it
expanded, with land plants becoming common over the course of the Silurian
period. And those plants may have caused the next great ice age.

## Plants invade the land

**360 to 260 million years ago**

Like the Cryogenian glaciation, the Karoo ice age featured two peaks in ice
cover that may well have been distinct ice ages. They took place in the
Mississipian period, 359 to 318 million years ago, and again in the
Pennsylvanian 318 to 299 million years ago.

These ice ages may have been the result of the expansion of land plants that
followed the Cryogenian. As plants spread over the planet, they absorbed CO2
from the atmosphere and released oxygen (PDF). As a result CO2 levels fell and
the greenhouse effect weakened, triggering an ice age.

There is some evidence that the ice came and went in regular cycles, driven by
changes in Earth's orbit. If true, this would mean that the Karoo ice age
operated in much the same way as the current one.

## Antarctica freezes over

**14 million years ago** ****

Antarctica wasn't always a frozen wasteland. It wasn't until around 34 million
years ago that the first small glaciers formed on the tops of Antarctica's
mountains. And it was 20 million years later, when world-wide temperatures
dropped by 8 °C, that the glaciers' ice froze onto the rock, and the southern
ice sheet was born.

This temperature drop was triggered by the rise of the Himalayas. As they grew
higher they were exposed to increased weathering, which sucked CO2 out of the
atmosphere and reduced the greenhouse effect.

The northern hemisphere remained relatively ice-free for longer, with
Greenland and the Arctic becoming heavily glaciated only around 3.2 million
years ago.

## Latest advance of the ice

**2.58 million years ago** ****

The Quaternary glaciation started just a few million years ago – and is still
going on. So its history is relatively recent, in geological terms, and can be
studied in far more detail than the others'. It's evident that the ice sheets
have gone through multiple stages of growth and retreat over the course of the
Quaternary.

During "glacial" stages, the temperature was low and ice extended far away
from the poles. During "interglacials", the temperature was somewhat warmer
and the ice retreated. Brief, inconclusive periods of advancing ice –
typically lasting less than 10,000 years – are called "stadials"; conversely,
periods when the ice retreated, but only briefly, are called "interstadials".

The main trigger for the Quaternary glaciation was the continuing fall in the
level of CO2 in the atmosphere due to the weathering of the Himalayas.
However, the timing of the glacials and interglacials was driven by periodic
changes in Earth's orbit that change the amount of sunshine reaching various
parts of the planet. The effect of these small orbital changes was amplified
by positive feedbacks, such as changes in greenhouse gas levels.

During the first two-thirds of the Quaternary, the ice advanced and retreated
roughly every 41,000 years – the same tempo as the changes in the tilt of
Earth's axis. About a million years ago, the ice switched to a 100,000-year
cycle for reasons that were until recently a mystery. Now more detailed
information about the timing of the ice's movements may have helped
glaciologists find an answer.

To make matters more complicated still, the ice didn't advance and retreat
simultaneously all around the world. Often it would begin advancing on one
continent, with the others only being covered thousands of years later, and
then linger on a few continents several millennia after it had disappeared
from the others.

So there were actually many overlapping glaciations within the Quaternary,
each separately named&colon; the Bavelian and Cromerian complexes of glacials
and interglacials; the Elsterian glacial; the Holsteinian interglacial and the
Saalian glaciation, among others.

Between 130,000 and 114,000 years ago, the ice retreated during the Eemian
interglacial – and then advanced again to create the glacial that most people
know as "the ice age".

## Our ice age

**110,000 to 12,000 years ago**

The cool temperatures of the Quaternary may have allowed our brains to become
much larger than those of our of hominid ancestors. While that's still open to
debate, it's plausible that the most recent glacial period left its mark on
our species.

Neanderthals, with whom we shared the planet until just before the last
glacial maximum, 20,000 years ago, may have struggled to survive as the rising
and falling ice ate away at their habitat – although many other explanations
for their extinction have been suggested. What is beyond doubt is that _Homo
sapiens_ survived and turned to farming soon after the ice retreated, setting
the stage for the rise of modern civilisation.

As the glacial period drew to a close and temperatures began to rise, there
were two final cold snaps. First, the chilly "Older Dryas" of 14,700 to 13,400
years ago transformed most of Europe from forest to tundra, like modern-day
Siberia. After a brief respite, the Younger Dryas, between 12,800 to 11,500
years ago, froze Europe solid within a matter of months – probably as a result
of meltwater from retreating glaciers shutting down the Atlantic Ocean's
"conveyor-belt" current, although a cometary impact has also been blamed.

Twelve thousand years ago, the great ice sheets retreated at the beginning of
the latest interglacial – the Flandrian – allowing humans to return to
northern latitudes. This period has been relatively warm, and the climate
relatively stable, although it has been slightly colder than the last
interglacial, the Eemian, and sea levels are currently at least 3 metres lower
– differences that are being closely scrutinised by researchers keen to
understand how our climate will develop.

But this respite from the ice is likely to prove short-lived, at least in
geological terms. Human effects on the climate notwithstanding, the cycle will
continue to turn, the hothouse period will some day come to an end – and the
ice sheets will descend again.

More on these topics:

                    
                                                * climate change
                    

##### Advertisement

Trending Latest Video Free

                    
                                                1. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            2. Dragonfish have 'invisible' teeth to help them sneak up on their prey
                            3. Cause of polycystic ovary syndrome discovered at last
                            4. Stem cell patch may help repair damage caused by heart attacks
                            5. The planets might control the sun's activity - and it's not astrology
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            4. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            5. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                    
                            1. Mixed reality in military aircraft of the future
                            2. How the young can rejuvenate the old
                            3. Skeletons: the frame of life
                            4. The delightful and dangerous world of liquids
                            5. Exploring the solar system
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            4. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                            5. Bizarre pentaquark turns out to be a new kind of subatomic 'molecule'
                    

![](https://images.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/06103349/nsc_190608_301-300x395.jpg)

                    
                                                * Download
                            * Buy In Print
                    

##### Advertisement

### Sign up to our newsletter

Enter your email address to get started

                    
                                                * Contact us
                            * Help
                            * About us
                            * Privacy & cookies
                            * Terms & conditions
                            * Advertise
                            * Write for us
                            * Events
                            * Science jobs
                            * Syndication
                            * RSS feeds
                            * Gift subscriptions
                            * Student subscriptions
                            * Educational subscriptions
                            * Corporate subscriptions
                    

### Get the app

### FOLLOW US

(C) Copyright New Scientist Ltd.

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

