

# Deforestation and climate change

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Deforestation is one of the main contributors to climate change. It comes in
many forms: wildfire, agricultural clearcutting, livestock ranching, and
logging for timber, among others. Forests cover 31% of the land area on Earth
and annually, 18.7 million acres of forest is lost.[1] Mass deforestation
continues to threaten tropical forests, their biodiversity and the ecosystem
services they provide. The main area of concern of deforestation is in
tropical rainforests, since it is home to the majority of the biodiversity.
Organizations such as World Wildlife Fund focus on the preservation of nature
and the reduction of the most pressing threats to the diversity of life on
Earth.[1]

Deforestation is the second largest anthropogenic source of carbon dioxide to
the atmosphere, after fossil fuel combustion. Deforestation and forest
degradation contribute to atmospheric greenhouse gas emissions through
combustion of forest biomass and decomposition of remaining plant material and
soil carbon. It used to account for more than 20% of carbon dioxide emissions,
but it’s currently somewhere around the 10% mark. By 2008, deforestation was
12% of total CO  
2, or 15% if peatlands are included. These proportions are likely to have
fallen since given the continued rise of fossil fuel use.[2]

Averaged over all land and ocean surfaces, temperatures warmed roughly 1.53 °F
(0.85 °C) between 1880 and 2012, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. In the Northern Hemisphere, 1983 to 2012 were the warmest
30-year period of the last 1400 years.[3]

## Contents

                    
                                                * 1 Causes of deforestation
                              * 1.1 Lumber industry
                              * 1.2 Urbanization
                              * 1.3 Livestock ranching
                              * 1.4 Agricultural expansion
                            * 2 Effect on climate change
                              * 2.1 Decrease in biodiversity
                              * 2.2 Decrease in climate services
                                * 2.2.1 Implications on soil and water
                            * 3 Counteracting climate change
                              * 3.1 Reforestation
                              * 3.2 Afforestation
                                * 3.2.1 China
                                * 3.2.2 Japan
                              * 3.3 Agroforestry
                              * 3.4 Reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                            * 4 Preventive measures for deforestation
                            * 5 Projects and foundations
                              * 5.1 Arbor Day Foundation
                              * 5.2 Billion Tree Campaign
                              * 5.3 The Amazon Fund (Brazil)
                            * 6 See also
                            * 7 References
                    

## Causes of deforestation[edit]

### Lumber industry[edit]

A large contributing factor to deforestation is the lumber industry. The
reason behind this is due to logging since it is so common due to frequent
wood production uses in many people’s daily lives. A total of almost 4 million
hectares (9.9×10 ~~^~~ 6 acres) [4] of timber is harvested each year. In
addition, the increasing demand for low costing timber products only supports
to the lumber company to continue logging. The carbon emitted from the process
of converting timber to wood products accounts for 15%[4] of the carbon
emissions in the environment. Deforestation is a main concern in tropical
rainforest since it is home to millions of animals in the biodiversity. Not
only does the lumber industry impact deforestation but also the environment
due to deforestation drives on climate change.

### Urbanization[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( April 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

---|--- 

Urbanization is the process of clearing a large area of land to build more
living space. As a result of expanding land for residential and urban
purposes, there is a significant amount of forest loss[5]. As the human
population continue to increase throughout the years, the demand and needs for
necessities also increase. This means that more land is needed to be cleared
in order to build more homes, recreational uses, and agriculture. In addition,
this also promotes the industrialization to grow and require more land to
provide consumers with the food products demanded.

### Livestock ranching[edit]

Livestock ranching requires large portions of land to raise herds of animals
and livestock crops for consumerism needs. Livestock ranching originated in
Texas between 1820 and 1865 which were mainly driven by Mexican cowboys.[6]
Later, Texans drove the Mexicans out, while leaving the cattle behind. After
the civil war, Texans begin rounding up the cattle and selling them around
states such as California and New Orleans. According to Greenpeace, a non-
governmental global environmental organization, the cattle industry is
responsible for a significant amount of methane emission. This is because
speculators burn huge areas of rainforest for pasture. Rhett Butler says over
60% of land that is deforested become pasture for animals such as cattle and
cows.[7]

### Agricultural expansion[edit]

Further information: Agricultural expansion

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( April 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

---|--- 

The number one largest cause of deforestation and acute degradation is
agriculture. According to Wageningen University and Research Centre, more than
80% cause of deforestation is agriculture[8]. A continued increase of demand
for timber and agricultural products are only critical indirect drives. Forest
are giving way to plantation for coffee, tea, palm oil, rice, rubber, and many
other highly demanded products. These rising demands for certain products and
global trade arrangements causes forest conversions, which ultimately leads to
soil erosion. The top soil oftentimes erodes after forests are being cleared
which leads to sedimentation increase in rivers and streams. Over time,
agricultural land degrades and becomes almost useless causing producers to
find new productive lands.

## Effect on climate change[edit]

### Decrease in biodiversity[edit]

Further information: loss of biodiversity

A 2007 study conducted by the National Science Foundation found that
biodiversity and genetic diversity are codependent—that diversity among
species requires diversity within a species, and vice versa. "If any one type
is removed from the system, the cycle can break down, and the community
becomes dominated by a single species."[9]

### Decrease in climate services[edit]

Forests are nature’s atmospheric carbon sink; plants take in atmospheric
carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) and convert the carbon into sugars and plant
materials through the process of photosynthesis.[10] The carbon is stored
within the trees, vegetation, and soil of the forests. Studies show that
“intact forests,” in fact, do sequester carbon.[11] Examples of large forests
that have a significant impact on the balance of carbon include the Amazonian
and the Central African rainforests.[12] However, deforestation disrupts the
processes of carbon sequestration and affects localized climates.
Additionally, cutting down trees plays a role in a positive feedback loop
centered around climate change on a much larger scale, as studies are
finding.[11]

Burning or cutting down trees reverses the effects of carbon sequestration and
releases greenhouse gases (including carbon dioxide) into the atmosphere.[12]
Furthermore, deforestation changes the landscape and reflectivity of earth’s
surface, i.e. decreasing albedo. This results in an increase in the absorption
of light energy from the sun in the form of heat, enhancing global
warming.[11]

#### Implications on soil and water[edit]

Trees are a major source of carbon. It is estimated that the amount of carbon
within the Amazon exceeds the ten year’s worth of carbon released by human
production.[13] Unfortunately, since forests are often cleared by fire such as
in slash and burn agriculture, the combustion process of wood release huge
amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.[13] The increase of atmospheric
carbon is not the only consequence of deforestation, changes in soil
properties could turn the soil itself into a carbon contributor.[13] According
to scientists at Yale University, clearing forests changes the environment of
the microbial communities within the soil, and causes a loss of biodiversity
in regards to the microbes since biodiversity is actually highly dependent on
soil texture.[14] Although the effect of deforestation has much more profound
consequences on sandier soils compared to clay-like soils, the disruptions
caused by deforestation ultimately reduces properties of soil such as
hydraulic conductivity and water storage, thus reducing the efficiency of
water and heat absorption.[14][15] In a simulation of the deforestation
process in the Amazon, researchers found that surface and soil temperatures
increased by 1 to 3 degrees Celsius demonstrating the loss of the soil’s
ability to absorb radiation and moisture.[15] Furthermore, soils that are rich
in organic decay matter are more susceptible to fire, especially during long
droughts.[14] As a consequence of reduced evapotranspiration, precipitation is
also reduced. This implies having a hotter and drier climate, and a longer dry
season.[13][15] This change in climate has drastic ecological and global
impacts including increases in severity and frequency of fires, and disruption
in the pollination process that will likely spread beyond the area of
deforestation.[15][13]

## Counteracting climate change[edit]

### Reforestation[edit]

Main article: Reforestation

Reforestation is the natural or intentional restocking of existing forests and
woodlands that have been depleted, usually through deforestation. It is the
reestablishment of forest cover either naturally or artificially.[16] Similar
to the other methods of forestation, reforestation can be very effective
because a single tree can absorb as much as 22 kilograms (48 lb) of carbon
dioxide per year and can sequester 0.91 tonnes (1 short ton) of carbon dioxide
by the time it reaches 40 years old.[17]

### Afforestation[edit]

Main article: Afforestation

Afforestation is the planting of trees where there was no previous tree
coverage. Degradation of forest ultimately leads to a decrease in oxygen and a
sufficient increase of carbon dioxide. In order to make up for the loss, more
trees are being planted. As a result, the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere could significantly decrease[18]. According to a scientific
research, plantation forest could absorb more carbon dioxide than natural
forest since they grow faster leading to a higher absorbance rate. The process
is usually encouraged by governments because they want it to lead to a
decrease in carbon dioxide and because it increases the aesthetics of the
area. Although, it could lead to infringing upon ecosystems and create
complications in environments that previously did not have tree coverage or
forests.

#### China[edit]

Although China has set official goals for reforestation, these goals were set
for an 80-year time horizon and were not significantly met by 2008. China is
trying to correct these problems with projects such as the Green Wall of
China, which aims to replant forests and halt the expansion of the Gobi
Desert. A law promulgated in 1981 requires that every school student over the
age of 11 plant at least one tree per year. But average success rates,
especially in state-sponsored plantings, remains relatively low. And even the
properly planted trees have had great difficulty surviving the combined
impacts of prolonged droughts, pest infestation and fires. Nonetheless, China
currently has the highest afforestation rate of any country or region in the
world, with 4.77 million hectares (47,000 square kilometers) of afforestation
in 2008.[19]

#### Japan[edit]

Main article: Afforestation in Japan

The primary goal of afforestation projects in Japan is to develop the forest
structure of the nation and to maintain the biodiversity found in the Japanese
wilderness. The Japanese temperate rainforest is scattered throughout the
Japanese archipelago and is home to many endemic species that are not
naturally found anywhere else. As development of the country’s caused a
decline in forest cover, a reduction in biodiversity was seen in those
areas.[20]

### Agroforestry[edit]

Main article: Agroforestry

Agroforestry or agro-sylviculture is a land use management system in which
combinations of trees or shrubs are grown around or among crops or
pastureland. It combines agricultural and forestry technologies to create more
diverse, productive, profitable, healthy, and sustainable land-use systems.
There are many benefits to agroforestry such as increasing farm
profitability.[21] In addition, agroforestry helps to preserve and protect
natural resources such as controlling soil erosions, creating habitat for the
wildlife, and managing animal waste.

### Reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation[edit]

Recognition of the negative impacts of deforestation and of the overwhelming
evidence of global warming has led to the development of international policy
surrounding the conservation of forests. One attempt towards fighting climate
change globally is the _Reducing Emissions for Deforestation and Forest
Degradation_ (REDD+) efforts, and a few countries are already starting to
implement and analyze ways to protect standing trees.

In the case of the Bac Kan province in Vietnam, researchers came up with
systems to encourage leaving forests intact while also meeting international,
national, and individual investments successfully. Their methods included
“benefit-distribution systems” and dividends for ecosystem services. The
researchers hope that their results “can be replicated and directly contribute
to reducing carbon emissions globally.”[22]

## Preventive measures for deforestation[edit]

This is a non-exhaustive list of measures that contribute against climate
change on the individual level:[ _citation needed_ ]

                    
                                                1. Plant a tree: planting trees help recover for the trees being clear cut and helps improve the air quality.[23]
                            2. Go paperless: rather than printing something, use documents or pdf files instead and take advantage of technology. This can help decrease the demand for paper supplies, therefore fewer trees are needed to be clear cut.
                            3. Recycle: reuse products as much as possible, if necessary. Recycling can help deflect the demand for clearing trees.[23]
                            4. Cut down meat consumption: reduce the amount of meat intake to a minimum since certain meat industry source from land where forests have been cleared.
                            5. Use reusable bags: when shopping, use reusable bags rather than plastic or paper bags.[23]
                            6. Do not use firewoods: refrain from burning firewood for fuel, instead use eco friendly natural resources.
                            7. Buy organic products: non-organic food can be genetically modified and contain toxic pesticides to keep the foods fresh which is unhealthy. Additionally, it does not pose underground water contamination and release harmful chemicals into the soil.[23]
                            8. Minimize carbon footprint: There are many ways of reducing carbon footprint to help better the environment.
                    

## Projects and foundations[edit]

### Arbor Day Foundation[edit]

Main article: Arbor Day Foundation

Founded in 1972, the centennial of the first Arbor Day observance in the 19th
century, the Foundation has grown to become the largest nonprofit membership
organization dedicated to planting trees, with over one million members,
supporters, and valued partners.[24] They work on projects focused on planting
trees around campuses, low-income communities, and communities that have been
affected by natural disasters among other places.

### Billion Tree Campaign[edit]

Main article: Billion Tree Campaign

The Billion Tree Campaign was launched in 2006 by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) as a response to the challenges of global
warming, as well as to a wider array of sustainability challenges, from water
supply to biodiversity loss.[25] Its initial target was the planting of one
billion trees in 2007. Only one year later in 2008, the campaign's objective
was raised to 7 billion trees—a target to be met by the climate change
conference that was held in Copenhagen, Denmark in December 2009. Three months
before the conference, the 7 billion planted trees mark had been surpassed. In
December 2011, after more than 12 billion trees had been planted, UNEP
formally handed management of the program over to the not-for-profit Plant-
for-the-Planet initiative, based in Munich, Germany.[26]

### The Amazon Fund (Brazil)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f7/Deforestation_Rates_in_the_Amazon.png/220px-

Deforestation_Rates_in_the_Amazon.png)

Four-year plan to reduce in deforestation in the Amazon

Considered the largest reserve of biological diversity in the world, the
Amazon Basin is also the largest Brazilian biome, taking up almost half the
nation’s territory. The Amazon Basin corresponds to two fifths of South
America’s territory. Its area of approximately seven million square kilometers
covers the largest hydrographic network on the planet, through which runs
about one fifth of the fresh water on the world’s surface. Deforestation in
the Amazon rainforest is a major cause to climate change due to the decreasing
number of trees available to capture increasing carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere.[27]

The Amazon Fund is aimed at raising donations for non-reimbursable investments
in efforts to prevent, monitor and combat deforestation, as well as to promote
the preservation and sustainable use of forests in the Amazon Biome, under the
terms of Decree N.º 6,527, dated August 1, 2008.[28] The Amazon Fund supports
the following areas: management of public forests and protected areas,
environmental control, monitoring and inspection, sustainable forest
management, economic activities created with sustainable use of forests,
ecological and economic zoning, territorial arrangement and agricultural
regulation, preservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and recovery of
deforested areas. Besides those, the Amazon Fund may use up to 20% of its
donations to support the development of systems to monitor and control
deforestation in other Brazilian biomes and in biomes of other tropical
countries.[28]

## See also[edit]

                    
                                                * Boreal forest of Canada
                            * Effects of global warming on human health#Deforestation
                            * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                    

## References[edit]

                    
                                                1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Deforestation | Threats | WWF". _World Wildlife Fund_. Retrieved  2018-04-18.
                            2. **^** Werf, G. R. van der; et al. (2009). "CO2 emissions from forest loss". _Nature Geoscience_. pp. 737–738. Retrieved 22 October 2014.
                            3. **^** "How much has the Global Temperature Risen in the Last 100 Years?". _National Center for Atmospheric Research_. University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. Retrieved  20 October 2014.
                            4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Rates of Deforestation & Reforestation in the U.S." Retrieved  2018-04-11.
                            5. **^** "The impact of cattle ranching on rainforests". _Mongabay.com_. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            6. **^** "BBC - GCSE Bitesize: Cattle ranching - a brief history". Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            7. **^** "How cattle ranches are chewing up the Amazon rainforest | Greenpeace UK". _Greenpeace UK_. 2009-01-31. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            8. **^** "Agriculture is the direct driver for worldwide deforestation". _ScienceDaily_. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            9. **^** "Study: Loss Of Genetic Diversity Threatens Species Diversity". _Environmental News Network_. 26 September 2007. Retrieved  27 October 2014.
                            10. **^** "Carbon Dioxide Fertilization Greening Earth, Study Finds." NASA, 26 April 2014, Accessed 8 February 2018.
                            11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Malhi, Y., et al. “Climate Change, Deforestation, and the Fate of the Amazon.” Science, vol. 319, no. 5860, 11 Jan. 2008, pp. 169–172., doi:10.1126/science.1146961.
                            12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Deforestation and climate change." GREENPEACE, Accessed 8 February 2018.
                            13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Rebecca, Lindsey, (2007-03-30). "Tropical Deforestation : Feature Articles". _earthobservatory.nasa.gov_. Retrieved  2018-02-09.
                            14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Deforestation of sandy soils a greater threat to climate change". _YaleNews_. 2014-04-01. Retrieved  2018-02-09.
                            15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Shukla, J.; Nobre, C.; Sellers, P. (1990-03-16). "Amazon Deforestation and Climate Change". _Science_. **247** (4948): 1322–1325. doi:10.1126/science.247.4948.1322. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 17843795.
                            16. **^** "Definition of Reforestation". _Dictionary of Forestry_. SAFnet Dictionary. 13 September 2008. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved  22 October 2014.
                            17. **^** "Tree Facts". NC State University. Retrieved  28 October 2014.
                            18. **^** Institute, Grantham Research (2012-11-29). "To what extent could planting trees help solve climate change?". _the Guardian_. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            19. **^** Yang, Ling. "China to plant more trees in 2009". _ChinaView_. Xinhua News Agency. Retrieved  23 October 2014.
                            20. **^** Miyamoto, Asako (2008). _The Influence of Forest Management on Landscape Structure in the Cool-Temperate Forest Region of Central Japan_. pp. 248–256.
                            21. **^** User, Super. "What is agroforestry?". _www.aftaweb.org_. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            22. **^** Hoang, M. H., et al. "Benefit distribution across scales to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) in Vietnam." Land Use Policy, vol 31, 6 Sept. 2011, pp. 48-60.
                            23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "15+ Phenomenal Ways To Stop Deforestation and Protect Our Planet". _Conserve Energy Future_. 2016-03-23. Retrieved  2018-04-29.
                            24. **^** "About the Arbor Day Foundation". _Arbor Day Foundation_. Retrieved  20 October 2014.
                            25. **^** "Commit to Action - Join the Billion Tree Campaign!". _UNEP_. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Archived from the original on 15 December 2014. Retrieved  22 October 2014.
                            26. **^** "UNEP Billion Tree Campaign Hands Over to the Young People of the Plant-for-the-Planet Foundation". UNEP. Retrieved  28 October 2014.
                            27. **^** "Amazon Fund Activity Report 2013" (PDF). Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-10-28.
                            28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Amazon Fund/Purposes and Management". _Fundo Amizonia_. Amazon Fund. Archived from the original on 9 November 2014. Retrieved  19 October 2014.
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Deforestation by country or region

* * *

Africa|

                    
                                                * DR Congo
                            * Ethiopia
                            * Kenya
                            * Madagascar
                            * Nigeria
                    

|

![Deforestation in

Brazil](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a6/NASAburningbrazil.jpg/120px-

NASAburningbrazil.jpg)

Americas|

                    
                                                * Amazon
                            * Brazil
                            * Canada (British Columbia)
                            * Central America
                            * Colombia
                            * Costa Rica
                            * Haiti
                            * Mexico
                            * United States
                    

Asia|

                    
                                                * Borneo
                            * Cambodia
                            * China
                            * India
                            * Indonesia (Kalimantan)
                            * Laos
                            * Malaysia (East Malaysia)
                            * Myanmar
                            * Nepal
                            * Philippines
                            * Sri Lanka
                            * Thailand
                            * Vietnam
                    

Europe|

                    
                                                * Roman Empire
                            * Russia
                    

Oceania|

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * New Zealand
                            * Papua New Guinea
                    
                            * ![Pine forest in Sweden.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/42/Pine_forest_in_Sweden.jpg/15px-Pine_forest_in_Sweden.jpg) Forestry portal
                            * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**
                            * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
                            * ![WikiProject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg/16px-People_icon.svg.png) WikiProject Forestry
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Deforestation and desertification

* * *

Deforestation|

                    
                                                * Assarting
                            * Deforestation
                            * Deforestation and climate change
                            * Deforestation by region
                            * Deforestation during the Roman period
                            * Illegal logging
                            * Mountaintop removal
                            * Slash-and-burn
                            * Slash-and-char
                    

|

![Illegal slash and burn in

Madagascar](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/17/Manantenina_bushfire.jpg/140px-

Manantenina_bushfire.jpg)

Desertification|

                    
                                                * Aridification
                            * Desertification
                            * Moisture recycling
                            * Soil retrogression and degradation
                            * Water scarcity
                    

Mitigation|

                    
                                                * Afforestation
                            * Arid Lands Information Network
                            * Biochar
                            * Conservation grazing
                            * Desert greening
                            * Ecoforestry
                            * Ecological engineering
                            * Farmer-managed regeneration
                            * Flexible Mechanisms
                            * Great Green Wall (Africa)
                            * Managed intensive rotational grazing
                            * Oasification
                            * Reforestation
                            * Three-North Shelter Forest (China)
                    

Related articles|

                    
                                                * Allan Savory
                            * Biodiversity
                            * Economic impact analysis
                            * Environmental philosophy
                            * Extinction
                            * Intact forest landscape
                            * International Year of Forests
                            * Land surface effects on climate
                            * Land use, land-use change and forestry
                            * Natural landscape
                            * Neolithic
                            * Richard St. Barbe Baker
                            * Satoyama
                            * Terraforming
                            * _Terra preta_
                            * Wilderness
                            * World Forestry Congress
                    
                            * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) **Portal**
                    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deforestation_and_climate_change&oldid=898397049"

Categories:

                    
                                                * Deforestation
                            * Climate forcing agents
                            * Global warming
                            * Sustainable forest management
                            * Environmental issues with forests
                            * Forestry
                    

Hidden categories:

                    
                                                * Articles needing additional references from April 2018
                            * All articles needing additional references
                            * All articles with unsourced statements
                            * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018
                    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                    
                                                * Not logged in
                            * Talk
                            * Contributions
                            * Create account
                            * Log in
                    

### Namespaces

                    
                                                * Article
                            * Talk
                    

### Variants

### Views

                    
                                                * Read
                            * Edit
                            * View history
                    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                    
                                                * Main page
                            * Contents
                            * Featured content
                            * Current events
                            * Random article
                            * Donate to Wikipedia
                            * Wikipedia store
                    

### Interaction

                    
                                                * Help
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Community portal
                            * Recent changes
                            * Contact page
                    

### Tools

                    
                                                * What links here
                            * Related changes
                            * Upload file
                            * Special pages
                            * Permanent link
                            * Page information
                            * Wikidata item
                            * Cite this page
                    

### Print/export

                    
                                                * Create a book
                            * Download as PDF
                            * Printable version
                    

### Languages

                    
                                                * Tiếng Việt
                    

Edit links

                    
                                                * This page was last edited on 23 May 2019, at 09:05 (UTC).
                            * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                            * Privacy policy
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Disclaimers
                            * Contact Wikipedia
                            * Developers
                            * Cookie statement
                            * Mobile view
                            * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                            * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

