

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=185498565121014&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

New Atlas

                    
                                                * Lifestyle
                            * Science
                            * Technology
                            * Transport
                            * Search
                            *             * Subscribe
                    

# Wind turbine placement to optimize wind power generation for a given area

Environment

![Darren

Quick](https://img.newatlas.com/avatars/34.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&dpr=2&fit=max&h=40&q=60&w=40&s=360aceeb36736e9a632fcc8f1455c1b6)

Darren Quick

July 14th, 2011

3 pictures

The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of closely
spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were tested

View gallery - 3 images

Although wind power energy production in 2010 was estimated to be only about
2.5 percent of worldwide electricity usage, wind turbines are considered a
mature technology with many experts suggesting that we're approaching the
theoretical limit of individual wind turbine efficiency. For this reason,
researchers are now looking at new approaches to wind farm design to increase
the power output of wind farms. Researchers at the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech) have been conducting a field study and claim the power
output of wind farms can be increased at least tenfold by optimizing the
placement of turbines on a given plot of land.

While most wind farms employing horizontal-axis wind turbines (HAWTs) - the
standard propeller-like turbines most commonly found in wind farms around the
world - space the individual turbines around seven rotor diameters apart, a
recent study found that spacing of at least 15 rotor diameters apart produced
the most cost-efficient power generation. But even though spreading the
turbines out increases the cost-efficiencies by allowing for fewer individual
turbines, it also lowers the power output of a given plot of land.

To compensate for the energy loss resulting from the wake generated from one
turbine interfering with neighboring turbines, HAWT wind farms also resort to
using bigger blades and taller towers that are capable of taking advantage of
the more powerful gusts of wind found at greater heights. But these larger
structures result in increased production and maintenance costs, visual,
acoustic, and radar signatures problems, as well as more bat and bird impacts.

In an attempt to develop a more efficient wind farm design that maximizes its
energy-collecting efficiency at heights closer to the ground, John Dabiri,
Caltech professor of aeronautics and bioengineering, and his colleagues turned
to vertical-axis wind turbines (VAWTs) - turbines like the Windspire that have
vertical rotors and look like eggbeaters sticking out of the ground. VAWTs
aren't more prominently used today because they tend to be less efficient
individually and previous generations suffered from structural failures
relating to fatigue.

But Dabiri says, "advances in materials and in predicting aerodynamic loads
have led to new designs that are better equipped to withstand fatigue loads."
Additionally, because VAWTs can be positioned very close together they are
able to capture nearly all the energy of the blowing wind, and so the lower
efficiency of individual turbines is not as much of an issue.

Dabiri carried out field tests in the summer of 2010 at an experimental farm
known as the Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy (FLOWE), which houses
24 10-meter-tall, 1.2-meter-wide VAWTs. In the field tests, which used six
VAWTs, Dabiri and his colleagues measured the rotational speed and power
generated by each of the turbines when placed in a number of different
configurations. One turbine was kept in a fixed position for every
configuration, while the others were on portable footings that allowed them to
be shifted around.

They found that the aerodynamic interference between neighboring turbines was
completely eliminated when all the turbines in an array were spaced four
turbine diameters (roughly five meters or 16 feet) apart. In comparison,
propeller-style HAWTs would need to be spaced 20 rotor diameters apart - which
equates to a distance of more than one mile for the largest wind turbines
currently in use - for the aerodynamic interference to be eliminated.

The six VAWTs generated from 21 to 47 watts of power per square meter of land
area, while a comparably sized HAWT farm generates just two to three watts per
square meter.

"Our results are a compelling call for further research on alternatives to the
wind energy status quo," Dabiri says. "Since the basic unit of power
generation in this approach is smaller, the scaling of the physical forces
involved predicts that turbines in our wind farms can be built using less
expensive materials, manufacturing processes, and maintenance than is possible
with current wind turbines."

The researchers plan to scale up their field demonstration and are looking to
improve upon the off-the-shelf wind turbine designs used for their field
study.

The findings of the field study conducted by Dabiri and his Caltech colleagues
appear in the July issue of the _Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy_.

View gallery - 3 images

![The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of

closely spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were

tested](https://img.newatlas.com/flowe.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&q=60&w=1000&s=9e21e086af7740f35b411a415913ded4)

The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of closely
spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were tested

![The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of

closely spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were

tested](https://img.newatlas.com/flowe-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&q=60&w=1000&s=f09617a421fe015b0aa0d91d1969d5cf)

The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of closely
spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were tested

![The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of

closely spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were

tested](https://img.newatlas.com/flowe-2.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&q=60&w=1000&s=f17b4ea3302e86977fd0336f509a7558)

The Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy where arrays of closely
spaced vertical-axis wind turbines were tested

Tags

                    
                                                * #Caltech
                            * #Wind Power
                            * #Wind turbine
                    

Share this article

                    
                                                *             *             *             *             *             *             * Show 12 comments
                    

## Over 280,000 people receive our email newsletter

See the stories that matter in your inbox every morning

Your Email

No thanks

## Top stories

                    
                                                * ![An Oakland City Council resolution has effectively decriminalized all natural plant-based psychedelic compounds](https://img.newatlas.com/mushroom-illustration-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C1919%2C1079&w=300&s=26dbb3f4969340f3ab293f7e82fbc28a)
                    

### Oakland City Council decriminalizes all "natural psychedelics" in landmark

resolution

                    
                                                * ![Armored vehicles could benefit from a new bulletproof metal foam developed at North Carolina State University](https://img.newatlas.com/metal-foam-half-weight-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C38%2C1713%2C964&w=300&s=957e35e472ca0d5d6a8440aa1aee566b)
                    

### Bulletproof metal foam could make military vehicles lighter and more

efficient

                    
                                                * ![Researchers have created a new magnetic metamaterial that can reduce MRI times while improving the resolution ...](https://img.newatlas.com/mri-metamaterial-3.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C91%2C1620%2C911&w=300&s=dafb7ce6de3c66bf341d71de20f80906)
                    

### Magnetic metamaterial amplifies MRI for clearer images in less time

                    
                                                * ![Road hazards are absorbed by the Uptis tire, eliminating about 200 million tires a year that ...](https://img.newatlas.com/michelin-uptis-4.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C131%2C1620%2C911&w=300&s=dd9c602bf4d4aca2d6f3f5ca16c999e9)
                    

### Michelin and GM unveil airless tires for a puncture-free ride

#### Sponsored Content

## Recommended for you

#### Sponsored Content

## Latest in Environment

                    
                                                * ![Startling study finds US fertilizer industry emits 100 times more methane than estimated](https://img.newatlas.com/methane-emissions-underestimated-2.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C64%2C1619%2C910&w=300&s=414d0203b1c5016a42edb6f6060c1eb0)
                    

### Startling study finds US fertilizer industry emits 100 times more methane

than estimated

                    
                                                * ![Heat and carbon turn plastic waste into jet fuel](https://img.newatlas.com/plastic-waste-jet-fuel-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C149%2C1439%2C810&w=300&s=7019f9f86bb7525cdefa12c200d04015)
                    

### Heat and carbon turn plastic waste into jet fuel

                    
                                                * ![Autonomous mapping vessel takes out Ocean Discovery XPrize](https://img.newatlas.com/ocean-mapping-xprize-4.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C82%2C1619%2C911&w=300&s=055a9957132d38bcad77140e99c63ca3)
                    

### Autonomous mapping vessel takes out Ocean Discovery XPrize

                    
                                                * ![The bees' needs: McDonald's unveils "McHive," flogs it for charity](https://img.newatlas.com/mcdonalds-beehives-6.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=76%2C50%2C1803%2C1015&w=300&s=c5228228ab4d33ee6cbad3d621f358e3)
                    

### The bees' needs: McDonald's unveils "McHive," flogs it for charity

                    
                                                * ![Antibiotics found in world's rivers at levels up to 300 times above safe levels](https://img.newatlas.com/antibiotics-river-danube-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=184%2C192%2C1578%2C887&w=300&s=562821e9b3ea34bdce78589e53ed036e)
                    

### Antibiotics found in world's rivers at levels up to 300 times above safe

levels

                    
                                                * ![New discoveries in Laos deepen the ancient mystery of the Plain of Jars](https://img.newatlas.com/plain-jars-laos-2.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C919%2C517&w=300&s=01ca8cad38b1ce56c75b38d6775ae15a)
                    

### New discoveries in Laos deepen the ancient mystery of the Plain of Jars

                    
                                                * ![Quarter of West Antarctic glacier ice unstable, says 25-year satellite study](https://img.newatlas.com/antarctica-glacierloss-3.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C1912%2C1075&w=300&s=6a79a41a2703d0e52d2ef2fa5e7717cb)
                    

### Quarter of West Antarctic glacier ice unstable, says 25-year satellite

study

                    
                                                * ![Forests that live fast and die young may help speed up climate change](https://img.newatlas.com/forest-climate-change-carbon-sink-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C117%2C1641%2C923&w=300&s=6a034920159d4015dc7bdae23afec220)
                    

### Forests that live fast and die young may help speed up climate change

                    
                                                * ![Whistling wind turbines may save bats' lives](https://img.newatlas.com/wind-turbines-bats-whistle-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C160%2C1344%2C756&w=300&s=ec09fd039a96a8faaef3b085393edf57)
                    

### Whistling wind turbines may save bats' lives

                    
                                                * ![Eco-friendly foam outperforms the "real thing"](https://img.newatlas.com/cellulose-foam-insulation-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C149%2C1439%2C810&w=300&s=e17b89f20a97d23dcef37bfe64fe80e2)
                    

### Eco-friendly foam outperforms the "real thing"

                    
                                                * ![Atmospheric carbon dioxide hits the highest point in human existence](https://img.newatlas.com/carbon-dioxide-highest-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C163%2C5760%2C3240&w=300&s=63c07c0ca27e07d6959da57665565f43)
                    

### Atmospheric carbon dioxide hits the highest point in human existence

                    
                                                * ![Radioactive carbon from nuclear bomb tests finds its way to deepest ocean trenches](https://img.newatlas.com/deep-carbon-3.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C217%2C1340%2C754&w=300&s=32a6f6bbf5baf80b8fb62472283bd63f)
                    

### Radioactive carbon from nuclear bomb tests finds its way to deepest ocean

trenches

## Editors Choice

                    
                                                * ![E3 2019: Which games are confirmed, expected, or unlikely to appear?](https://img.newatlas.com/e3-2019-upcoming-8.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C999%2C562&w=300&s=2605870734ce3238a22c5a914368a949)
                    

### E3 2019: Which games are confirmed, expected, or unlikely to appear?

                    
                                                * ![Compare the latest tech gear](https://proxy.newatlas.com/https%3A%2F%2Fgizmag-images.imgix.net%2Fnikond500-canon7dii-25.jpg%3Fauto%3Dformat%26fit%3Dmax%26h%3D670%26q%3D60%26w%3D930%26s%3D037e2207dc7485af4ead495d2796c717?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&w=300&s=927026d86af9105959d8dbc3a93da601)
                    

### Compare the latest tech gear

                    
                                                * ![Pictorial: The spectacular 2019 Concorso d’Eleganza Villa d’Este](https://img.newatlas.com/pictorial-2019-concorso-deleganza-villa-deste-31.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C1771%2C996&w=300&s=b0c06d44ecc494ffbe9a78c870047faa)
                    

### Pictorial: The spectacular 2019 Concorso d’Eleganza Villa d’Este

                    
                                                * ![Antibiotics found in world's rivers at levels up to 300 times above safe levels](https://img.newatlas.com/antibiotics-river-danube-1.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=184%2C192%2C1578%2C887&w=300&s=562821e9b3ea34bdce78589e53ed036e)
                    

### Antibiotics found in world's rivers at levels up to 300 times above safe

levels

                    
                                                * ![BMW Motorrad Concept R18: The beginning of a full frontal attack on the cruiser marketplace](https://img.newatlas.com/bmw-motorrad-concept-r18-motorcycle-18.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=235%2C79%2C1539%2C866&w=300&s=7d066805133c0cdde9fb3c634d7804ea)
                    

### BMW Motorrad Concept R18: The beginning of a full frontal attack on the

cruiser marketplace

                    
                                                * ![In photos: Rascally robots and kindred contraptions, at ICRA 2019](https://img.newatlas.com/icra-2019-photo-gallery-18.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C361%2C5183%2C2916&w=300&s=47fb0d0d4a929ddc920d9356d36c08a0)
                    

### In photos: Rascally robots and kindred contraptions, at ICRA 2019

                    
                                                * ![2019 Mercedes-Benz G550: The new, still awesome, G Unit](https://img.newatlas.com/2019-mercedes-benz-g-wagen-33.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C1405%2C790&w=300&s=fd907337bc11f874e1654c18349ba2bd)
                    

### 2019 Mercedes-Benz G550: The new, still awesome, G Unit

                    
                                                * ![Apollo 10: The mission that paved the way for the Moon landing](https://img.newatlas.com/apollo-x-23.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C198%2C1333%2C750&w=300&s=885f88de58e736f9c9d2ac87f7f8fd30)
                    

### Apollo 10: The mission that paved the way for the Moon landing

                    
                                                * ![Gallery: Sci-fi futuristic vehicles from the movies at the Petersen Auto Museum](https://img.newatlas.com/hollywood-movie-cars-petersen-museum-296.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C70%2C1620%2C911&w=300&s=5d9614ee722cb0deb1f987a9756e3c91)
                    

### Gallery: Sci-fi futuristic vehicles from the movies at the Petersen Auto

Museum

                    
                                                * ![Gallery: Astonishing images of the natural world in the 2019 BigPicture winners](https://img.newatlas.com/big-picture-2019-winners-6.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C331%2C3660%2C2059&w=300&s=20e891fdeacf129168adb68054447b5b)
                    

### Gallery: Astonishing images of the natural world in the 2019 BigPicture

winners

                    
                                                * ![Incredible study shows music can help build the brains of premature babies](https://img.newatlas.com/brain-baby-music-1.jpeg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C181%2C719%2C405&w=300&s=161948d952dd8773e1b9b62113ec2971)
                    

### Incredible study shows music can help build the brains of premature babies

                    
                                                * ![Google Pixel 3a and 3a XL vs. Pixel 3 and 3 XL](https://img.newatlas.com/google-pixel3-3a-1.png?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&h=169&q=60&rect=0%2C0%2C1772%2C996&w=300&s=2758116f33bfbc8319df3641c0656213)
                    

### Google Pixel 3a and 3a XL vs. Pixel 3 and 3 XL

Over 280,000 people receive our email newsletter

See the stories that matter in your inbox every morning

Email address

                    
                                                * Top
                            * Home
                            * About
                            * Contact
                            * Privacy
                            * Terms & Conditions
                            * Advertise
                            * FAQ
                    

Copyright (C) Gizmag Pty Ltd 2019

                    
                                                * Twitter
                            * Facebook
                            * RSS
                            * Flipboard
                    

Gizmag is now New Atlas

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

