
                    
                                                * Billionaires
                    
                              * All Billionaires 
                              * World's Billionaires 
                              * Forbes 400 
                              * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
                              * China's Richest 
                              * India's Richest 
                              * Indonesia's Richest 
                              * Korea's Richest 
                              * Thailand's Richest 
                              * Japan's Richest 
                              * Australia's Richest 
                              * Taiwan's Richest 
                              * Singapore's Richest 
                              * Philippines' Richest 
                              * Hong Kong's Richest 
                              * Malaysia's Richest 
                            * Innovation
                    
                              * All Innovation 
                              * AI & Big Data 
                              * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
                              * Cloud 100 2018 
                              * Consumer Tech 
                              * Cybersecurity 
                              * Enterprise & Cloud 
                              * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
                              * Games 
                              * Green Tech 
                              * Healthcare 
                              * Oracle BrandVoice 
                              * SAP BrandVoice 
                              * Science 
                              * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
                              * Sharing Economy 
                              * Social Media 
                              * Venture Capital 
                            * Leadership
                    
                              * All Leadership 
                              * Careers 
                              * CMO Network 
                              * Crowe BrandVoice 
                              * Deloitte BrandVoice 
                              * Diversity & Inclusion 
                              * Education 
                              * Entrepreneurs 
                              * ForbesWomen 
                              * Franchises 
                              * Leadership Strategy 
                              * Small Business 
                              * Under 30 
                              * Workday BrandVoice 
                            * Money
                    
                              * All Money 
                              * Banking & Insurance 
                              * Crypto & Blockchain 
                              * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
                              * Fintech 
                              * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
                              * Investing 
                              * Markets 
                              * Personal Finance 
                              * Retirement 
                              * Taxes 
                              * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
                              * Wealth Management 
                            * Consumer
                    
                              * All Consumer 
                              * Food & Drink 
                              * Hollywood & Entertainment 
                              * Media 
                              * Real Estate 
                              * Retail 
                              * SportsMoney 
                            * Industry
                    
                              * All Industry 
                              * Aerospace & Defense 
                              * Energy 
                              * Flexport BrandVoice 
                              * Manufacturing 
                              * Policy 
                              * Transportation 
                              * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
                            * Lifestyle
                    
                              * All Lifestyle 
                              * Arts 
                              * Boats & Planes 
                              * Capital One BrandVoice 
                              * Cars & Bikes 
                              * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
                              * Dining & Drinking 
                              * Forbes Travel Guide 
                              * ForbesLife 
                              * Watches & Jewelry 
                              * Travel 
                              * Vices 
                            * BrandVoice
                    
                              * AppDynamics 
                              * Capital One 
                              * Cole Haan 
                              * Crowe 
                              * Deloitte 
                              * ExtraHop 
                              * Flexport 
                              * Impact Partners 
                              * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
                              * Oracle 
                              * SAP 
                              * ServiceNow 
                              * Workday 
                            * Lists 
                            * Advisor
                    
                              * All Advisor 
                              * Credit Cards 
                              * Personal Loans 
                              * Brokerage 
                              * Checking Accounts 
                              * Savings Accounts 
                            * More
                    
                              * 30 Under 30 2019 
                              * Daily Dozen Briefing 
                              * Forbes8 
                              * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
                              * Forbes Editors' Picks 
                              * Forbes Finds 
                              * Forbes Insights: AI 
                              * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
                              * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
                              * Forbes Video 
                              * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
                              * Newsletters 
                              * Tech MD 
                              * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
                    

# Is Cold Fusion Feasible? Or Is It A Fraud?

![Starts With A

Bang](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fassets%2Fimages%2Favatars%2Fblog-4033_400_bb861067b7e24bc2865e470e8808c0ff.jpg)

Ethan Siegel Senior Contributor Starts With A Bang

Contributor Group

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Science The Universe is out there, waiting for you to discover it.

                    
                                                * Share to facebook __
                            * Share to twitter __
                            * Share to linkedin __
                    

A device designed to simulate a working cold fusion reaction, but that was in
fact a deliberate deception. Image credit: Juan-Louis Naudin, 2003.

One of the greatest promises of nuclear physics is cheap, clean, abundant
energy. While nuclear fission plants have to deal with highly radioactive
materials and end-products, and the Sun -- a spontaneous source of nuclear
fusion -- is 93 million miles away, the dream of nuclear fusion here on Earth
is alive and well. Whether in the form of "cold fusion" or "LENR" (for Low
Energy Nuclear Reactions), many have claimed since the 1980s that the solution
to our energy needs was either on the horizon or already here. Yet no one has
brought a working cold fusion device to market, nor has one ever been
independently investigated and verified. What's going on here?

The most powerful way to extract energy from matter is to convert that mass
into energy directly, via Einstein's _E = mc 2_. Unlike chemical reactions,
which release electron-Volts (eV) worth of energy per atom when they take
place, nuclear reactions -- reactions like fusion and fission -- release Mega-
electron-Volts (MeV) worth of energy per atom: around a million times as much.
The most powerful nuclear explosion ever to take place on Earth converted
approximately an apple's worth of mass into energy, and was strong enough to
wipe out an entire large city.

The mushroom cloud resulting from the nuclear weapon test Bravo (yield 15 Mt)
on Bikini Atoll. The test was part of the Operation Castle in 1954, and was
one of the strongest (but not THE strongest) Hydrogen bombs ever detonated.
Image credit: U.S. Department of Energy.

Even the Sun, powered by nuclear fusion, has converted approximately 0.03% of
its mass into energy over the span of its 4.5 billion year lifetime: around
the mass of the planet Saturn. Nuclear fusion, however, takes place between
charged particles like atomic nuclei, and the barrier of like charges
repelling is very strong. In order to bring two protons close enough together
to fuse, it requires temperatures in excess of 4 million K, which leads to the
type of nuclear fusion we know: hot fusion. (This is the same reason why a
fission bomb is required to ignite nuclear fusion in the hydrogen bomb, the
most powerful weapon known to humanity.) Progress has been made on the fronts
of magnetically confined fusion and inertial confinement fusion, where either
powerful magnetic fields or a series of lasers are used to confine and
compress a plasma, causing nuclei to fuse together, over the past few decades.
More and more energy has been extracted compared to what needs to be inputted
in these reactions, but we're still a long way away from the breakeven point:
where more energy comes out of the reaction than is required to start the
reaction in the first place.

A fusion device based on magnetically confined plasma. Image credit: PPPL
management, Princeton University, the Department of Energy, from the FIRE
project at http://fire.pppl.gov/.

If we could reach that breakeven point, it would be the ultimate energy
breakthrough, as fusion power is clean, produces no radioactive waste, and the
fuel for it is cheap, abundant and virtually unlimited. So far, traditional
"hot fusion" seems to require incredibly high, sustained temperatures in order
to work, and for that we'd have to build our own miniature Sun; those
technical difficulties more than any other perhaps explain best why we don't
yet have it. But there is another possibility: _cold fusion_. Instead of
needing to reach temperatures of millions of degrees, cold fusion -- recently
rebranded as LENR (Low-Energy Nuclear Reactions) -- is the idea that these
fusion reactions can be incited efficiently and repeatably at much lower
temperatures: perhaps only thousands of degrees, or something not much higher
than room temperature. It's the ultimate promise of free, abundant energy, and
it's a dream that would put a generating device in every home.

A concept of a "home" E-cat, courtesy of E-Cat.com.

But is it too good to be true? There's an old story that's very similar in
nature to the cold fusion stories out there today. I’m going to tell you a
story that starts back in 1770, before not only the idea of nuclear fusion,
but before atomic nuclei or even the modern theory of atoms existed. Instead,
our story starts with the very first chess-playing automaton, Wolfgang von
Kempelen‘s Mechanical Turk.

The Mechanical Turk, open and closed, as drawn in the 19th century. Images
credit: copper engraving by Karl Gottlieb von Windisch.

Nearly two centuries before the invention of the modern computer, the Turk was
able to play a very strong game of chess, winning most of its games and
defeating all but the world’s very top players at the time. Immediately, of
course, it was believed to be a hoax, but many exhibitions of the machine
seemed to prove it genuine, and the machine seemed to display not only
remarkable chess skill, but also the ability to detect false moves. As one
(defeated) opponent observed, his attempt at cheating,

> “by giving the Queen the move of a Knight, but my mechanic opponent was not
to be so imposed upon; he took up my Queen and replaced her in the square from
which I had moved her.”

A modern reconstruction of the Mechanical Turk, a fake chess-playing
automaton. Image credit: Carafe/Creative Commons.

The Turk appeared to require a manual cranking to "power up" and operate, and
would result in a grinding, gear-turning sound inside. In addition to the
lower drawers, which contained a chessboard and pieces, there were six doors,
three on the front and three on the back. Behind the left door, as shown
above, was a set of interlocking metal gears, which indeed turned after being
wound. Behind the right two was a red cushion and open space, so that all
doors could be opened and one could see clearly through the Turk.

The "see-through" underside of the Mechanical Turk. Nothing but gears here!
Image credit: Carafe/Creative Commons.

After defeating all but the strongest regional competition, the Turk was taken
around Europe, where it played in a great many exhibitions, including one
against the strongest player of the day, Andre Philidor, who -- although
victorious -- called it “his most fatiguing game of chess ever!”

But the gears on the left and the drawers on the bottom were _false_ ; they
only extended a third of the way back, allowing the operator -- a person no
taller than 4 feet (at most) who was hidden inside -- to slip to an unseen
position when the rightmost two doors were opened. The Turk was, in fact,
_not_ an automaton, but a very well-designed machine, driven by a human
operator inside. But it was not until the 1820s that the fraud was uncovered,
and it would _literally_ not be for 200 years after the Turk’s first match
that a truly automated program could play chess at the level of the Turk.

Andrea Rossi (background) and his team members, working on a "controlled
demonstration" of the E-Cat. Image credit: Ovidiu Sandru.

The reason this story is important and relevant to the cold fusion game is
because there are a large number of ways the "fraud" of the Mechanical Turk
could have been caught.

                    
                                                * People could have demanded instructions for how to build one themselves, and when they couldn't (because it wouldn't work when the instructions were followed), they would know it was fraudulent.
                            * People could have tested the device independently, where they would have access to disassemble, analyze and access every single one of the components that make it up. And they would have either uncovered a non-working device (with no human inside) or a fraudulent one (with a human inside).
                            * Or they could have demanded replicas or designs that allegedly provided the key components of the device, testing that it actually, physically did what the inventor contended.
                    

An alleged cold fusion "device" in action, observed remotely by a team that
was not allowed to access the device before, during or after the test. Image
credit: from G. Levi et al., 2014, via http://www.sifferkoll.se/sifferkoll/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/LuganoReportSubmit.pdf.

But the fraud wouldn't have been able to be caught if there were things like
hidden components to the device that couldn't be accessed, if there were
external signals being transmitted to or through it that went undetected, if
someone was surreptitiously accessing and altering the device when no one
could observe it, or if it were made to appear that a signal were originating
from the device when, in fact, it came from an external source. And with every
cold fusion device that's been purported to work, these are exactly the
problems at play.

A clever wiring trick could easily "fool" a current-measuring device, when in
fact an external source was powering the purported fusion generator. Image
credit: Peter Thieberger, 2011.

Although there are many scientists -- many fringe scientists, some armchair
scientists and some serious scientists as well -- working on cold fusion or
LENR devices, there is only one type of experiment that has met the scientific
set of criteria for being robust, reproducible science: muon-catalyzed fusion.
Hydrogen atoms are made out of protons and electrons, and because electrons
are so light, they typically have a physical size of around 10-10 meters. You
can bring multiple atoms close together, but their nuclei, which only have a
size of about 10-15 meters, never get close enough at these low temperatures
for their quantum wavefunctions to overlap enough that fusion occurs. But if
you replace the electron with a muon, an unstable particle with a lifetime of
just 2.2 microseconds, the hydrogen atom becomes hundreds of times smaller.
And then the wavefunctions can overlap, and low-energy fusion occurs.

An illustration (not to scale) of normal hydrogen and muonic hydrogen, with
wavefunction overlap shown inset. Images credit: University of Taiwan (main)
and the Molecular Beam Epitaxy Group at University of Maryland (inset).

This would be a great source of energy, if it didn't cost so much to produce
and control muons in the first place! For all the other ideas, mechanisms and
devices out there, there's no experiment that you can perform where you get
fusion occurring and more energy out than you put in. There's nothing
published that is verifiable and repeatable by an independent team. And
there's no device out there -- despite purported "demonstrations" existing for
over five years -- that you can purchase, investigate, use or control without
interference from the so-called inventors. Despite what claims you might hear
from cold fusion enthusiasts, LENR researchers, Andrea Rossi or Defkalion,
none of them are willing to provide you with a verifiable, working device that
you can investigate independently, nor with an experiment you can repeat
yourself. Any contention to the contrary is philosophically indefensible.

Andrea Rossi and Sterling Allan, during a 2011 demonstration of the E-Cat.
Image credit: Sterling D. Allan with Hank Mills of Pure Energy Systems News.
Via http://pesn.com/2011/10/28/9501940_1_MW_E-Cat_Test_Successful/.

This doesn't necessarily mean that they're lying, that LENR is impossible or
that there's fraud going on. But it isn't the job of science to prove that
someone is fooling us; it's the job of a good scientist to prove to the world
that we _aren't_ fooling ourselves when we make an extraordinary claim. As
soon as that bar is cleared -- and that starts with the people working on this
making an extraordinary effort to demonstrate that bar is cleared -- we can
promote LENR or cold fusion to the realm of real, robust and incredible
science. But until that day, we should all remain skeptical. In the words of
Richard Feynman:

> The first principle is that you must not fool yourself. And you are the
easiest person to fool.

_Astrophysicist and author Ethan Siegel is the founder and primary writer of
Starts With A Bang! His books, Treknology and Beyond The Galaxy, are available
wherever books are sold._

![Ethan

Siegel](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/136x0/smart/https%3A%2F%2Fspecials-

images.forbesimg.com%2Fimageserve%2F5c6ddd4b4bbe6f0ec7541ff1%2F960x0.jpg%3FcropX1%3D133%26cropX2%3D675%26cropY1%3D211%26cropY2%3D752)
Ethan Siegel Senior Contributor

I am a Ph.D. astrophysicist, author, and science communicator, who professes
physics and astronomy at various colleges. I have won numerous awards for
science writing s...

Read More

![Starts With A

Bang](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fassets%2Fimages%2Favatars%2Fblog-4033_400_bb861067b7e24bc2865e470e8808c0ff.jpg)

Starts With A Bang

Contributor Group

Starts With A Bang is dedicated to exploring the story of what we know about
the Universe as well as how we know it, with a focus on physics, astronomy,
and the scientif...

Read More

                    
                                                * Print
                            * Site Feedback
                            * Tips
                            * Corrections
                            * Reprints & Permissions
                            * Terms
                            * Privacy
                            * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
                            * AdChoices
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

