

Skip to main content

Search Brookings Search

                    
                                                * About Us
                            * Press Room
                            * Experts
                            * Events
                            * The Brookings Press
                            * Brookings Exec Ed
                            * Support Brookings
                            * Careers
                            * Cart 0
                            * Search
                    

The Brookings Institution The Brookings Institution

# Declining absolute mobility rates for the middle class since 1950

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * LinkedIn
                            * Print
                            * SMS
                            * Email
                            * More
                            *             * Reddit
                            *             * Cities & Regions
                            * Global Development
                            * International Affairs
                            * U.S. Economy
                            * U.S. Politics & Government
                            * More
                    

Search Menu

0

**Series:** Middle Class Memos

![Peer 1 client Robert A. plays hopscotch with his 5-year-old daughter

Isabella during Kid's Day at Peer 1 in Denver November 7, 2015. Peer 1 is a

drug and alcohol rehabilitation programme for men, many having spent years in

and out of prison, in Denver, Colorado. The men have often tried and failed

over and over to turn their life around. With histories of abuse as children

and living on the streets, they come to Peer 1 hoping to turn away from

addiction and crime, to rebuild their lives and learn how to integrate into

society. Treatment includes family group therapy, meditation and trust-

building exercises.  REUTERS/Rick WilkingPICTURE 25 OF 26 FOR WIDER IMAGE

STORY "PEER 1: PRISON, DEATH OR RECOVERY". SEARCH "PEER WILKING" FOR ALL

IMAGES - GF20000082782]()

Up Front

# Fewer Americans are making more than their parents did—especially if they

grew up in the middle class

Richard V. Reeves and Katherine Guyot Wednesday, July 25, 2018

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * LinkedIn
                            * Print
                            * SMS
                            * Email
                            * More
                            *             * Reddit
                            * ### Authors
                    

![Reeves headshot](https://i0.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/Reeves-

headshot.jpg?crop=0px%2C28px%2C580px%2C580px&quality=1#038;w=120&ssl=1)

## Richard V. Reeves

### John C. and Nancy D. Whitehead Chair

### Senior Fellow - Economic Studies

### Director - Future of the Middle Class Initiative

### Co-director - Center on Children and Families

Twitter RichardvReeves

![Katherine Guyot headshot](https://i1.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/08/guyot_headshot.jpg?w=120&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C0px%2C100%2C120px&ssl=1)

## Katherine Guyot

### Research Assistant

One of the most striking social science findings of recent years is that only
half of today’s 30-year-olds earn more than their parents. Raj Chetty and his
coauthors showed that rates of absolute mobility—that is, the share of
children with higher inflation-adjusted incomes than their parents—declined
from around 90 percent for children born in 1940 to just 50 percent for those
born in 1984. Just in case you’ve been snoozing for the last year and half,
here’s the chart:

###

####

__

![Brookings Watermark](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/themes/brookings/static/images/simplechart-brookings-logo.png)

Surprisingly, the bulk of the decline between the 1940 and 1980 cohorts was
concentrated toward the top of the income distribution. As Aparna Mathur and
Cody Kallen of AEI wrote in “Poor rich kids?”: “[P]erhaps the most
puzzling—and least commented upon—finding is the large positive correlation
between the parent’s income and the decline in absolute mobility over the
years. Put more simply, the richer the parents, the larger has been the
decline in mobility for their kids.”

But the 1940 cohort may be unusual for many reasons, most notably the
influence of World War II and the postwar economic boom. If we instead begin
with the 1950 cohort, then it appears that absolute mobility has fallen most
for children with parents in the middle class. Comparisons to the 1960 and
1970 cohorts reveal a similar story of middle-class decline.

Here we dig a little deeper into the rates of absolute mobility for those born
on different rungs of the income ladder, and in different birth cohorts. The
big drop in absolute mobility for those at the top of distribution occurs
between the 1940 and 1950 birth cohorts. Since then, the middle class has
suffered greater losses of absolute mobility than those at the top or bottom.

## Related Content

![\(L-R\) Jeremiah Underhill is shown on the family property with son Dalton

on his shoulders, wife and mother Annette, and baby Blake in her arms at their

home in Richfield, Pennsylvania March 8, 2016. Picture taken March 8, 2016. To

match Special Report USA-WATER/LEAD REUTERS/Gary Cameron -

WASEC381SER01](https://i2.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/RTSA2PS.jpg?w=135&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C6px%2C100%2C76px&ssl=1)

Social Mobility Memos

#### Seven reasons to worry about the American middle class

Eleanor Krause and Isabel V. Sawhill

Tuesday, June 5, 2018

![Panelists on stage at the launch event of the Future of the Middle Class

Initiative.](https://i2.wp.com/www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/es_middleclassevent_panel1.jpg?w=135&quality=1#038;crop=0%2C7px%2C100%2C76px&ssl=1)
Play Video

Up Front

#### A policy wish list for the middle class

Richard V. Reeves and Katherine Guyot

Monday, May 14, 2018

## The Chetty-bomb, revisited

The following chart from the original paper shows the share of children at
each percentile of the income distribution who out-earned their parents in the
five decadal cohorts between 1940 and 1980:

###

####

__

![Brookings Watermark](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/themes/brookings/static/images/simplechart-brookings-logo.png)

While absolute mobility declined across the income distribution, those born
into the very bottom of the distribution are still highly likely to out-earn
their parents. This is virtually a mechanical result: we would expect such a
trend given the low point from which they started. Children born into the 5th
percentile of their parents’ income distribution in 1980 would only have to
make it into the 12th percentile of their own cohort’s distribution to earn
more than their parents, according to Online Data Table 7. Likewise, low rates
of absolute mobility at the very top are not a surprise. As Chetty _et al._
explain, “Naturally, rates of absolute mobility were lower at the highest
parental income levels, as children have less scope to do better than their
parents if their parents had very high incomes.”

What is more surprising is that absolute mobility rates appear to have
declined more for those near the top (up to around the 96th percentile) than
for those in the middle. This conclusion depends on the choice of a comparison
cohort. Here we show the percentage-point decline in absolute mobility for the
1980 cohort compared to each of the other four cohorts from the previous
chart:

###

####

__

![Brookings Watermark](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/themes/brookings/static/images/simplechart-brookings-logo.png)

Only the comparison to the 1940 cohort is skewed toward the top. If we compare
the 1980 cohort to the 1950 or 1960 cohorts, then the decline in absolute
mobility is more evenly distributed across the wide middle of the
distribution. This suggests that the unusually large declines at the top of
the distribution took place early in the period. Consider the following
comparison of each cohort to the one born one decade prior (i.e. the 1950
cohort to 1940, 1960 to 1950, and so on):

###

####

__

![Brookings Watermark](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-

content/themes/brookings/static/images/simplechart-brookings-logo.png)

As the chart shows, the decline in absolute mobility between the 1940 and 1950
cohorts was greater higher up the income distribution. But this was not true
for later cohort comparisons. At the tails, people born in 1960 were only
slightly less upwardly mobile than those born in 1950, and those born in 1970
were actually more upwardly mobile than those born in 1960. The tails of the
1980/1970 comparison are less pronounced, but it seems that those in the
lower-middle suffered the greatest declines in absolute mobility between these
cohorts.

## What’s different about the 1940 cohort?

There remains something of a puzzle in the top percentiles, however. Given
that top-heavy losses are unique to comparisons that use 1940 as the base
cohort, the key question may not be why so many rich children born in the
1950s and beyond failed to out-earn their parents, but rather why so many rich
children born in the 1940s succeeded. This answer, at least, seems fairly
simple: Most people born in the 1940s earned more than even some of the
highest earners in their parents’ generation due to broad-based economic
growth in the post-war years (see Figure 2B of the Chetty _et al._ paper).
Under more normal growth conditions, we might expect the distribution of
absolute mobility to look more like it did in 1950, with lower mobility levels
at higher ranks of parental income.

## Who has dropped fastest?

Who, then, has suffered the greatest decline in absolute mobility: the middle
class or the “poor rich kids”? The answer depends crucially on the choice of
reference group. Empirically, the biggest drop between decadal cohorts is
between those born in 1940 and those in born in 1950—and especially for those
at the top of the distribution—with a slower decline since, focused more on
those in the middle. In the original paper, Chetty _et al._ estimated that the
main explanation for the mobility decline between the 1940 and 1980 cohorts
was increased inequality, followed by slower growth rates; it would be
interesting to repeat the exercise for the decline between the 1950 and 1980
cohorts, given the very different distributional stories for the later
cohorts. But it seems clear that the absolute mobility trends have very little
if anything to do with the pulling away of the top 1% in recent decades.

But psychology matters as much as statistics here. In terms of how mobility
impacts our sense of our own status, progress, and condition, the question is
which benchmark we select to make that assessment. For many people, mobility
does consist of doing better than your parents did, in absolute terms. This
seems to have become steadily harder to achieve for those born into middle-
class families in particular from 1950 onward. The challenge is to learn from
these historical trends in order to secure a better future for the middle
class.

#### Related Topics

                    
                                                * Income Inequality & Social Mobility
                            * Middle Class
                    

The Brookings Institution

                    
                                                * Facebook Find us on Facebook
                            * Twitter Find us on Twitter
                            * YouTube Find us on YouTube
                            * Podcast Listen to our Podcast
                            * Browse Newsletters Browse Newsletters
                            * RSS Subscribe to our RSS
                    
                            * Languages
                            * Español
                            * 中文
                            * عربي
                    
                            * About Us
                            * Research Programs
                            * Find an Expert
                            * Careers
                            * Contact
                            * Terms and Conditions
                            * Brookings Privacy Policy
                            * Copyright 2019 The Brookings Institution
                    

## The Brookings Institution

Close

                    
                                                * Trending
                              * International Affairs
                              * U.S. Politics & Government
                            * Topics
                              * Cities & Regions
                              * Global Development
                              * International Affairs
                              * U.S. Economy
                              * U.S. Politics & Government
                              * More
                            * About Us
                            * Press Room
                            * Experts
                            * Events
                            * The Brookings Press
                            * Brookings Exec Ed
                            * Support Brookings
                            * Careers
                            * Cart 0
                    

Get daily updates from Brookings

Enter Email

Close

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/mu-

plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

