

NASA

Global Climate Change

Vital Signs of the Planet

![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

Skip Navigation

# Facts

                    
                                                * Evidence 
                            * Causes 
                            * Effects 
                            * Scientific Consensus 
                            * Vital Signs 
                            * Questions (FAQ)
                    

Evidence Causes Effects Scientific Consensus Vital Signs Questions (FAQ)

# The Effects of Climate Change

![](/system/content_pages/main_images/1320_effects-image.jpg)

The potential future effects of global climate change include more frequent
wildfires, longer periods of drought in some regions and an increase in the
number, duration and intensity of tropical storms. Credit: Left -
Mellimage/Shutterstock.com, center - Montree Hanlue/Shutterstock.com.

Global climate change has already had observable effects on the environment.
Glaciers have shrunk, ice on rivers and lakes is breaking up earlier, plant
and animal ranges have shifted and trees are flowering sooner.

Effects that scientists had predicted in the past would result from global
climate change are now occurring: loss of sea ice, accelerated sea level rise
and longer, more intense heat waves.

> Taken as a whole, the range of published evidence indicates that the net
damage costs of climate change are likely to be significant and to increase
over time.

>

>             * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Scientists have high confidence that global temperatures will continue to rise
for decades to come, largely due to greenhouse gases produced by human
activities. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which
includes more than 1,300 scientists from the United States and other
countries, forecasts a temperature rise of 2.5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit over
the next century.

According to the IPCC, the extent of climate change effects on individual
regions will vary over time and with the ability of different societal and
environmental systems to mitigate or adapt to change.

The IPCC predicts that increases in global mean temperature of less than 1.8
to 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit (1 to 3 degrees Celsius) above 1990 levels will
produce beneficial impacts in some regions and harmful ones in others. Net
annual costs will increase over time as global temperatures increase.

"Taken as a whole," the IPCC states, "the range of published evidence
indicates that the net damage costs of climate change are likely to be
significant and to increase over time." 1-2

## Future Effects

Some of the long-term effects of global climate change in the United States
are as follows, according to the Third and Fourth National Climate Assessment
Reports:

* * *

## Change Will Continue Through This Century and Beyond

                    
                                                * ![Global climate is projected to continue to change over this century and beyond.](/internal_resources/632)
                    

Global climate is projected to continue to change over this century and
beyond. The magnitude of climate change beyond the next few decades depends
primarily on the amount of heat-trapping gases emitted globally, and how
sensitive the Earth's climate is to those emissions.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated monthly.](/internal_resources/634)
                        

Earth's vital signs: Sea level

An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated
monthly.

                    
                                                * ![NASA visualizations of future precipitation scenarios](/internal_resources/619)
                    

GISS climate models

NASA visualizations of future precipitation scenarios.

                    
                                                * ![Climate Time Machine](/internal_resources/623)
                    

Climate Time Machine

Go backward and forward in time with this interactive visualization that
illustrates how the Earth's climate has changed in recent history.

* * *

## Temperatures Will Continue to Rise

                    
                                                * ![Because human-induced warming is superimposed on a naturally varying climate, the temperature rise has not been, and will not be, uniform or smooth across the country or over time.](/internal_resources/38)
                    

Because human-induced warming is superimposed on a naturally varying climate,
the temperature rise has not been, and will not be, uniform or smooth across
the country or over time.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![A visualization of global temperature changes since 1880 based on NASA GISS data.](/internal_resources/95)
                        

Graphic: Global warming from 1880 to 2018

A visualization of global temperature changes since 1880 based on NASA GISS
data.

                    
                                                * ![NASA visualization of future global temperature projections based on current climate models.](/internal_resources/622)
                    

21st century temperature scenarios

NASA visualization of future global temperature projections based on current
climate models.

* * *

## Frost-free Season (and Growing Season) will Lengthen

                    
                                                * ![The length of the frost-free season \(and the corresponding growing season\) has been increasing nationally since the 1980s, with the largest increases occurring in the western United States, affecting ecosystems and agriculture](/internal_resources/493)
                    

The length of the frost-free season (and the corresponding growing season) has
been increasing nationally since the 1980s, with the largest increases
occurring in the western United States, affecting ecosystems and agriculture.
Across the United States, the growing season is projected to continue to
lengthen.

In a future in which heat-trapping gas emissions continue to grow, increases
of a month or more in the lengths of the frost-free and growing seasons are
projected across most of the U.S. by the end of the century, with slightly
smaller increases in the northern Great Plains. The largest increases in the
frost-free season (more than eight weeks) are projected for the western U.S.,
particularly in high elevation and coastal areas. The increases will be
considerably smaller if heat-trapping gas emissions are reduced.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![This NASA visualization presents observational evidence that the growing season \(climatological spring\) is occurring earlier in the Northern Hemisphere.](/internal_resources/620)
                        

Visualization comparing 1950s and 2010s

This NASA visualization presents observational evidence that the growing
season (climatological spring) is occurring earlier in the Northern
Hemisphere.

* * *

## Changes in Precipitation Patterns

                    
                                                * ![Average U.S. precipitation has increased since 1900, but some areas have had increases greater than the national average, and some areas have had decreases](/internal_resources/635)
                    

Average U.S. precipitation has increased since 1900, but some areas have had
increases greater than the national average, and some areas have had
decreases. More winter and spring precipitation is projected for the northern
United States, and less for the Southwest, over this century.

Projections of future climate over the U.S. suggest that the recent trend
towards increased heavy precipitation events will continue. This trend is
projected to occur even in regions where total precipitation is expected to
decrease, such as the Southwest.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![These NASA visualizations show model projections of the precipitation changes from 2000 to 2100 as a percentage difference between the 30-year precipitation averages and the 1970-1999 average.](/internal_resources/619)
                        

NASA visualizations of future precipitation scenarios

These NASA visualizations show model projections of the precipitation changes
from 2000 to 2100 as a percentage difference between the 30-year precipitation
averages and the 1970-1999 average.

                    
                                                * ![The official website for NASA's fleet of Earth science missions that study rainfall and other types precipitation around the globe.](/internal_resources/91)
                    

Precipitation Measurement Missions

The official website for NASA's fleet of Earth science missions that study
rainfall and other types precipitation around the globe.

                    
                                                * ![Earthâ€™s water is stored in ice and snow, lakes and rivers, the atmosphere and the oceans. How much do you know about Earth's water cycle and the crucial role it plays in our climate?](/internal_resources/92)
                    

Precipitation quiz

Earth's water is stored in ice and snow, lakes and rivers, the atmosphere and
the oceans. How much do you know about Earth's water cycle and the crucial
role it plays in our climate?

* * *

## More Droughts and Heat Waves

                    
                                                * ![Droughts in the Southwest and heat waves \(periods of abnormally hot weather lasting days to weeks\) everywhere are projected to become more intense, and cold waves less intense everywhere.](/internal_resources/492)
                    

Droughts in the Southwest and heat waves (periods of abnormally hot weather
lasting days to weeks) everywhere are projected to become more intense, and
cold waves less intense everywhere.

Summer temperatures are projected to continue rising, and a reduction of soil
moisture, which exacerbates heat waves, is projected for much of the western
and central U.S. in summer. By the end of this century, what have been once-
in-20-year extreme heat days (one-day events) are projected to occur every two
or three years over most of the nation.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![These NASA visualizations show model projections of the precipitation changes from 2000 to 2100 as a percentage difference between the 30-year precipitation averages and the 1970-1999 average.](/internal_resources/619)
                        

NASA visualizations of future precipitation scenarios

These NASA visualizations show model projections of the precipitation changes
from 2000 to 2100 as a percentage difference between the 30-year precipitation
averages and the 1970-1999 average.

                    
                                                * ![Droughts in the Southwest and Central Plains of the United States in the second half of the 21st century could be drier and longer than anything humans have seen in those regions in the last 1,000 years, according to a NASA study published in Science Advances on February 12, 2015.](/internal_resources/624)
                    

NASA: Megadroughts in U.S. West projected to be worst of millennium

Droughts in the Southwest and Central Plains of the United States in the
second half of the 21st century could be drier and longer than anything humans
have seen in those regions in the last 1,000 years, according to a NASA study
published in Science Advances on February 12, 2015.

* * *

## Hurricanes Will Become Stronger and More Intense

                    
                                                * ![The intensity, frequency and duration of North Atlantic hurricanes, as well as the frequency of the strongest \(Category 4 and 5\) hurricanes, have all increased since the early 1980s](/internal_resources/494)
                    

The intensity, frequency and duration of North Atlantic hurricanes, as well as
the frequency of the strongest (Category 4 and 5) hurricanes, have all
increased since the early 1980s. The relative contributions of human and
natural causes to these increases are still uncertain. Hurricane-associated
storm intensity and rainfall rates are projected to increase as the climate
continues to warm.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![According to a new NASA study, a string of nine years without a major hurricane landfall in the U.S. is Iikely to come along only once every 177 years.](/internal_resources/621)
                        

NASA: What are the chances of another Hurricane Katrina?

According to a new NASA study, a string of nine years without a major
hurricane landfall in the U.S. is Iikely to come along only once every 177
years. This video explains the findings of this study.

* * *

## Sea Level Will Rise 1-4 feet by 2100

                    
                                                * ![Global sea level has risen by about 8 inches since reliable record keeping began in 1880. It is projected to rise another 1 to 4 feet by 2100](/internal_resources/495)
                    

Global sea level has risen by about 8 inches since reliable record keeping
began in 1880. It is projected to rise another 1 to 4 feet by 2100. This is
the result of added water from melting land ice and the expansion of seawater
as it warms.

In the next several decades, storm surges and high tides could combine with
sea level rise and land subsidence to further increase flooding in many
regions. Sea level rise will continue past 2100 because the oceans take a very
long time to respond to warmer conditions at the Earth's surface. Ocean waters
will therefore continue to warm and sea level will continue to rise for many
centuries at rates equal to or higher than those of the current century.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated monthly.](/internal_resources/634)
                        

Earth's vital signs: Sea level

An indicator of current global sea level as measured by satellites; updated
monthly.

                    
                                                * ![Test your knowledge of sea level rise and its effect on global populations.](/internal_resources/637)
                    

Sea level quiz

Test your knowledge of sea level rise and its effect on global populations.

* * *

## Arctic Likely to Become Ice-Free

                    
                                                * ![The Arctic Ocean is expected to become essentially ice free in summer before mid-century.](/internal_resources/491)
                    

The Arctic Ocean is expected to become essentially ice free in summer before
mid-century.

            * more
                        
                                                    * ![An indicator of changes in the Arctic sea ice minimum over time. Arctic sea ice extent both affects and is affected by global climate change.](/internal_resources/99)
                        

Earth's vital signs: Sea ice

An indicator of changes in the Arctic sea ice minimum over time. Arctic sea
ice extent both affects and is affected by global climate change.

                    
                                                * ![An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice, glaciers and continental ice sheets worldwide.](/internal_resources/167)
                    

Global Ice Viewer

An interactive exploration of how global warming is affecting sea ice,
glaciers and continental ice sheets worldwide.

* * *

## U.S. Regional Effects

Below are some of the impacts that are currently visible throughout the U.S.
and will continue to affect these regions, according to the Third3 and Fourth4
National Climate Assessment Reports, released by the U.S. Global Change
Research Program:

**Northeast.** Heat waves, heavy downpours and sea level rise pose growing
challenges to many aspects of life in the Northeast. Infrastructure,
agriculture, fisheries and ecosystems will be increasingly compromised. Many
states and cities are beginning to incorporate climate change into their
planning.

**Northwest.** Changes in the timing of streamflow reduce water supplies for
competing demands. Sea level rise, erosion, inundation, risks to
infrastructure and increasing ocean acidity pose major threats. Increasing
wildfire, insect outbreaks and tree diseases are causing widespread tree die-
off.

**Southeast.** Sea level rise poses widespread and continuing threats to the
region 's economy and environment. Extreme heat will affect health, energy,
agriculture and more. Decreased water availability will have economic and
environmental impacts.

**Midwest.** Extreme heat, heavy downpours and flooding will affect
infrastructure, health, agriculture, forestry, transportation, air and water
quality, and more. Climate change will also exacerbate a range of risks to the
Great Lakes.

**Southwest.** Increased heat, drought and insect outbreaks, all linked to
climate change, have increased wildfires. Declining water supplies, reduced
agricultural yields, health impacts in cities due to heat, and flooding and
erosion in coastal areas are additional concerns.

* * *

### References

                    
                                                1. IPCC 2007, Summary for Policymakers, in _Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,_ Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, p. 17.
                            2. IPCC, 2013: Summary for Policymakers. In: _Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_ [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
                            3. USGCRP 2014, Third Climate Assessment.
                            4. USGCRP 2017, Fourth Climate Assessment.
                    

## A Degree of Difference

![](/system/internal_resources/details/original/211_shutterstock_372px.jpg)

Credit: VladisChern/Shutterstock.com

So, the Earth's average temperature has increased about 2 degrees Fahrenheit
during the 20th century. What's the big deal?

Two degrees may sound like a small amount, but it's an unusual event in our
planet's recent history. Earth's climate record, preserved in tree rings, ice
cores, and coral reefs, shows that the global average temperature is stable
over long periods of time. Furthermore, small changes in temperature
correspond to enormous changes in the environment.

For example, at the end of the last ice age, when the Northeast United States
was covered by more than 3,000 feet of ice, average temperatures were only 5
to 9 degrees cooler than today.

## Find Out More

The U.S. Global Change Research Program's Third Assessment Report

The IPCC's 2014 report on climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability

## Latest resources

                    
                                                * ![Video: Ozonewatch 2018](/system/resources/list_images/186_ozone_dec31_1979-2018_print-320x240.jpg)
                    

Video: Ozonewatch 2018

                    
                                                * ![Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science](/system/resources/list_images/184_list_call_of_science.jpg)
                    

Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science

                    
                                                * ![Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world](/system/resources/list_images/167_Screen-Shot-2018-05-16-at-12.37.30-PM.jpg)
                    

Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world

# Explore

## Interactives, galleries and apps

![Images of Change](/system/feature_items/images/9_images_of_change.jpg)

##

# Images of Change

Explore a stunning gallery of before-and-after images of Earth from land and
space that reveal our home planet in a state of flux.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Mobile

Apps](/system/feature_items/images/26_climate_mobile_apps.jpg)

##

# Climate Mobile Apps

Keep track of Earth's vital signs, see the planet in a state of flux and slow
the pace of global warming with NASA's free mobile apps.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Time

Machine](/system/feature_items/images/27_climate_time_machine.jpg)

##

# Climate Time Machine

Travel through Earth's recent climate history and see how increasing carbon
dioxide, global temperature and sea ice have changed over time.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Eyes on the Earth](/system/feature_items/images/37_eyes_on_earth-2.jpg)

##

# Eyes on the Earth

Track Earth's vital signs from space and fly along with NASA's Earth-observing
satellites in an interactive 3D visualization.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Global Ice Viewer](/system/feature_items/images/28_global_ice_viewer.jpg)

##

# Global Ice Viewer

Earth's ice cover is shrinking. See how climate change has affected glaciers,
sea ice, and continental ice sheets.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

more multimedia

## Get the Newsletter

## Stay Connected

![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

### Facts

                    
                                                *               * Evidence
                              * Causes
                              * Effects
                              * Scientific Consensus
                              * Vital Signs
                              * Questions (FAQ)
                    

### Articles

                    
                                                *               * News and Features
                              * Blog
                              * Fun Facts
                    

### Solutions

                    
                                                *               * Mitigation and Adaptation
                              * Government Resources
                    

### Explore

                    
                                                *               * Images of Change
                              * Earth Minute Videos
                              * Interactives
                              * Mobile Apps
                              * Beautiful Earth Gallery
                              * Earth 360
                    

### Resources

                    
                                                *               * Graphics and Multimedia
                              * For Educators
                              * Climate Kids
                              * About Global Warming
                              * About Climate Change
                    

### NASA Science

                    
                                                *               * Science Mission Directorate
                              * Earth System Science
                              * Earth Science Missions
                              * History
                    
                            * About Us
                    

|

                    
                                                * Feedback
                    

|

                    
                                                * Awards
                    

|

                    
                                                * Earth Observatory
                    

|

                    
                                                * SEA LEVEL CHANGE
                    

|

                    
                                                * Privacy
                    

|

                    
                                                * Climate Data Initiative
                    

|

                    
                                                * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT
                    

This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
Science Editor: Susan Callery

Site last updated: May 28, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

