
                    
                                                * __
                            * Sections __
                            * __
                            * Home
                    

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

                    
                                                * Try 1 month for $1
                            * Username
                            * Sign In
                    

* * *
                    
                                                  * My Post __
                              * My Reading List __
                              * Account Settings __
                              * Newsletters & alerts __
                              * Gift subscriptions __
                              * Contact us __
                              * Help desk __
                    
                            * My Post __
                            * My Reading List __
                            * Account Settings __
                            * Newsletters & alerts __
                            * Gift subscriptions __
                            * Contact us __
                            * Help desk __
                    
                            * Accessibility for screenreader
                    

PostEverything Perspective

__

**Perspective** Interpretation of the news based on evidence, including data,
as well as anticipating how events might unfold based on past events

# How the fossil fuel industry got the media to think climate change was

debatable

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/qEMbrA5XtjB9i8dVsmtpYs_Lz6A=/1484x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/TCLAVRAI74I6TCKCB32EFZMQSQ.jpg)  
A brown-coal-fired power plant in Bergheim, Germany. (Sascha Steinbach/EPA-
EFE/REX)

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

By Amy Westervelt

Amy Westervelt is an audio and print reporter who covers climate and gender,
and sometimes the intersection of the two. Her podcast Drilled is about the
creation and spread of climate denial and her first book "Forget 'Having It
All'" was published by Seal Press in November 2018.

January 10

Late last year, the Trump administration released the latest national climate
assessment on Black Friday in what many assumed was an attempt to bury the
document. If that was the plan, it backfired, and the assessment wound up
earning more coverage than it probably would have otherwise. But much of that
coverage perpetuated a decades-old practice, one that has been weaponized by
the fossil fuel industry: false equivalence.

Although various business interests began pushing back against environmental
action in general in the early 1970s as part of the conservative “war of
ideas” launched in response to the social movements of the 1960s, when global
warming first broke into the public sphere, it was a bipartisan issue and
remained so for years. On the campaign trail in 1988, George H.W. Bush
identified as an environmentalist and called for action on global warming,
framing it as a technological challenge that American innovation could
address. But fossil fuel interests were shifting as the industry and its
allies began to push back against empirical evidence of climate change, taking
many conservatives along with them.

Documents uncovered by journalists and activists over the past decade lay out
a clear strategy: First, target media outlets to get them to report more on
the “uncertainties” in climate science, and position industry-backed
contrarian scientists as expert sources for media. Second, target
conservatives with the message that climate change is a liberal hoax, and
paint anyone who takes the issue seriously as “out of touch with reality.” In
the 1990s, oil companies, fossil fuel industry trade groups and their
respective PR firms began positioning contrarian scientists such as Willie
Soon, William Happer and David Legates as experts whose opinions on climate
change should be considered equal and opposite to that of climate scientists.
The Heartland Institute, which hosts an annual International Conference on
Climate Change known as the leading climate skeptics conference, for example,
routinely calls out media outlets (including The Washington Post) for showing
“bias” in covering climate change when they either decline to quote a skeptic
or question a skeptic’s credibility.

_[Five myths about climate change]_

Data on how effective this strategy has been is hard to come by, but anecdotal
evidence of its success abounds. In the early 1990s, polls showed that about
80 percent of Americans were aware of climate change and accepted that
something must be done about it, an opinion that crossed party lines. By 2008,
Gallup found a marked partisan divide on climate change. By 2010, the American
public’s belief in climate change hit an all-time low of 48 percent, despite
the fact that those 20 years saw increased research, improved climate models
and several climate change predictions coming true.

By demanding “balance,” the industry transformed climate change into a
partisan issue. We know that was a deliberate strategy because various
internal documents from ExxonMobil, Shell, the American Petroleum Institute
and a handful of now-defunct fossil fuel industry groups reveal not only the
industry’s strategy to target media with this message and these experts, but
also its own preemptive debunking of the very theories it went on to support.

It need not have been such a successful strategy: If news purveyors really
wanted to be evenhanded on coverage of climate change, they could certainly
weave in the insights of more conservative scientists — those whose
predictions err on the sunnier side of apocalypse. Instead, many took the
industry’s bait, routinely inserting denialist claims into stories about
climate science in the interest of providing balance: In an analysis of 636
articles covering climate change that appeared in “prestige U.S. outlets” from
1988 to 2002, researchers from the University of California at Santa Cruz and
American University found that 52.65 percent presented climate science and
contrarian theories as equal. The practice continued into the mid-2000s. As
recently as 2007, PBS NewsHour invited well-known (and widely debunked) former
weatherman Anthony Watts on to counterbalance Richard Muller, a former Koch-
funded skeptic who had shifted his view.

_[Scientists know climate change is a threat. Politicians need to realize it,
too.]_

By about 2008, most mainstream print outlets had moved past the notion that
“balance” means including climate contrarians in coverage of climate science.
These outlets do still trip up occasionally, though. In 2017, ProPublica
published a remarkably uncritical Q&A with Happer, for example, describing him
as “brilliant and controversial,” and characterizing his view that global
warming is _good_ for the planet as merely “unusual.” That same year, the New
York Times was roundly criticized for hiring climate contrarian Bret Stephens
as a regular editorial columnist (and his first column didn’t help).

While print outlets aren’t perfect, TV news has lagged further behind on
climate, often presenting climate contrarians as an equal and opposite balance
to climate scientists. In coverage of the national climate assessment, for
example, multiple cable news shows featured both climate scientists and
climate deniers, as though the two are simply opposite sides of a debate.
“Meet the Press,” “Anderson Cooper 360” and “State of the Union” all brought
on climate deniers to provide balance to their shows. Republican politicians
made the cable news rounds, too, spouting familiar tall tales about climate
change being normal and cyclical or sun spots and volcanoes being the real
culprits. Sen. Joni Ernst (R-Iowa) repeated the “the climate always changes”
story on CNN, while Rick Santorum, informal White House adviser Stephen Moore
and British politician Nigel Farage pushed the “climate scientists getting
rich” narrative.

Though some outlets have moved to extricate deniers from the conversation, too
many television news programs continue to bring on “contrarian” experts,
giving a platform to tired lies. I say “lies” because fossil fuel industry
scientists debunked these theories themselves decades ago, so they are
knowingly perpetuating falsehoods. In a “global warming primer” prepared in
the 1990s by the Global Climate Coalition, a since-disbanded consortium of
fossil fuel producers, utilities, manufacturers, and other U.S. business
interests (including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce), a Mobil scientist debunked
all of the prevailing contrarian theories of the day on climate change. That
part of the primer was left unprinted, of course, and oil companies went on to
fund scientists promoting those very theories — the same ones that industry
spokesmen and conservative politicians spout today.

In addition to propping up experts and leaning on media to use them as
sources, oil companies have spent millions on advertising and advertorials
over the years. Which seems innocuous — most companies advertise — but oil
companies don’t sell a consumer product so much as a commodity. Most people
aren’t loyal to a particular brand of gas; they buy whatever is most
convenient or cheapest. So, when oil companies take out ads, it’s with the
intention of shifting the opinions of the voting public, policymakers, and the
media.

In an exhaustive survey of ExxonMobil’s advertorials from 1977 to 2014,
science historian Naomi Oreskes and researcher Geoffrey Supran found that
these pieces often took the form of “op-ads” that look and read a lot like op-
eds but are paid for by an advertiser. Some simply presented positive stories
about the company (heavily focused on their investments in algal biofuels, for
example), but others argued for more relaxed policies on offshore drilling or
a “common sense” approach to climate change regulation. The researchers found
that “83 percent of peer-reviewed papers and 80 percent of internal documents
acknowledge that climate change is real and human-caused, yet only 12% of
advertorials do so, with 81 percent instead expressing doubt.”

A 1981 internal Mobil memo discovered by the Climate Investigations Center is
an evaluation of the first decade of Mobil’s advertorial program, and it makes
the company’s goals clear: “Not only is the company presenting its opinion to
key opinion leaders, but it has been engaging in continuing debate with the
New York Times itself. In fact, the paper has even changed to positions
similar to Mobil’s on at least seven key energy issues.”

_[Deniers club: Meet the people clouding the climate change debate]_

Granted, Mobil communications staff are giving themselves a lot of credit
here, but whether they accomplished their goal is almost beside the point.
This document shows the intention of these campaigns, and that’s something
that should be taken seriously by any media outlet agreeing to run them,
especially because many still do today. Campaigns that bring in big money at a
time when the business of news is struggling are surely hard to turn down, but
media outlets need to seriously consider the impact these campaigns have on
their ability to inform the public, and work to mitigate that impact, above
and beyond the usual “church and state” division between advertising and
editorial. They could stop running these campaigns alongside climate
reporting, do a better job of labeling campaigns, or refuse to run them
altogether.

It’s well past time the media stopped allowing itself to be a tool in the
fossil fuel industry’s information war. Oreskes likens the push for “balance”
on climate change to journalists arguing over the final score of a baseball
game. “If the Yankees beat the Red Sox 6-2, journalists would report that.
They would not feel compelled to find someone to say actually the Red Sox won,
or the score was 6-4,” she says.

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=307315456358341&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

