

Skip to content

![Stanford University](//news.stanford.edu/wp-

content/themes/news/images/stanford-white@2x.png)

News

Menu

## Search form

Search term __

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Find Stories
                            * For Journalists
                            * Contact
                    

June 27, 2018

# Stanford study finds poor air quality responsible for one in five infant

deaths in sub‑Saharan Africa

Satellite measurements of air quality across sub-Saharan Africa revealed small
improvements in air quality could be one of the most effective interventions
to curb infant mortality rates.

                    
                                                * __Facebook
                            * __Twitter
                            * __Email
                    

By Michelle Horton

In 2015, exposure to particulate matter in sub-Saharan Africa led to 400,000
otherwise preventable infant deaths, according to a new Stanford study. The
research, published this week in _Nature_ , finds that even modest
improvements in air quality could lead to substantial reductions in infant
mortality in developing countries.

__Go to the web site to view the video.

Video by Stanford Center on Food Security and the Environment

A new Stanford study shows that improving air quality in sub-Saharan Africa
could provide benefits to infant health larger than nearly all currently used
health interventions, such as vaccinations or food and water supplements.

“Many wealthy countries have recently used legislation to clean up their air,”
said Marshall Burke, study co-author and assistant professor of Earth system
science in the School of Earth, Energy & Environmental Sciences at Stanford.
“We find that if countries in Africa could achieve reductions in particulate
matter exposure similar to wealthy countries, the benefits to infant health
could be larger than nearly all currently used health interventions, such as
vaccinations or food and water supplements.”

Led by Sam Heft-Neal, a research scholar at Stanford’s Center on Food Security
and the Environment, the research team combined 15 years of survey data on
nearly 1 million births across sub-Saharan Africa with satellite-based
measurements of particulate matter, an important contributor to poor air
quality. The mixture of microscopic particles in the air can cause serious
health effects when inhaled.

“We know that breathing dirty air is bad for your health,” said Heft-Neal.
“But in developing countries in particular, we don’t yet know how big a threat
poor air quality is relative to other common health risks like poor nutrition
and infectious disease.”

![heat map of share of infant deaths in sub-Saharan Africa attributable to

particulate matter](https://news-media.stanford.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/21162218/infant-deaths-map.jpg)

Stanford scientists calculate the amount of infant deaths due to high
particulate matter concentrations in 31 sub-Saharan African countries. (Image
credit: Marshall Burke)

Understanding the impact of poor air quality in developing countries has
traditionally been difficult, as most do not have on-the-ground pollution
monitors or vital registration data recording birth outcomes. To overcome
these constraints, the research team compiled data from 65 household surveys
across 30 sub-Saharan African countries spanning from 2001 to 2015. Using new
satellite-based measures of ambient particulate matter, they then compared the
particulate matter each infant was exposed to while in utero and after birth.
From this, they could relate exposure to particulate matter with health
outcomes.

“The results were sobering,” said Burke. “We find that mortality rates are
substantially higher for infants exposed to higher levels of particulate
matter.”

The researchers found that high particulate matter concentrations were
responsible for 22 percent of infant deaths from 2001 to 2015. They also found
that this number has not decreased over the past 15 years and remains
unchanged even in wealthier households.

The group’s estimate of the effect of particulate matter exposure on mortality
is about three times larger than existing estimates, suggesting poor air
quality is an even bigger problem than currently believed. The main
explanation for these larger estimates, according to the study’s authors, is
that exposure to particulate matter can lead to a range of negative health
effects, including lower birth weight and impaired growth in the first year of
life, beyond those typically considered in health analyses.

One of the study’s most important implications is that relatively small
decreases in particulate matter concentrations could result in major
reductions in mortality.

The researchers conclude that finding cost-effective ways to reduce
particulate matter exposure should be a research and policy priority. “We now
have a better sense of the immense benefits of air quality improvements for
infant health,” said Heft-Neal. “Next we need to establish how these
improvements can be achieved.”

_Additional co-authors include_ _Jennifer Burney_ _, a fellow at the Center on
Food Security and the Environment and an assistant professor at the University
of California, San Diego,School of Global Policy and Strategy, and __Eran
Bendavid_ _, an associate professor of medicine at Stanford, member of
theChild Health Research Institute and an affiliate of the Stanford Woods
Institute for the Environment. Burke is also a fellow at the Center on Food
Security and the Environment, the Stanford Woods Institute and the __Freeman
Spogli Institute for International Studies_ , _and theStanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research. The research was supported by the Stanford
Environmental Venture Projects program and the National Science Foundation._

## Media Contacts

Marshall Burke, School of Earth, Energy & Environmental Sciences:
mburke@stanford.edu, (650) 721-2203

Michelle Horton, Center on Food Security and the Environment:
mjhorton@stanford.edu, (650) 498-4129

* * *

Science & Technology

Ecology & Environment

Health

                    
                                                * __Facebook
                            * __Twitter
                            * __Email
                    

## What to read next:

![Millennial couple reviewing invoices and looking stressed](https://news-

media.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/31112857/sotu_getty-200x200.jpg)

Social Sciences

### How toxic economic trends have impacted millennials

A new report by Stanford scholars lays out the problems U.S. millennials face
as a result of decades-long rising inequality. Problems they experience
include rising mortality rates and increased poverty among those without
college degrees.

![The "Securing American Elections" report image](https://news-

media.stanford.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/05133240/GettyImages-1056052958-200x200.jpg)

Social Sciences

### Strategies to secure American elections

Stanford scholars outline a detailed strategy for how to protect the integrity
of American elections – including recommendations such as requiring a paper
trail of every vote cast and publishing information about a campaign’s
connections with foreign nationals.

![Male vlogger recording content for his video blog. Young man in focus on

digital camera screen.](https://news-media.stanford.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2020/06/31143858/video-200x200.jpg)

Science & Technology

### Edit video by editing text

A new algorithm allows video editors to modify talking head videos as if they
were editing text – copying, pasting, or adding and deleting words.

### Stanford Report

Receive daily Stanford news.

More about _Stanford Report_

### For Journalists

                    
                                                * Press Releases
                            * Media Contacts
                            * Stanford Experts
                    

### See Also

                    
                                                * Contact Stanford News
                            * Faculty / Staff Resources __
                    

### Weather

__60 °

Stanford forecast

### Events

__Events calendar

Stanford News is a publication of Stanford University Communications

![Stanford University](https://www-media.stanford.edu/su-

identity/images/footer-stanford-logo@2x.png)

                    
                                                * Stanford Home
                            * Maps & Directions
                            * Search Stanford
                            * Emergency Info
                    
                            * Terms of Use
                            * Privacy
                            * Copyright
                            * Trademarks
                            * Non-Discrimination
                            * Accessibility
                    

(C) Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

