

Here's What Humanity Must Do Immediately to Prevent Catastrophic Climate
Change, According to the New U.N. Report

                    
                                                * Subscribe
                    
                            * U.S.
                            * Politics
                            * World
                            * Tech
                            * Entertainment
                            * Subscribe
                    

![Subscribe](https://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

Close

                    
                                                * Home 
                            * U.S. 
                            * Politics 
                            * World 
                            * Business 
                            * Tech 
                            * Health 
                            * Entertainment 
                            * Science 
                            * Newsfeed 
                            * Living 
                            * Sports 
                            * History 
                            * The TIME Vault 
                            * Magazine 
                            * Ideas 
                            * TIME Labs 
                            * Audio 
                            * Photography 
                            * Videos 
                            * The Goods 
                            * Shop TIME 
                            * Press Room 
                            * The 100 Most Influential People 
                            * Finding Home 
                            * TIME Guide to Happiness 
                            * The ISS Experience 
                            * Next Generation Leaders 
                            * Opioids 
                            * Person of the Year 
                            * Top of the World 
                            * TIME Cover Store 
                            * TIME for KiDS 
                            * TIME Edge 
                            * Subscribe 
                            * Give a Gift 
                            * Newsletters 
                            * Feedback 
                            * Jobs 
                            * Privacy Policy 
                            * Your California Privacy Rights 
                            * Terms of Use 
                            * Ad Choices 
                            * TIME Apps 
                            * Advertising 
                            * Reprints and Permissions 
                            * Site Map 
                            * Help 
                            * Customer Service 
                            * EU Customer Service
                    

Stay Connected

                    
                                                1. Science 
                            2. climate change 
                            3. Here's What Humanity Must Do Immediately to Prevent Catastrophic Climate Change, According to the New U.N. Report
                    

# Here's What Humanity Must Do Immediately to Prevent Catastrophic Climate

Change, According to the New U.N. Report

By Katie Reilly

Updated: October 10, 2018 1:11 PM ET | Originally published: October 8, 2018

A landmark United Nations report on Monday warned that sufficiently limiting
man-made global warming will "require rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented
changes in all aspects of society" in order to avoid dramatic global
consequences, including rising sea levels, dying coral reefs and human
casualties due to extreme heat.

The special report -- published Monday by the United Nations'
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change -- assessed what it will take to
limit global temperature increase to no more than 2.7ยบ F (1.5ยบ C) above
preindustrial levels, in accordance with the 2015 Paris Agreement. Scientists
consider that temperature to be a tipping point at which many severe effects
of global warming will be realized.

"Examples of actions include shifting to low- or zero-emission power
generation, such as renewables; changing food systems, such as diet changes
away from land-intensive animal products; electrifying transport and
developing 'green infrastructure', such as building green roofs, or improving
energy efficiency by smart urban planning, which will change the layout of
many cities," the report said.

The report called climate change "an urgent and potentially irreversible
threat to human societies and the planet," and warned that delayed action
would make it impossible to limit warming to 2.7ยบ F.

"While the pace of change that would be required to limit warming to [2.7ยบ F]
can be found in the past, there is no historical precedent for the scale of
the necessary transitions, in particular in a socially and economically
sustainable way," the report stated. "Resolving such speed and scale issues
would require people's support, public-sector interventions and private-sector
cooperation."

Here are some of the changes that will need to be made in order to stop the
current pace of global warming:

## Reduce carbon emissions by 45%

By 2030, global carbon dioxide emissions must be 45% less than they were in
2010, the report found. And carbon dioxide emissions must reach net zero
around 2075 **--** meaning the amount of carbon dioxide entering the
atmosphere equals the amount being removed.

By 2050, emissions of other heat-trapping greenhouse gasses, including methane
and black carbon, should be reduced by 35%, relative to the 2010 rate.

"Emissions would need to decline rapidly across all of society's main sectors,
including buildings, industry, transport, energy, and agriculture, forestry
and other land use," the report said.

The United States -- which has contributed more to carbon pollution than any
other country in history -- emitted 5.6 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide
in 2010, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. If the
United States followed the report's 45% goal, it would have 12 years to
decrease annual emissions by more than 2.5 billion metric tons.

In 2017, global energy-related carbon emissions rose to a record high.

## Scrub carbon dioxide from the air

In addition to reducing carbon dioxide emissions, the report recommended
carbon dioxide removal measures -- including planting new trees and carbon
capture and storage, a process by which carbon dioxide is trapped and
prevented from entering the atmosphere.

"Most current and potential [carbon dioxide removal] measures could have
significant impacts on land, energy, water, or nutrients if deployed at large
scale," the report said.

## Use 85% renewable energy and stop using coal entirely

The report recommended far-reaching changes to land use, urban planning,
infrastructure systems and energy use -- changes that will be "unprecedented
in terms of scale."

Climate scientists said renewable energy sources will have to account for 70%
to 85% of electricity production by 2050. The use of coal should decrease
steeply and should account for close to 0% of global electricity, and gas just
8%.

"While acknowledging the challenges, and differences between the options and
national circumstances, political, economic, social and technical feasibility
of solar energy, wind energy and electricity storage technologies have
substantially improved over the past few years," the report stated. "These
improvements signal a potential system transition in electricity generation."

## **Plant new forests equal to the size of Canada**

Scientists recommend that up to about 3 million square miles of pasture and up
to 1.9 million square miles of non-pasture agricultural land be converted into
up to 2.7 million square miles for energy crops, which can be used to make
biofuels. That would amount to land a little less than the size of Australia.

The report also recommends adding 3.9 million square miles of forests by 2050,
relative to 2010 -- which is roughly the size of Canada.

"Such large transitions pose profound challenges for sustainable management of
the various demands on land for human settlements, food, livestock feed,
fibre, bioenergy, carbon storage, biodiversity and other ecosystem services,"
the report stated. "Mitigation options limiting the demand for land include
sustainable intensification of land use practices, ecosystem restoration and
changes towards less resource-intensive diets."

**Correction: Oct. 9**

_The original version of this story misstated the size of additional forest
that must be planted, according to a U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change report. It is 3.9 million square miles, not 3.9 square miles._

**Write to** Katie Reilly at Katie.Reilly@time.com.

### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

![](//assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

## Read More From TIME

![](//pixel.watch/f3fo) ![](//pixel.carambo.la/Pixel/tmnc11/112753/0/1/0)

## Read More From TIME

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up to receive the top stories you need to know now on politics, health
and more

SUBSCRIBE

EDIT POST

![](//subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

![](//subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

### Subscribe & Save

Subscribe today and save up to 84% off the cover price.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

![](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/time-newsletter-tout-

footer.png)

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up to receive the top stories you need to know now on politics, health
and more

SUBSCRIBE

                    
                                                * Home
                            * U.S.
                            * Politics
                            * World
                            * Business
                            * Tech
                            * Entertainment
                            * Health
                            * Science
                            * Newsfeed
                            * Living
                            * Ideas
                            * Sports
                            * History
                            * The Goods
                            * The TIME Vault
                            * Magazine
                            * Newsletters
                            * Audio
                            * Subscribe
                            * Give a Gift
                            * TIME for KiDS
                            * TIME Edge
                            * TIME Cover Store
                            * Advertising
                            * Careers
                            * Customer Service
                            * EU Customer Service
                            * Site Map
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Your California Privacy Rights
                            * Terms of Use
                            * Ad Choices
                    

(C) 2019 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes
acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California Privacy
Rights).  
TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this
website. Offers may be subject to change without notice. | EU Data Subject
Requests

this link is to an external site that may or may not meet accessibility
guidelines.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

