

Breaking News

Health+

FoodFitnessWellnessParentingLive Longer

WorldUS PoliticsBusinessEntertainmentSportTravelStyleHealthVideo

Live TV __

Search »

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

Home

World

  * US
  * Africa
  * Americas
  * Asia
  * Australia
  * China
  * Europe
  * Middle East
  * India
  * UK

US Politics

  * 45
  * Congress
  * Supreme Court
  * Facts First
  * 2020 Election

Business

  * Markets
  * Tech
  * Media
  * Success
  * Perspectives
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

  * Stars
  * Screen
  * Binge
  * Culture
  * Media

Tech

  * Innovate
  * Gadget
  * Mission: Ahead
  * Upstarts
  * Business Evolved
  * Work Transformed
  * Innovative Cities

Sport

  * Football
  * Tennis
  * Equestrian
  * Golf
  * Skiing
  * Horse Racing
  * Formula E
  * F1
  * Sailing
  * Rugby

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

  * Destinations
  * Food & Drink
  * Play
  * Stay
  * Videos

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

  * Arts
  * Design
  * Fashion
  * Architecture
  * Luxury
  * Autos
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

  * Food
  * Fitness
  * Wellness
  * Parenting
  * Live Longer

Features

  * Freedom Project
  * Impact Your World
  * Inside Africa
  * 2 degrees
  * CNN Heroes
  * All Features

Video

  * Video news
  * Feature shows
  * HLN
  * TV shows
  * TV schedule
  * Faces of CNN Worldwide
  * CNNVR

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

  * How To Watch VR
  * Archives

More…

  * Weather
  * CNN Profiles
  * Leadership
  * Pressroom
  * Partner sites
  * Work for CNN

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)U.S.

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)International

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_espaniol.png)Español

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_arabic.png)Arabic

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

FacebookTwitterInstagram

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151129193854-your-body-landing-page-

background-white-full-169.jpg)

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151130105339-body-project-logo-

large-169.png)

# The other 'fingerprints' you don't know about

By Sandee LaMotte

Updated 1922 GMT (0322 HKT) December 4, 2015

Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as
it unfolds.

![This is what makes your body

unique](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![This is what makes your body

unique](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151125154602-your-body-dna-

image-3-exlarge-169.jpg)

![This is what makes your body

unique](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151125154602-your-body-dna-

image-3-exlarge-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## This is what makes your body unique

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

This is what makes your body unique 01:26

### Story highlights

  * Identical twins aren't really identical: They can have "typos" in their DNA that make them unique
  * You can also be identified by your unique ear shape, iris pattern and tongue texture

(CNN)Move over fingerprints. From your ears to your toes, there are many body
parts that make you uniquely special. And all of them are being examined as a
way to identify you from others in a crowd.

**Do your ears hang low? Wobble to and fro?**

![Your ear is so unique that it can be used to pick you out of a

crowd.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Your ear is so unique that it can be used to pick you out of a

crowd.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119122705-04-unique-body-parts-

ear-young-large-169.jpg)

Your ear is so unique that it can be used to pick you out of a crowd.

It turns out the ridges, bumps and shape of your outer ear are so unique that
it may soon be one of the best ways to identify you. According to University
of Southampton biometrics expert Mark Nixon, studies have shown up to 99.6%
accuracy when ears were scanned using computer software that recreates their
position, scale and rotation. That's the same accuracy as fingerprints.

Your ear is fully shaped when you are born, and changes little after about age
10. It does grow larger and begin to sag as you age because of the effects of
gravity, but that is a measurable effect; in fact it has been calculated to be
just 1.22 mm per year. So unless you damage your ears, by say getting into a
fight with Mike Tyson, it's a pretty reliable measurement.

Research in this area is exploding. A recent study showed you can even
identify gender by 2-D and 3-D images of ears (and women do tend to have
smaller ears than men). Of course you can easily hide ears with hair, hats,
scarves and other clothing, but when a profile is all you have to work from to
identify someone, that unique ear shape could be very helpful.

![No two eyes have exactly the same iris

patterns.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![No two eyes have exactly the same iris

patterns.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119122106-03-unique-body-parts-

iris-03-large-169.jpg)

No two eyes have exactly the same iris patterns.

Read More

**The eyes have it**

Look in the mirror at both your eyes. Now look closely at each iris. That's
the muscle that opens and closes your pupil to control the amount of light
that enters your eye. You'll see small, random patterns of texture in one of
your irises, which are completely different from the texture in your other
iris. How does that happen?

While your DNA does set the ultimate color and structure of each iris, the
furrows, rifts and pits you see happen randomly during fetal development in
the womb. It's called "chaotic morphogenesis," and is thought to occur when
iris tissue tightens and folds as the fetus opens and shuts its developing
eyes. Just like fingerprints, identical twins don't share the same iris swirls
and patterns, so each of their irises is also unique.

![The irises in all four of these eyes are unique from the

others.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The irises in all four of these eyes are unique from the

others.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119141854-07b-unique-body-parts-

twins-young-large-169.jpg)

The irises in all four of these eyes are unique from the others.

Because the iris is protected behind the cornea, it was long though that these
unique patterns never changed, making an iris identification nearly foolproof.
However, recent studies show the iris does degrade, perhaps from age or from
damage, such as contact lens use.

Still, researchers such as Marios Savvides of Carnegie Mellon's CyLab are
excited by the possibilities. "As long as the part of the eye over the iris
region remains unaltered from disease then iris recognition will not be
affected," said Savvides. "We are working on extracting iris features from
high resolution visible photos and matching them against other high resolution
photos of irises" and have been able to match those, which is "an exciting
finding."

"We have also demonstrated capturing an iris from a person in a stopped
vehicle to depict the scenario where a police officer could identify who the
driver is before approaching. Iris recognition and in particular long-range
iris recognition can [also] help identify victims of human trafficking or
abduction and alert authorities," added Savvides.

**You can tell by the way I walk**

No, I'm not talking about John Cleese's "Ministry of Silly Walks." You don't
have to be that outrageous to be identified by your gait.

"Several decades ago researchers put lights on ankles, knees, hips and figured
out you could recognize friends by the way they walk," said University of
Notre Dame biometrics expert Kevin Bowyer. Today computers can identify a
person in a crowded city block by their walk.

Nixon pioneered much of the research in gait analysis. "We removed every other
variable we could to test the hypothesis, which is why we used a green
screen," he said. "All we had was a person walking in a series of images. We
look at the motion of the body and the body parts, then measured those with a
computer to get a set of numbers. And as long as we get the same set of
numbers for each person, we can achieve recognition."

Nixon recently put his computers to the test in a murder trial in Australia.
"The guy killed a man and his wife in a shop. He had cased the joint in the
morning and we had surveillance footage of him. Then when he came back in the
evening he wore a mask and gloves and covered his head. All we could see of
him was the way he walked. We presented evidence that the gait was the same;
the guy put his hands up and said 'Yeah, it was me'."

![The bumps and ridges on your tongue make it unique from any

other.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The bumps and ridges on your tongue make it unique from any

other.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119120814-02-unique-body-parts-

tongue-large-169.jpg)

The bumps and ridges on your tongue make it unique from any other.

**The mouth has spoken**

The next time someone sticks out their tongue at you, take a closer look. See
all those tiny bumps and ridges? "It's the different distribution of size and
shape, just as fingerprints," said Bowyer, that makes your tongue unique to
you and no one else. The bumps contain more than 10,000 taste buds, each one
filled with microscopic hairs called microvilli. Microvilli function like tiny
food critics, sensing if your meal is sweet or sour, salty or bitter, and
sending reviews up to the brain.

Your voice is another way to identify you, and each of us have unique
characteristics formed by the length of our vocal tract, the frequency and
intensity of our vocal quality, and how we've learned to speak. Because it's
so easy for someone to mimic another voice, you have to use a computer to tell
the differences, and science is working hard on that.

Each person's set of teeth is also unique, but that's because of what you do
to them, like clenching or grinding or sucking your thumb. Because of those
environmental differences, even identical twins do not have exactly the same
set of teeth.

Dental records are often used to identify a body in forensics, but you don't
see anyone running out to take tongue prints, although it is the only internal
body organ that can quite easily be exposed for inspection. Say ah!

**The window into your nervous system, and maybe your soul**

The very back of your eye, the part where light rays focus, is called the
retina. The pattern of blood vessels displayed there is a very precise
snapshot of your nervous system — unique to you. While it's widely used in the
animal world to verify the identity of show cattle and purebred horses, as
well as track food safety and disease outbreaks, use in humans has been
limited.

Except in your eye doctor's office. The retina is the only place in your body
where doctors can see your central nervous system without surgery.
Ophthalmologists can see first signs of diabetes, multiple sclerosis, high
blood pressure, even brain health during your annual checkup.

![Even identical twins have different

fingerprints](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Even identical twins have different

fingerprints](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119131440-unique-body-parts-

twins-alternate-large-169.jpg)

Even identical twins have different fingerprints

**Fingerprints no longer the gold standard**

No one else has your exact fingerprints, even your identical twin. How can
that be? It starts when you're a fetus, between 1 and 3 inches long, and the
pads on your fingers and palms begin to grow. As the skin forms and thickens
over the next month or two, it comes into contact with other structures in the
womb, which start to create ridges on the skin of the fingertip. The density
of your mom's amniotic fluid, how much you move, and your position in the womb
are all thought to affect how those ridges form.

"Where the lines end or join is determined randomly," Bowyer said. "We know
you're supposed to have 10 fingers and 10 fingerprints, but the detail of the
pattern isn't predictable."

![ Ultrasound of fetus at fourth month of

pregnancy.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![ Ultrasound of fetus at fourth month of

pregnancy.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/150323113024-four-month-

ultrasound-large-169.jpg)

Ultrasound of fetus at fourth month of pregnancy.

By the time mom is in her sixth month of pregnancy, your fingerprints have
fully formed the arches, loops and whorls we use to match fingerprints, with
lots of other unique patterns scattered in between.

Once considered the "gold standard" of identification, fingerprints have lost
some of their luster because they can be degraded or damaged, such as by
chemical burns or having a career as a bricklayer. In one case, a man lost his
fingerprints when a common cancer drug caused the skin to peel. Still,
fingerprints are commonly used by law enforcement, forensics and companies
such as Apple for personal identification.

Recent studies believe we can now even tell gender from fingerprints.

**Related: 5 biometric alternatives to the password**

Some people are born without fingerprints. It's called adermatoglyphia, and is
a very rare disorder caused by mutations in the SMARCAD1 gene. According to
the National Institutes of Health, it's also called "immigration delay
disease" because those who have it have lots of problems when they try to
enter countries requiring fingerprinting for identification.

**DNA is still the gold standard**

DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid as it is rarely pronounced, is the genetic
formula that tells your cells how to build you into you, and no one else.

Think of your DNA as four Legos that like to play in pairs along a spiral
staircase called a double helix. Those pairs (A and T; C and G) form building
blocks of code called genes that become the blueprint for your hair, eyes,
body shape and everything else that makes you unique.

There are nearly 20,000 human genes, created from about 3 billion bases, so
it's easy to see why no other human will have the exact same pattern of DNA.
Unless you have an identical twin, right?

But wait, that truism is no longer true. Breakthrough studies in the last year
show even identical twins have different DNA. Using second generation genome
sequencing, said Bowyer, "you find that once that fertilized egg splits there
are random mutations that are happening and that can be used to identify
differences between twins."

Called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or "Snips," these "typos" in the DNA
sequence are being studied to shed light on how we differ in our response to
drugs, environmental toxins and why one of us might get a particular disease,
even if our twin didn't.

![Move over fingerprints. From your ears to your toes, many of your body parts

make you uniquely special.  And all of them are being investigated as a way to

identify you from others in a

crowd.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Move over fingerprints. From your ears to your toes, many of your body parts

make you uniquely special.  And all of them are being investigated as a way to

identify you from others in a

crowd.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119151804-unique-body-parts---

individual-in-crowd---restricted-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

You're more unique than you know - Move over fingerprints. From your ears to
your toes, many of your body parts make you uniquely special. And all of them
are being investigated as a way to identify you from others in a crowd.

Hide Caption

1 of 13

![The ridges, bumps and shape of your outer ear are so unique that your ear

may soon be one of the best ways to identify you. According to University of

Southampton <a href="http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/people/msn"

target="_blank">biometrics expert Mark Nixon</a>, studies

have shown up to 99.6% accuracy when ears were scanned using computer software

that recreates their position, scale and rotation. That's as accurate as a

fingerprint and you don't have to ink up

first.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The ridges, bumps and shape of your outer ear are so unique that your ear

may soon be one of the best ways to identify you. According to University of

Southampton <a href="http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/people/msn"

target="_blank">biometrics expert Mark Nixon</a>, studies

have shown up to 99.6% accuracy when ears were scanned using computer software

that recreates their position, scale and rotation. That's as accurate as a

fingerprint and you don't have to ink up

first.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119150228-04a-unique-body-parts-

ear-young-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Good for more than hearing - The ridges, bumps and shape of your outer ear are
so unique that your ear may soon be one of the best ways to identify you.
According to University of Southampton biometrics expert Mark Nixon, studies
have shown up to 99.6% accuracy when ears were scanned using computer software
that recreates their position, scale and rotation. That's as accurate as a
fingerprint and you don't have to ink up first.

Hide Caption

2 of 13

![The pattern of your iris differs in each eye. This even holds true for

identical twins.  How does that happen? As the developing fetus opens and

shuts its eyes in utero, iris tissue tightens and folds randomly, so no two

can be the

same.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The pattern of your iris differs in each eye. This even holds true for

identical twins.  How does that happen? As the developing fetus opens and

shuts its eyes in utero, iris tissue tightens and folds randomly, so no two

can be the same.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119121850-03-unique-

body-parts-iris-02-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Every iris is unique - The pattern of your iris differs in each eye. This even
holds true for identical twins. How does that happen? As the developing fetus
opens and shuts its eyes in utero, iris tissue tightens and folds randomly, so
no two can be the same.

Hide Caption

3 of 13

![Researchers are trying to look deep into your eyes from a safe distance,

like when a police officer stops a car and needs to identify the occupant.

"A police officer could identify who the driver is before

approaching," says <a

href="https://www.cylab.cmu.edu/education/faculty/savvides.html"

target="_blank">Marios Savvides </a>of Carnegie

Mellon's CyLab. "Long-range iris recognition can \[also\] help

identify victims of human trafficking or abduction and alert

authorities."](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Researchers are trying to look deep into your eyes from a safe distance,

like when a police officer stops a car and needs to identify the occupant.

"A police officer could identify who the driver is before

approaching," says <a

href="https://www.cylab.cmu.edu/education/faculty/savvides.html"

target="_blank">Marios Savvides </a>of Carnegie

Mellon's CyLab. "Long-range iris recognition can \[also\] help

identify victims of human trafficking or abduction and alert

authorities."](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119122106-03-unique-

body-parts-iris-03-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

No two are the same - Researchers are trying to look deep into your eyes from
a safe distance, like when a police officer stops a car and needs to identify
the occupant. "A police officer could identify who the driver is before
approaching," says Marios Savvides of Carnegie Mellon's CyLab. "Long-range
iris recognition can [also] help identify victims of human trafficking or
abduction and alert authorities."

Hide Caption

4 of 13

![See all those tiny bumps and ridges?  "It's the different

distribution of size and shape," says <a

href="http://news.nd.edu/for-the-media/nd-experts/faculty/kevin-

bowyer/" target="_blank">University of Notre Dame biometrics

expert Kevin Bowyer</a>, that makes your tongue unique to you, just like

fingerprints.  But no one expects you to start inking up your tongue for an ID

print anytime soon.  "Gosh, the user acceptance of that is going to be

really, really low," says Bowyer with a chuckle.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![See all those tiny bumps and ridges?  "It's the different

distribution of size and shape," says <a

href="http://news.nd.edu/for-the-media/nd-experts/faculty/kevin-

bowyer/" target="_blank">University of Notre Dame biometrics

expert Kevin Bowyer</a>, that makes your tongue unique to you, just like

fingerprints.  But no one expects you to start inking up your tongue for an ID

print anytime soon.  "Gosh, the user acceptance of that is going to be

really, really low," says Bowyer with a chuckle.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119120912-01-unique-body-parts-

tongue-2-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

The mouth has spoken - See all those tiny bumps and ridges? "It's the
different distribution of size and shape," says University of Notre Dame
biometrics expert Kevin Bowyer, that makes your tongue unique to you, just
like fingerprints. But no one expects you to start inking up your tongue for
an ID print anytime soon. "Gosh, the user acceptance of that is going to be
really, really low," says Bowyer with a chuckle.

Hide Caption

5 of 13

![Researchers are fast at work analyzing the way you move so you can be

identified in a crowd.   "We look at the motion of the body and the body

parts, then measured those with a computer to get a set of numbers," says

University of Southampton <a

href="http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/people/msn"

target="_blank">biometrics expert Mark Nixon</a>.

"And as long as we get the same set of numbers for each person, we can

achieve recognition."

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Researchers are fast at work analyzing the way you move so you can be

identified in a crowd.   "We look at the motion of the body and the body

parts, then measured those with a computer to get a set of numbers," says

University of Southampton <a

href="http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/people/msn"

target="_blank">biometrics expert Mark Nixon</a>.

"And as long as we get the same set of numbers for each person, we can

achieve recognition."

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119133652-09-unique-body-parts-gait-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

You can tell by the way I walk - Researchers are fast at work analyzing the
way you move so you can be identified in a crowd. "We look at the motion of
the body and the body parts, then measured those with a computer to get a set
of numbers," says University of Southampton biometrics expert Mark Nixon. "And
as long as we get the same set of numbers for each person, we can achieve
recognition."

Hide Caption

6 of 13

![No one else has your exact fingerprints, even your identical twin. How can

that be? It's all about the random way you used your fingers while the

tips were developing in the womb. The density of your mom's amniotic

fluid, how much you move, and your position in the womb are all thought to

affect how those unique ridges formed on your

fingers.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![No one else has your exact fingerprints, even your identical twin. How can

that be? It's all about the random way you used your fingers while the

tips were developing in the womb. The density of your mom's amniotic

fluid, how much you move, and your position in the womb are all thought to

affect how those unique ridges formed on your

fingers.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119120527-01-unique-body-parts-

finger-print-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

It's all about touch - No one else has your exact fingerprints, even your
identical twin. How can that be? It's all about the random way you used your
fingers while the tips were developing in the womb. The density of your mom's
amniotic fluid, how much you move, and your position in the womb are all
thought to affect how those unique ridges formed on your fingers.

Hide Caption

7 of 13

![Think of your DNA as four Legos that like to play in pairs along a spiral

staircase called a double helix. Those pairs \(A and T; C and G\) form

building blocks of code called genes that become the blueprint for your hair,

eyes, body shape and everything else that makes you unique. There are almost

20,000 human genes, created from about 3 billion bases, so it's easy to

see why no other human will have the exact same pattern of DNA.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Think of your DNA as four Legos that like to play in pairs along a spiral

staircase called a double helix. Those pairs \(A and T; C and G\) form

building blocks of code called genes that become the blueprint for your hair,

eyes, body shape and everything else that makes you unique. There are almost

20,000 human genes, created from about 3 billion bases, so it's easy to

see why no other human will have the exact same pattern of DNA.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119124259-06-unique-body-parts-dna-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

DNA is still the gold standard - Think of your DNA as four Legos that like to
play in pairs along a spiral staircase called a double helix. Those pairs (A
and T; C and G) form building blocks of code called genes that become the
blueprint for your hair, eyes, body shape and everything else that makes you
unique. There are almost 20,000 human genes, created from about 3 billion
bases, so it's easy to see why no other human will have the exact same pattern
of DNA.

Hide Caption

8 of 13

![Breakthrough studies in the last year show even identical twins have

different DNA.  Using second generation genome sequencing, says Bowyer,

"If you do a more detailed and deeper level construction of DNA, you find

that once that fertilized egg splits there are random mutations that are

happening and that can be used to identify differences between

twins."](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Breakthrough studies in the last year show even identical twins have

different DNA.  Using second generation genome sequencing, says Bowyer,

"If you do a more detailed and deeper level construction of DNA, you find

that once that fertilized egg splits there are random mutations that are

happening and that can be used to identify differences between

twins."](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119131440-unique-body-parts-

twins-alternate-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Even identical twins have different DNA - Breakthrough studies in the last
year show even identical twins have different DNA. Using second generation
genome sequencing, says Bowyer, "If you do a more detailed and deeper level
construction of DNA, you find that once that fertilized egg splits there are
random mutations that are happening and that can be used to identify
differences between twins."

Hide Caption

9 of 13

![Your voice is another way to identify you, and we have <a

href="http://www.ncvs.org/ncvs/tutorials/voiceprod/tutorial/quality.html"

target="_blank">unique characteristics</a> formed by the

length of our vocal tract, the frequency and intensity of our vocal quality,

and how we've learned to speak.  Because it's so easy for someone to

mimic another voice, you have to use a computer to tell the differences, and

science is working hard on

that.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Your voice is another way to identify you, and we have <a

href="http://www.ncvs.org/ncvs/tutorials/voiceprod/tutorial/quality.html"

target="_blank">unique characteristics</a> formed by the

length of our vocal tract, the frequency and intensity of our vocal quality,

and how we've learned to speak.  Because it's so easy for someone to

mimic another voice, you have to use a computer to tell the differences, and

science is working hard on

that.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119134503-11-unique-body-parts-

voice-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Finding your voice - Your voice is another way to identify you, and we have
unique characteristics formed by the length of our vocal tract, the frequency
and intensity of our vocal quality, and how we've learned to speak. Because
it's so easy for someone to mimic another voice, you have to use a computer to
tell the differences, and science is working hard on that.

Hide Caption

10 of 13

![The Pentagon is hard at work trying to analyze your personal smell, the one

that's linked to your genetics. It's believed dogs recognize their

owners in that manner, and the military is trying to wade through the more

than 300 compounds that can produce a human's smell.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The Pentagon is hard at work trying to analyze your personal smell, the one

that's linked to your genetics. It's believed dogs recognize their

owners in that manner, and the military is trying to wade through the more

than 300 compounds that can produce a human's smell.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119134151-10-unique-bodyparts-odor-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Your 'eau de parfum' - The Pentagon is hard at work trying to analyze your
personal smell, the one that's linked to your genetics. It's believed dogs
recognize their owners in that manner, and the military is trying to wade
through the more than 300 compounds that can produce a human's smell.

Hide Caption

11 of 13

![The pattern of blood vessels displayed on the retina at the back of your eye

is a very precise snapshot of your nervous system — unique to you.

Ophthalmologists can see telltale first signs of diabetes, multiple sclerosis,

high blood pressure, even brain health. Smart phones are taking the technology

to Third World

countries.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The pattern of blood vessels displayed on the retina at the back of your eye

is a very precise snapshot of your nervous system — unique to you.

Ophthalmologists can see telltale first signs of diabetes, multiple sclerosis,

high blood pressure, even brain health. Smart phones are taking the technology

to Third World countries.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/141202125755-peek-

retina-imaging-horizontal-large-gallery.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

The window into your health - The pattern of blood vessels displayed on the
retina at the back of your eye is a very precise snapshot of your nervous
system — unique to you. Ophthalmologists can see telltale first signs of
diabetes, multiple sclerosis, high blood pressure, even brain health. Smart
phones are taking the technology to Third World countries.

Hide Caption

12 of 13

![Even our unique bits change as we age, which makes it challenging for those

who want to identify us.<br />"Is there anything that never changes

at all?  I wouldn't say that," says Bower. "But for things we

think are pretty stable, or we know how they age, generally we have some sort

of idea through aging recognition techniques." <br

/>](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Even our unique bits change as we age, which makes it challenging for those

who want to identify us.<br />"Is there anything that never changes

at all?  I wouldn't say that," says Bower. "But for things we

think are pretty stable, or we know how they age, generally we have some sort

of idea through aging recognition techniques." <br

/>](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119125926-08-unique-body-parts-

twins-old-super-169.jpg)

Photos: Unique body parts

Nothing stays the same - Even our unique bits change as we age, which makes it
challenging for those who want to identify us.  
"Is there anything that never changes at all? I wouldn't say that," says
Bower. "But for things we think are pretty stable, or we know how they age,
generally we have some sort of idea through aging recognition techniques."

Hide Caption

13 of 13

![unique body parts - individual in crowd -

RESTRICTED](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119151804-unique-body-parts---

individual-in-crowd---restricted-small-11.jpg)![04a unique body parts ear

young](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119150228-04a-unique-body-parts-

ear-young-small-11.jpg)![03 unique body parts iris

02](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119121850-03-unique-body-parts-

iris-02-small-11.jpg)![03 unique body parts iris

03](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119122106-03-unique-body-parts-

iris-03-small-11.jpg)![01 unique body parts tongue

2](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119120912-01-unique-body-parts-

tongue-2-small-11.jpg)![09 unique body parts

gait](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119133652-09-unique-body-parts-gait-

small-11.jpg)![01 unique body parts finger

print](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119120527-01-unique-body-parts-

finger-print-small-11.jpg)![06 unique body parts

dna](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119124259-06-unique-body-parts-dna-

small-11.jpg)![unique body parts twins

alternate](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119131440-unique-body-parts-

twins-alternate-small-11.jpg)![11 unique body parts

voice](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119134503-11-unique-body-parts-

voice-small-11.jpg)![10 unique bodyparts

odor](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119134151-10-unique-bodyparts-odor-

small-11.jpg)![peek retina imaging

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/141202125755-peek-retina-imaging-

topics.jpg)![08 unique body parts twins

old](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/151119125926-08-unique-body-parts-twins-

old-small-11.jpg)

  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   * Home

  * World

    1. US
    2. Africa
    3. Americas
    4. Asia
    5. Australia
    6. China
    7. Europe
    8. Middle East
    9. India
    10. UK
  * US Politics

    1. 45
    2. Congress
    3. Supreme Court
    4. Facts First
    5. 2020 Election
  * Business

    1. Markets
    2. Tech
    3. Media
    4. Success
    5. Perspectives
    6. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

    1. Stars
    2. Screen
    3. Binge
    4. Culture
    5. Media
  * Tech

    1. Innovate
    2. Gadget
    3. Mission: Ahead
    4. Upstarts
    5. Business Evolved
    6. Work Transformed
    7. Innovative Cities
  * Sport

    1. Football
    2. Tennis
    3. Equestrian
    4. Golf
    5. Skiing
    6. Horse Racing
    7. Formula E
    8. F1
    9. Sailing
    10. Rugby
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

    1. Destinations
    2. Food & Drink
    3. Play
    4. Stay
    5. Videos
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

    1. Arts
    2. Design
    3. Fashion
    4. Architecture
    5. Luxury
    6. Autos
    7. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

    1. Food
    2. Fitness
    3. Wellness
    4. Parenting
    5. Live Longer
  * Features

    1. Freedom Project
    2. Impact Your World
    3. Inside Africa
    4. 2 degrees
    5. CNN Heroes
    6. All Features
  * Video

    1. Video news
    2. Feature shows
    3. HLN
    4. TV shows
    5. TV schedule
    6. Faces of CNN Worldwide
    7. CNNVR
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

    1. How To Watch VR
    2. Archives
  * More…

    1. Weather
    2. CNN Profiles
    3. Leadership
    4. Pressroom
    5. Partner sites
    6. Work for CNN

International Edition

  * Set edition preference:
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Confirm
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Arabic
  * Español

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans ™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Accessibility & CC
  * AdChoices
  * Modern Slavery Act Statement
  * Advertise with us
  * About us
  * CNN Store
  * Newsletters
  * Transcripts
  * License Footage
  * CNN Newsource

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif?labels=noscript%3ANo%20Labels%20Set)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

