

![Logical Science](https://logicalscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/Normal.png)

                    
                                                * Latest 
                            * Popular 
                            * Hot 
                            * Trending
                    
                            * Home
                            * Education
                            * Engineering
                            * Food
                            * Health
                            * Life
                            * Physical
                            * Research
                            * Technology
                            * Web
                    

Follow us

                    
                                                * facebook
                            * twitter
                            * pinterest
                            * tumblr
                    

Search

Search for: Search

Add post

Story Image Audio View all formats

![Logical Science](https://logicalscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/small.png)

                    
                                                * Latest 
                            * Popular 
                            * Hot 
                            * Trending
                    

Menu

Follow us

                    
                                                * facebook
                            * twitter
                            * pinterest
                            * tumblr
                    

Search

Search for: Search

in Climatology

# Richard Lindzen Openly Claimed "There's no consensus on global warming."

January 1, 2008, 8:05 pm **2.1k** Views

59

SHARES

ShareTweet

PinPlus

![Global Warming](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-

ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)

**Richard Lindzen** was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1977
and is a professor at MIT. He is rather well known for claiming that "There's
no consensus on global warming." in the Wall Street Journal, in front of
Congress, and many other places. Other researchers like Dean Dr. Mark H.
Thiemens say this "has nothing to do with reality".1,2,3

How can Lindzen, a member of the National Academies be wrong about the
consensus?  
Well every major scientific society on the entire planet with relevant
expertise disagrees with him. Even the National Academy of Sciences, which he
is a member of, disagrees with him. Here is a press release released in 2005
which opens with the words “Climate Change is real”. It’s conclusion begins
with “We urge all nations, in the line with the UNFCCC principles, to take
prompt action to reduce the causes of climate change, adapt to its impacts and
ensure that the issue is included in all relevant national and international
strategies.” It is signed by:

                    
                                                * Academia Brasiliera de Ciências, Brazil
                            * Royal Society of Canada, Canada
                            * Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
                            * Academié des Sciences, France
                            * Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher, Germany
                            * Indian National Science Academy, India
                            * Accademia dei Lincei, Italy
                            * Science Council of Japan, Japan
                            * Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia
                            * Royal Society, United Kingdom
                            * National Academy of Sciences, United States of America
                    

For a complete analysis of the consensus which Lindzen says doesn’t exist
please go here:  
Does he have any conflict of interests?

Lindzen recieved $2500 a day from oil and coal interests for his services. His
article "Global Warming: the Origin and Nature of Alleged Scientific
Consensus," was underwritten by OPEC. Lindzen has lectured at numerous Cooler
Heads Coalition meetings. The Cooler Heads Coalition is funded by CEI which is
in turn funded by Exxon Mobil. He has also given talks for the George C.
Marshall Institute which is also funded by Exxon Mobil. His connections to the
oil, coal, and even tobacco industry are apparently rather extensive. Here is
one listof many that is worth exploring. Richard Lindzen claims he is
currently not recieving any handouts from oil companies.

Lindzen also has a habit of disagreeing with other people. According to SEED
magazine: "His former graduate students describe him as fiercely intelligent,
with a deep contrarian streak." One of Lindzens own MIT students, Kirk-
Davidoff, has said "If you want to prove yourself a brilliant scientist, you
don't always agree with the consensus," "You show you're right and everyone
else is wrong. He certainly enjoys showing he's right and everyone else is
wrong, If you have a ten minute conversation with him, you can tell that."

Will he put his money where his mouth is?

He claimed to be willing to accept bets on the future climate during an
interview with Reason magazine. Reason printed “Richard Lindzen says he's
willing to take bets that global average temperatures in 20 years will in fact
be lower than they are now.” When Annanapproached him and tried to accept the
bet Lindzen seemed to carry a different tune. The following is from James
Annan’s personal website:

“Richard Lindzen will indeed accept a bet - but only if offered odds of 50:1
in his favour! He actually started out quoting 100:1 - but came down to 50:1
in what he described as a special favour to me. If the temperatures went down,
I was to hand over $10,000, but in the event of a rise, I'd get a whopping
$200. That's worth around  
$8 per year on my pension. Whoop-de-doo.” 1, 2, 3

Have his scientific theories ever been wrong before?

Yes, and more than once. He was wrong about satellite data showing no global
warming and his Iris effect.1, 2 Also, here is a quote from SEED magazine:

In 2001, Lindzen published a paper speculating that as the Earth warmed, water
vapor would decrease in the upper atmosphere, allowing heat to escape back
into space more efficiently, and thereby reducing overall temperature. The
paper met with vigorous criticism. Eventually, he disavowed the idea. "That
was an old view," Lindzen said about his five-year-old hypothesis. "I find it
insane that I am still forced to explain this."

Lindzen says we can't explain the Greenland icesheet.

Lindzen has made the following argument to Boston News: "the evidence so far
suggests that the Greenland ice sheet is actually growing on average…. And,
frankly, we don't know why." This is a misleading and patently false
statement. The quick and dirty answer is that Greenland is melting faster.
However, the warmer ocean temperatures are changing the snow and rain patterns
around the world. Greenland has seen a significant increase in snow. This
extra snow is outpacing the increased melt. If current trends continue, it is
only a matter of time before this trend reverses and Greenland starts
shrinking. Still global ice mass is way down. A more thorough analysis can be
found here.

Lindzen says global warming will weaken the hurricanes, is this true?

Lindzen stated during NPR's 'Global Warming Is Not a Crisis' debate that
"hurricanes are powered by the temperature difference between the pole and the
equator and global warming will reduce that difference."

Micheal E. Mann claims this statement violates concepts taught in
undergraduate courses. The following is his full response to Lindzen's
statement:

The poleward temperature gradient in middle latitudes leads to the phenomenon
of 'baroclinic instability', which governs the strength of mid-latitude
cyclones (i.e. the winter storms that influence the extratropical regions of
the world with their alternating cold fronts and warm fronts that come through
every few days on the average). This is fundamentally different from the
dynamical and thermodynamic factors which govern tropical cyclones (and
Hurricanes, which are just strong versions therefore). In this case, the
factors have a lot more to do with the vertical stability properties of the
tropical atmosphere, and things such as atmospheric wind shear. We generally
lecture on this key distinction in intermediate level undergraduate courses on
weather and the atmosphere. It is possible that Richard Lindzen, who was in
his day arguably one of the leading atmospheric dynamicists, simply doesn't
happen to know this. The other possibility is that he was intentionally
misleading the audience to score some cheap rhetorical points. I'll leave it
to you to decide. -mike

For more information on hurricanes and how they relate to global warming
please go here.

Has lindzen ever lied on TV?

On a Fox News interview Richard Lindzen said:

But there is no agreement that the warming we've seen is due to man. Moreover,
the warming we've seen is much less than we would have expected on the basis
of the models that produce alarm.  
So I guess this list of people are in no agreement. It seems as if national
academies of 18 total countries never signed these two press releases. And
Lindzen says the models are wrong? It looks as if these graphs and predictions
are fake then.

Has he ever lied to congress?

Realclimate.org has a nice little discussion on his testimony to the United
Kingdom's parliament. He made numerous statements that are extremely
misleading at best and flat out false at worst. The material isn't for
beginners but it can be seen here.

Have any of Lindzen’s claims regarding the consensus been published in a peer
review journal?  
No.

Does Lindzen have a standing paper in any peer review journal that can provide
a mechanism as to why current global warming isn't something to worry about?  
No.

Lindzen says there is a study that proves there is no consensus, is this true?

The real consensus is quoted and sourced here . However, Lindzen will often
cite Benny Peiser’s study which the peer review journals Science and Nature
refused to publish. Peiser then released a press release saying there was a
conspiracy against his work.. The study claimed that there are 32 peer review
journals that refute climate change. However, when Tim Lambert and William M.
Connolley reviewed the abstracts he found the following results:

Abstract # | Analysis  
---|---  
8, 9, 14 | These papers assumed existence of climate change as a given. This
directly contradicts Peiser’s conclusions.  
2, 3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33 | These journals do not refute climate change  
15, 20 | Probably does not refute climate change, borderline  
27 | Not a peer reviewed journal  
1, 6 | Very old paper, very old data  
7 | Possible doubting, Minor journal  
10 | Personal view, not science

A quick look at Connolley's results shows that Peiser's study is seriouly
flawed. Only one of the papers disagreed with the consensus and it wasn't even
peer reviewed. Therefore Benny found ZERO peer-reviewed papers that disagreed
with the scientific concensus. Several of the abstracts (#34) dealt with
carbon sequestration. Carbon sequestration has only one purpose which is to
fight global warming. So how Benny Peiser came to the conclusion that a paper
on carbon sequestration refutes global warming is a bit of a mystery. Benny
Peiser's work has been refuted on numerous other sites as well., William
Connolley and many others debunked Peiser's study on May 6th, 2005 and Peiser
admitted his mistakes on March 19, 2006. Despite his study being refuted by
numerous people, Peiser continues to use his discredited study to say a
scientific consensus regarding climate change doesn't exist. A science blog
called “Backseat driving” has spent a considerable amount of time documenting
what they call his “dishonesty” and “disinformation”. Backseat driving even
has a detailed and time stamped summary of Peisers reaction to the widespread
critique of his study.

Given the fact that Lindzen got Naomi Oreskes's name wrong as well as several
other errors, Dr. Tim Lambert concludes "It seems likely that he never checked
what Oreskes actually wrote and relied on a second or third hand account."
Lindzen had 4 months to learn about Peisers confession and 14 months to learn
about Connolley's debunking of Peisers study before writing his July 2, 2006
WSJ Opinion piece that erroneously claimed "There's no consensus". His
statement was also 13 months after the June 7th, 2005 National Academy of
Science's press release that urged prompt action to reduce climate change.
That press release was signed by 11 countries. Since Lindzen is a member of
the National Academy of Science, one might wonder how he could have missed it.

A peer review journal from Science disagrees with Lindzen regarding the
consensus. National academies from around the world including Brazil, Canada,
China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Russia, United Kingdom, United
States of America, and every major American institution with relevant
expertise disagree with Lindzen about the consensus. The scientists at
realclimate.org say “there are no grounds for debating whether such consensus
actually exists.” NASA's Gavin Schmidt even throws out a challenge:
"Regardless of these spats, the fact that the community overwhelmingly
supports the consensus is evidenced by picking up any copy of Journal of
Climate or similar, any scientific program at the AGU or EGU meetings, or
simply going to talk to scientists (not the famous ones, the ones at your
local university or federal lab). I challenge you, if you think there is some
un-reported division, show me the hundreds of abstracts at the Fall meeting
(the biggest confernce in the US on this topic) that support your view - you
won't be able to. You can argue whether the consensus is correct, or what it
really implies, but you can't credibly argue it doesn't exist." ****

                    
                                                * He says scientists are creating a scare to get funding, is this true?
                    

Lindzen has made this argument in his WSJ op-ed: Climate of Fear. A common
tactic of those that have no theory, no data, and no papers supporting their
cause is to resort to ad hominem attacks. The main problem with this argument
is that climatologists don't want anymore money. They want you to fix the
problem by funding alternative energy research which is a completely different
field of work involving completely different people. There are almost a dozen
serious flaws with this argument that are listed here.

                    
                                                * **He issues reports on climate change and pontificates in front of Congress. Therefore his testimony must be infallible right?**
                    

See the quote above from SEED and his House of Lords testimony. Also, this
video speaks for itself:

## Tobacco execs denying addictiveness of nicotine under oath

﻿  
For original source go here

This video shows Senator Ted Stevens refusing requests to make oil execs swear
in when they testified during the November 9 Energy Price & Profits hearing.
Since that hearing documents have popped up showing those oil execs lied to
congress. Since they were not under oath the oil executives can not be
prosecuted for committing a criminal act. Oil and gas companies are Ted
Stevens’s primary industry campaign contributors. Oil and gas also give
Lindzen large sums of money. The oil funded Pat Michaels has fraudulently
edited graphs published by NASA to discredit their scientists. Meryl Streep,
and actor with a degree in drama, testified before Congress on the dangers of
Alar. Due to her testimony, Alar was banned despite objections from Science,
Nature, WHO, FAO, EPA, and British Parliament experts that claimed there was
“no risk to health”. Lawyers that are paid oil lobbyists have edited
Whitehouse climate science reports with a heavy hand. Just because it’s in
front of Congress or the Whitehouse, doesn’t make it true.

                    
                                                * **Lindzen** **dismisses anthropogenic climate change as "religious belief”. How much basis is there in this claim?**
                    

The skeptics with relevant expertise can all fit in a small room. There are
hundreds of thousands of scientists across the globe that disagree with him.
Polls show that 92% of Americans believe in god and only 40% of American
scientists believe in god. So if this is a cult movement, it is far more
powerful than all the other religions combined.

                    
                                                * **He’s from MIT, surely that means he’s infallible does it?**
                    

Timothy Leary - LSD

Sir Fred Hoyle - steady-state theory

These people have made some claims that the vast majority of scientists have
claimed as "nonsense". There are even physics professors such as Steven E.
Jones from Brigham Young that think the WTC was brought down with planted
explosives. To take it even farther, a University of Colorado professor Ward
LeRoy Churchill called the World Trade Center victims Nazi's or more
specifically "little Eichmanns". Whatever the topic, you will always have a
few dissenters. Because individual humans are susceptible to corruption,
senility, bribery, relying on information that is 10 years out of date, and a
whole host of other problems it is important to either listen to the majority
of experts or learn enough about the topic to understand the material
yourself. The simplest way to get your facts right is to either find out what
the scientific consensus is, or listen to the National Academy of Sciences.

                    
                                                * **Well what exactly is wrong with the science behind Lindzen’s testimony?** ****
                    

Well for one thing Lindzen has no testable theory, no data, and no papers
explaining the current temperature trend. Despite this he still manages to get
his opinions published in the mainstream media as well as testifying in from
of Congress on the oil companies dime. A collaboration of mainstream
scientists around the world have banded together to create rebuttals to
Lindzens claims. Their efforts are distributed on the website
http://www.realclimate.org. The following are a select few of the rebuttals in
circulation:

Richard Linzden’s HoL testomony

Open Thread on Lindzen Op-Ed in WSJ

Lindzen: point by point

Gray and Muddy Thinking about Global Warming (Lindzen changes his tone)

NASA's James Hansen vs Lindzen (see table 1)

Lindzen claims global warming stopped in 1998

See more

                    
                                                * **Previous article** Measuring The Speed of Electrons
                            * **Next article** Consensus On Global Warming - Consensus Of Top Personalities
                    

## What do you think?

**0** points

Upvote Downvote

## You May Also Like

                    
                                                * ![Rogue science strikes again: The case of the first gene-edited babies](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

**80** Shares

in Biological Sciences, Life Sciences, Technology

### Rogue science strikes again: The case of the first gene-edited babies

                    
                                                * ![Antibiotic resistance is not new – it existed long before people used drugs to kill bacteria](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

**117** Shares

in Health Science

### Antibiotic resistance is not new – it existed long before people used

drugs to kill bacteria

                    
                                                * ![Spider glue's sticky secret revealed by new genetic research](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

Trending

**66** Shares

in Biological Sciences, Life Sciences

### Spider glue's sticky secret revealed by new genetic research

                    
                                                * ![Here are the Best Hard Drives for Designers in 2019](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

Trending

**73** Shares

in Technology

### Here are the Best Hard Drives for Designers in 2019

                    
                                                * ![Different Career Paths in Medicine](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

Trending

**37** Shares

in Health Science

### Different Career Paths in Medicine

                    
                                                * ![The Best Ways to Build Your Skills](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

Trending

**51** Shares

in Education

### The Best Ways to Build Your Skills

![Speed of Electrons](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-

ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)

### Measuring The Speed of Electrons

![Global Warming](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-

ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)

### Consensus On Global Warming - Consensus Of Top Personalities

## Our picks

                    
                                                * ![Computer Hardware Jobs](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

### The Projected Future of Computer Hardware Engineering Jobs in the U.S.

                    
                                                * ![Preservatives BHA and BHT](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

### Top 10 Hazardous Foods Eaten By Americans That Are Banned In Several

Countries

                    
                                                * ![Solar Energy NewYork](https://logicalscience.com/wp-content/plugins/media-ace/includes/lazy-load/images/blank.png)
                    

### Solar Uptown Brings Solar Power Revolution To Harlem, NYC

## Newsletter

Top scientific news straight into your inbox!

Email address:

Leave this field empty if you're human:

Don't worry, we don't spam

## Question?

Got something science-related that needs urgent answering? Send it to us at
ajith [at] logicalscience dot com

## Disclaimer

![](http://logicalscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Bottom.png)

LogicalScience.com is a useful resource for science lovers. You can contribute
as well as make use of this website for research and school work. No
warranties, promises and/or representations of any kind, expressed or implied,
are given as to the nature, standard, accuracy or otherwise of the information
provided in this website nor to the suitability or otherwise of the
information to your particular circumstances. Learn more about us

## Newsletter

Top scientific news straight into your inbox!

Email address:

Leave this field empty if you're human:

Don't worry, we don't spam

![Web Analytics](//static.getclicky.com/media/links/badge.gif)

![Clicky](//in.getclicky.com/101098459ns.gif)

## Find us on Facebook

Loading...

## Follow us

                    
                                                * facebook
                            * twitter
                            * pinterest
                            * tumblr
                    

© 2018 LogicalScience.com. All rights Reserved.

                    
                                                * About Us
                            * Copyright Notice
                            * Terms Of Service
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * #0 (no title)
                    

![](http://logicalscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/80.png)

Back to Top

Close

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Education
                            * Engineering
                            * Food
                            * Health
                            * Life
                            * Physical
                            * Research
                            * Technology
                            * Web
                            * Latest 
                            * Popular 
                            * Hot 
                            * Trending 
                            * facebook
                            * twitter
                            * pinterest
                            * tumblr
                    

Search for: Search

Add post

## Log In

#### Sign In

Username or Email Address

Password

Forgot password?

## Forgot password?

Enter your account data and we will send you a link to reset your password.

Username or Email Address

Back to Login

## Your password reset link appears to be invalid or expired.

## Log in

### Privacy Policy

Accept

Close

## Add to Collection

Add new or search

                    
                                                * Public collection title
                    
                            * Private collection title
                    

### No Collections

Here you'll find all collections you've created before.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

