

×

### THE DAILY NEWSLETTER

Sign up to our daily email newsletter

![New Scientist](/wp-content/themes/new-scientist/assets/img/logo.svg)

Subscribe and save

Menu

                    
                                                * news
                            * technology
                            * space
                            * physics
                            * health
                            * environment
                            * mind
                            * video
                            * travel
                            * events
                            * jobs
                    

Sign in Search

Sign in

Log in with facebook Log in with google

Email

Password

Forgotten Password?

Sign up for free|Educational access

### Sign up for more online articles

A selection of top articles hand-picked by our editors available only to
registered users.

Get increased access now

### Manage your subscription

Check your subscription package, update your details, renew or upgrade.

Manage your subscription here

Activate subscription

# Early Earth was covered in a global ocean and had no mountains

Earth 8 May 2017

![Zircon mineral grains](https://images.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/08153919/15274350-1.jpg)

Stuart Hay/Australian National University/PA Wi

By New Scientist staff and Press Association

Earth 4.4 billion years ago was flat and almost entirely covered in water with
just a few small islands, new research suggests.

Scientists came to the conclusion after analysing tiny zircon mineral grains
from a region of Western Australia containing the oldest rocks ever found.

"The history of the Earth is like a book with its first chapter ripped out
with no surviving rocks from the very early period, but we've used these trace
elements of zircon to build a profile of the world at that time,” says lead
researcher Antony Burnham, from the Australian National University.

##### Advertisement

"Our research indicates there were no mountains and continental collisions
during Earth's first 700 million years or more of existence - it was a much
more quiet and dull place,” he says. "There are strong similarities with
zircon from the types of rocks that predominated for the following 1.5 billion
years, suggesting that it took the Earth a long time to evolve into the planet
that we know today."

The team conducted a forensic study of the grains looking for clues to their
formation.

They found that the zircon was created by melting old igneous rocks rather
than sediments.

"Sediment melting is characteristic of major continental collisions, such as
the Himalayas, so it appears that such events did not occur during these early
stages of Earth's history," says Burnham.

The zircon grains, preserved in sandstone rocks in the Jack Hills, date back
to when the Earth was only 160 million years old.

The new research fits in with the "Cool Early Earth" theory that suggests a
cool, quiet period followed the extreme conditions of Earth's earliest
history.

It pre-dated the Late Heavy Bombardment 4.1 to 3.8 billion years ago when the
Earth was pummelled by comets and asteroids.

Bacterial life is thought to have emerged on Earth at the end of the
bombardment around 3.8 billion years ago.

Journal reference: _Nature Geoscience_ , DOI: 10.1038/ngeo2942

More on these topics:

                    
                                                * planets 
                            * geology
                    

##### Advertisement

Trending Latest Video Free

                    
                                                1. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            2. Dragonfish have 'invisible' teeth to help them sneak up on their prey
                            3. Cause of polycystic ovary syndrome discovered at last
                            4. Stem cell patch may help repair damage caused by heart attacks
                            5. The planets might control the sun's activity - and it's not astrology
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. We've seen signs of a mirror-image universe that is touching our own
                            4. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            5. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                    
                            1. Mixed reality in military aircraft of the future
                            2. How the young can rejuvenate the old
                            3. Skeletons: the frame of life
                            4. The delightful and dangerous world of liquids
                            5. Exploring the solar system
                    
                            1. 52-million-year-old fossils suggest oaks evolved in the south
                            2. Powerful CRISPR upgrade uses 'jumping genes' to directly insert DNA
                            3. Plan to remove hen harrier eggs and raise them in captivity criticised
                            4. Brainless fungi trade resources with plants like a stock market
                            5. Bizarre pentaquark turns out to be a new kind of subatomic 'molecule'
                    

![](https://images.newscientist.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/06103349/nsc_190608_301-300x395.jpg)

                    
                                                * Download
                            * Buy In Print
                    

##### Advertisement

### Sign up to our newsletter

Enter your email address to get started

                    
                                                * Contact us
                            * Help
                            * About us
                            * Privacy & cookies
                            * Terms & conditions
                            * Advertise
                            * Write for us
                            * Events
                            * Science jobs
                            * Syndication
                            * RSS feeds
                            * Gift subscriptions
                            * Student subscriptions
                            * Educational subscriptions
                            * Corporate subscriptions
                    

### Get the app

### FOLLOW US

(C) Copyright New Scientist Ltd.

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

