

# Greenpeace

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article is about the international environmental organization. For other
uses, see Greenpeace (disambiguation).

Greenpeace![Greenpeace

logo.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Greenpeace_logo.svg/220px-

Greenpeace_logo.svg.png)

Logo of Greenpeace

* * *

![Greenpeace

paises.PNG](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Greenpeace_paises.PNG/250px-

Greenpeace_paises.PNG)

Global map of Greenpeace office locations

Formation| 1969; 50 years ago (1969) – 1972 (1972) (See remarks)  
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada  
Type| non-governmental organization  
Purpose| environmentalism, peace  
Headquarters| Amsterdam, Netherlands

Region served

| Worldwide

Executive Director

| Bunny McDiarmid, Jennifer Morgan

Main organ

| Board of Directors, elected by the Annual General Meeting

Budget

| €236.9 million (2011)

Staff

| 2,400 (2008)

Volunteers

| 15,000[1]  
Website| www.greenpeace.org/international  
Remarks| See article for more details on formation.

Formerly called

| Don't Make a Wave Committee (1969–1972)[2]

**Greenpeace** is a non-governmental[3] environmental organization with
offices in over 39 countries and an international coordinating body in
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.[4] Greenpeace was founded in 1971 by Irving Stowe
and Dorothy Stowe, Canadian and US ex-pat environmental activists. Greenpeace
states its goal is to "ensure the ability of the Earth to nurture life in all
its diversity"[5] and focuses its campaigning on worldwide issues such as
climate change, deforestation, overfishing, commercial whaling, genetic
engineering, and anti-nuclear issues. It uses direct action, lobbying,
research, and ecotage[6] to achieve its goals. The global organization does
not accept funding from governments, corporations, or political parties,
relying on three million individual supporters and foundation grants.[7][8]
Greenpeace has a general consultative status with the United Nations Economic
and Social Council[9] and is a founding member[10] of the INGO Accountability
Charter, an international non-governmental organization that intends to foster
accountability and transparency of non-governmental organizations.

Greenpeace is known for its direct actions and has been described as the most
visible environmental organization in the world.[11][12] Greenpeace has raised
environmental issues to public knowledge,[13][14][15] and influenced both the
private and the public sector.[16][17] Greenpeace has also been a source of
controversy;[18] its motives and methods (some of the latter being illegal)
have received criticism,[19][20] including an open letter from more than 100
Nobel laureates urging Greenpeace to end its campaign against genetically
modified organisms (GMOs).[21] The organization's direct actions have sparked
legal actions against Greenpeace activists,[22][23] such as fines and
suspended sentences for destroying a test plot of genetically modified
wheat[24][25][26] and damaging the Nazca Lines, a UN World Heritage site in
Peru.[27]

## Contents

                    
                                                * 1 History
                              * 1.1 Origins
                                * 1.1.1 Founders and founding time of Greenpeace
                              * 1.2 After Amchitka
                              * 1.3 Organizational development
                            * 2 Organizational structure
                              * 2.1 Governance
                              * 2.2 Funding
                            * 3 Summary of priorities and campaigns
                            * 4 Climate and energy
                              * 4.1 Kingsnorth court case
                              * 4.2 "Go Beyond Oil"
                              * 4.3 Nuclear power
                                * 4.3.1 Anti-nuclear advertisement
                                * 4.3.2 EDF spying conviction and appeal
                              * 4.4 Cool IT Leaderboard
                              * 4.5 Ozone Layer and Greenfreeze
                            * 5 Forest campaign
                              * 5.1 Removal of an ancient tree
                              * 5.2 Wilmar International Palm Oil Issue
                            * 6 Tokyo Two
                            * 7 Genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
                              * 7.1 Greenpeace on golden rice
                            * 8 Toxic waste
                              * 8.1 Guide to Greener Electronics
                            * 9 Save the Arctic
                              * 9.1 In Norway
                            * 10 Ships
                              * 10.1 In service
                              * 10.2 Previously in service
                                * 10.2.1 First _Rainbow Warrior_
                                * 10.2.2 Second _Rainbow Warrior_
                                * 10.2.3 Others
                            * 11 Reactions and responses to Greenpeace activities
                            * 12 Criticism
                              * 12.1 Brent Spar tanker
                              * 12.2 Pascal Husting commute
                              * 12.3 Nazca Lines
                              * 12.4 Anti-whaling campaign in Norway in the 1990s
                              * 12.5 Open letter from Nobel laureates
                            * 13 See also
                            * 14 References
                            * 15 Further reading
                            * 16 External links
                    

## History[edit]

### Origins[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2b/AmchitkaAlaskaLoc.png/220px-

AmchitkaAlaskaLoc.png)

Location of Amchitka island in Alaska.

In the late 1960s, the U.S. had plans for an underground nuclear weapon test
in the tectonically unstable island of Amchitka in Alaska. Because of the 1964
Alaska earthquake, the plans raised some concerns of the test triggering
earthquakes and causing a tsunami. A 1969 demonstration of 7,000[28] people
blocked the Peace Arch Border Crossing between British Columbia and
Washington,[29] carrying signs reading "Don't Make A Wave. It's Your Fault If
Our Fault Goes".[30] The protests did not stop the U.S. from detonating the
bomb.[30]

While no earthquake or tsunami followed the test, the opposition grew when the
U.S. announced they would detonate a bomb five times more powerful than the
first one. Among the opposers were Jim Bohlen, a veteran who had served in the
U.S. Navy, and Irving Stowe and Dorothy Stowe, who had recently become
Quakers. As members of the Sierra Club Canada, they were frustrated by the
lack of action by the organization.[30] From Irving Stowe, Jim Bohlen learned
of a form of passive resistance, "bearing witness", where objectionable
activity is protested simply by mere presence.[30] Jim Bohlen's wife Marie
came up with the idea to sail to Amchitka, inspired by the anti-nuclear
voyages of Albert Bigelow in 1958. The idea ended up in the press and was
linked to The Sierra Club.[30] The Sierra Club did not like this connection
and in 1970 The Don't Make a Wave Committee was established for the protest.
Early meetings were held in the Shaughnessy home of Robert Hunter and his wife
Bobbi Hunter. Subsequently, the Stowe home at 2775 Courtenay Street
(Vancouver) became the headquarters.[31] As Rex Weyler put it in his
chronology, _Greenpeace_ , in 1969, Irving and Dorothy Stowe's "quiet home on
Courtenay Street would soon become a hub of monumental, global significance".
Some of the first Greenpeace meetings were held there. The first office was
opened in a backroom, storefront on Cypress and West Broadway SE corner in
Kitsilano, Vancouver.[32] Within half a year Greenpeace would move in to share
the upstairs office space with The Society Promoting Environmental
Conservation at 4th and Maple in Kitsilano.[33]

Irving Stowe arranged a benefit concert (supported by Joan Baez) that took
place on October 16, 1970 at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver.[34] The
concert created the financial basis for the first Greenpeace campaign.[35]
Amchitka, the 1970 concert that launched Greenpeace was published by
Greenpeace in November 2009 on CD and is also available as an mp3 download via
the Amchitka concert website. Using the money raised with the concert, the
Don't Make a Wave Committee chartered a ship, the _Phyllis Cormack_ owned and
sailed by John Cormack. The ship was renamed _Greenpeace_ for the protest
after a term coined by activist Bill Darnell.[30]

In the autumn of 1971, the ship sailed towards Amchitka and faced the U.S.
Coast Guard ship _Confidence_ [30] which forced the activists to turn back.
Because of this and the increasingly bad weather the crew decided to return to
Canada only to find out that the news about their journey and reported support
from the crew of the _Confidence_ had generated sympathy for their
protest.[30] After this Greenpeace tried to navigate to the test site with
other vessels, until the U.S. detonated the bomb.[30] The nuclear test was
criticized and the U.S. decided not to continue with their test plans at
Amchitka.

#### Founders and founding time of Greenpeace[edit]

Environmental historian Frank Zelko dates the formation of the "Don't Make a
Wave Committee" to 1969 and according to Jim Bohlen the group adopted the name
"Don't Make a Wave Committee" on 28 November 1969.[36] According to the
Greenpeace web site, The Don't Make a Wave Committee was established in
1970.[37] Certificate of incorporation of The Don't Make a Wave Committee
dates the incorporation to the fifth of October, 1970.[38] Researcher Vanessa
Timmer dates the official incorporation to 1971.[39] Greenpeace itself calls
the protest voyage of 1971 as "the beginning".[40] According to Patrick Moore,
who was an early member and has since distanced himself from Greenpeace, and
Rex Weyler, the name of "The Don't Make a Wave Committee" was officially
changed to Greenpeace Foundation in 1972.[38][41]

Vanessa Timmer has referred to the early members as "an unlikely group of
loosely organized protestors".[39] Frank Zelko has commented that "unlike
Friends of the Earth, for example, which sprung fully formed from the forehead
of David Brower, Greenpeace developed in a more evolutionary manner. There was
no single founder".[42] Greenpeace itself says on its web page that "there's a
joke that in any bar in Vancouver, British Columbia, you can sit down next to
someone who claims to have founded Greenpeace. In fact, there was no single
founder: name, idea, spirit and tactics can all be said to have separate
lineages".[37] Patrick Moore has said that "the truth is that Greenpeace was
always a work in progress, not something definitively founded like a country
or a company. Therefore there are a few shades of gray about who might lay
claim to being a founder of Greenpeace."[38] Early Greenpeace director Rex
Weyler says on his homepage that the insiders of Greenpeace have debated about
the founders since the mid-1970s.[43]

The current Greenpeace web site lists the founders of The Don't Make a Wave
Committee as Dorothy and Irving Stowe, Marie and Jim Bohlen, Ben and Dorothy
Metcalfe, and Robert Hunter.[37] According to both Patrick Moore and an
interview with Dorothy Stowe, Dorothy Metcalfe, Jim Bohlen and Robert Hunter,
the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee were Paul Cote, Irving and
Dorothy Stowe and Jim and Marie Bohlen.[38][44]

Paul Watson, founder of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society maintains that
he also was one of the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee and
Greenpeace.[45] Media sources concerning Watson report him being one of the
founders of Greenpeace,[46][47] with many articles reporting him being a
founder in 1972.[48][49][50][51] Patrick Moore has denied Watson being one of
the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee, and Greenpeace in 1972.
According to Moore the already campaigning organization was "simply changing
the name" in 1972.[38] Greenpeace has stated that Watson was an influential
early member, but not one of the founders of Greenpeace.[52] Watson has since
accused Greenpeace of rewriting their history.[45]

Because Patrick Moore was among the crew of the first protest voyage and the
beginning of the journey is often referred as the birthday of Greenpeace,
Moore also considers himself one of the founders.[38] Greenpeace used to list
Moore among "founders and first members"[53] but has later stated that while
Moore was a significant early member, he was not among the founders of
Greenpeace in 1970.[44][54]

On June 1, 2017, Donald Trump officially withdrew the United States from the
Paris Climate Accord, to date the world's most hopeful international treaty
addressing impending climate crisis. Without American leadership and
commitment, other first and second world nations are less likely to adhere to
its principles.[55]

### After Amchitka[edit]

After the office in the Stowe home, (and after the first concert fund-raiser)
Greenpeace functions moved to other private homes and held public meetings
weekly on Wednesday nights at the Kitsilano Neighborhood House before
settling, in the autumn of 1974, in a small office shared with the SPEC
environmental group at 2007 West 4th at Maple in Kitsilano. When the nuclear
tests at Amchitka were over, Greenpeace moved its focus to the French
atmospheric nuclear weapons testing at the Moruroa Atoll in French Polynesia.
The young organization needed help for their protests and were contacted by
David McTaggart, a former businessman living in New Zealand. In 1972 the yacht
_Vega_ , a 12.5-metre (41 ft) ketch owned by David McTaggart, was renamed
_Greenpeace III_ and sailed in an anti-nuclear protest into the exclusion zone
at Moruroa to attempt to disrupt French nuclear testing. This voyage was
sponsored and organized by the New Zealand branch of the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament.[56] The French Navy tried to stop the protest in several ways,
including assaulting David McTaggart. McTaggart was supposedly beaten to the
point that he lost sight in one of his eyes. However, one of McTaggart's crew
members photographed the incident and went public. After the assault was
publicized, France announced it would stop the atmospheric nuclear tests.[30]

In the mid-1970s some Greenpeace members started an independent campaign,
Project Ahab, against commercial whaling, since Irving Stowe was against
Greenpeace focusing on other issues than nuclear weapons.[57] After Irving
Stowe died in 1975, the _Phyllis Cormack_ sailed from Vancouver to face Soviet
whalers on the coast of California. Greenpeace activists disrupted the whaling
by placing themselves between the harpoons and the whales, and footage of the
protests spread across the world. Later in the 1970s, the organization widened
its focus to include toxic waste and commercial seal hunting.[30]

The "Greenpeace Declaration of Interdependence" was published by Greenpeace in
the _Greenpeace Chronicles_ (Winter 1976-77). This declaration was a
condensation of a number of ecological manifestos Bob Hunter had written over
the years.

### Organizational development[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Greenpeace_ship_%22Esperanza%22_off_Gravesend.jpg/220px-

Greenpeace_ship_%22Esperanza%22_off_Gravesend.jpg)

MV _Esperanza_ , a former fire-fighter owned by the Russian Navy, was
relaunched by Greenpeace in 2002

Greenpeace evolved from a group of Canadian and American protesters into a
less conservative group of environmentalists who were more reflective of the
counterculture and hippie youth movements of the 1960s and 1970s.[58] The
social and cultural background from which Greenpeace emerged heralded a period
of de-conditioning away from Old World antecedents and sought to develop new
codes of social, environmental and political behavior.[59][60]

In the mid-1970s independent groups using the name Greenpeace started
springing up worldwide. By 1977, there were 15 to 20 Greenpeace groups around
the world.[61] At the same time the Canadian Greenpeace office was heavily in
debt. Disputes between offices over fund-raising and organizational direction
split the global movement as the North American offices were reluctant to be
under the authority of the Vancouver office and its president Patrick
Moore.[61]

After the incidents of Moruroa Atoll, David McTaggart had moved to France to
battle in court with the French state and helped to develop the cooperation of
European Greenpeace groups.[30] David McTaggart lobbied the Canadian
Greenpeace Foundation to accept a new structure which would bring the
scattered Greenpeace offices under the auspices of a single global
organization. The European Greenpeace paid the debt of the Canadian Greenpeace
office and on October 14, 1979, **Greenpeace International** came into
existence.[39][61] Under the new structure, the local offices would contribute
a percentage of their income to the international organization, which would
take responsibility for setting the overall direction of the movement with
each regional office having one vote.[61] Some Greenpeace groups, namely
London Greenpeace (dissolved in 2001) and the US-based Greenpeace Foundation
(still operational) however decided to remain independent from Greenpeace
International.[62][63]

## Organizational structure[edit]

### Governance[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a3/GPIgovernance%26management.png/300px-

GPIgovernance%26management.png)

The governance and management structure of Greenpeace.

Greenpeace consists of _Greenpeace International_ (officially Stichting
Greenpeace Council) based in Amsterdam, Netherlands, and 26 regional offices
operating in 55 countries.[64] The regional offices work largely autonomously
under the supervision of Greenpeace International. The executive director of
Greenpeace is elected by the board members of Greenpeace International. The
current directors of Greenpeace International are Bunny McDiarmid and Jennifer
Morgan and the current Chair of the Board is Ana Toni.[65][66] Greenpeace has
a staff of 2,400[67] and 15,000 volunteers globally.[1]

Each regional office is led by a regional executive director elected by the
regional board of directors. The regional boards also appoint a trustee to The
Greenpeace International Annual General Meeting, where the trustees elect or
remove the board of directors of Greenpeace International. The role of the
annual general meeting is also to discuss and decide the overall principles
and strategically important issues for Greenpeace in collaboration with the
trustees of regional offices and Greenpeace International board of
directors.[68]

### Funding[edit]

Greenpeace receives its funding from individual supporters and
foundations.[5][7] Greenpeace screens all major donations in order to ensure
it does not receive unwanted donations.[69] The organization does not accept
money from governments, intergovernmental organizations, political parties or
corporations in order to avoid their influence.[5][7][69] However, Greenpeace
does receive money from the National Postcode Lottery, the biggest government-
sponsored lottery in the Netherlands

Donations from foundations which are funded by political parties or receive
most of their funding from governments or intergovernmental organizations are
rejected. Foundation donations are also rejected if the foundations attach
unreasonable conditions, restrictions or constraints on Greenpeace activities
or if the donation would compromise the independence and aims of
Greenpeace.[69] Since in the mid-1990s the number of supporters started to
decrease, Greenpeace pioneered the use of face-to-face fundraising where
fundraisers actively seek new supporters at public places, subscribing them
for a monthly direct debit donation.[70][71] In 2008, most of the €202.5
million received by the organization was donated by about 2.6 million regular
supporters, mainly from Europe.[67] In 2014, the annual revenue of Greenpeace
was reported to be about €300 million (US$400 million) although they lost
about €4 million (US$5 million) in currency speculation that year.[72]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/ba/DDC-GP.JPG/220px-DDC-

GP.JPG)

Greenpeace street fundraiser talking to a passer-by.

In September 2003, Public Interest Watch (PIW) complained to the Internal
Revenue Service that Greenpeace USA tax returns were inaccurate and in
violation of the law.[73][74] The IRS conducted an extensive review and
concluded in December 2005 that Greenpeace USA continued to qualify for its
tax-exempt status. In March 2006 _The Wall Street Journal_ reported that PIW's
"federal tax filing, covering August 2003 to July 2004, stated that $120,000
of the $124,095 the group received in contributions during that period came
from Exxon Mobil".[75] In 2013, after the IRS performed a follow-up audit,
which again was clean, and, following claims of politically motivated IRS
audits of groups affiliated with the Tea Party Movement, Greenpeace U.S.
Executive Director Phil Radford called for a Congressional investigation into
all politically motivated audits – including those allegedly targeting the Tea
Party Movement, the NAACP, and Greenpeace.[76]

## Summary of priorities and campaigns[edit]

On its International website, Greenpeace defines its mission as the following:
Greenpeace is an independent campaigning organisation, which uses non-violent,
creative confrontation to expose global environmental problems, and develop
solutions for a green and peaceful future. Our goal is to create a world where
all life on Earth can flourish. That means we work to:

            * Stop the planet from warming beyond 1.5º to prevent the most catastrophic impacts of the climate breakdown. 

            * Protect biodiversity in all its forms. 

            * Slow the volume of hyper-consumption and learn to live within our means. 

            * Promote renewable energy as a solution that can power the world. 

            * Nurture peace, global disarmament and non-violence. 

## Climate and energy[edit]

See also: climate and energy

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/38/Greenpeace_Climate_March_2015_Madrid.jpg/220px-

Greenpeace_Climate_March_2015_Madrid.jpg)

Greenpeace Climate March 2015 Madrid

Greenpeace was one of the first parties to formulate a sustainable development
scenario for climate change mitigation, which it did in 1993.[77] According to
sociologists Marc Mormont and Christine Dasnoy, Greenpeace played a
significant role in raising public awareness of global warming in the
1990s.[78] The organization has also focused on CFCs, because of both their
global warming potential and their effect on the ozone layer. Greenpeace was
one of the leading participants advocating early phase-out of ozone depleting
substances in the Montreal Protocol.[16] In the early 1990s, Greenpeace
developed a CFC-free refrigerator technology, "Greenfreeze" for mass
production together with the refrigerator industry.[16] United Nations
Environment Programme awarded Greenpeace for "outstanding contributions to the
protection of the Earth's ozone layer" in 1997.[79] In 2011 two fifths of the
world's total production of refrigerators were based on Greenfreeze
technology, with over 600 million units in use.[16][80]

Currently Greenpeace considers global warming to be the greatest environmental
problem facing the Earth.[81] Greenpeace calls for global greenhouse gas
emissions to peak in 2015 and to decrease as close to zero as possible by
2050. To reach these numbers, Greenpeace has called for the industrialized
countries to cut their emissions at least 40% by 2020 (from 1990 levels) and
to give substantial funding for developing countries to build a sustainable
energy capacity, to adapt to the inevitable consequences of global warming,
and to stop deforestation by 2020.[82] Together with EREC, Greenpeace has
formulated a global energy scenario, "Energy [R]evolution", where 80% of the
world's total energy is produced with renewables, and the emissions of the
energy sector are decreased by over 80% of the 1990 levels by 2050.[83]

Using direct action, Greenpeace has protested several times against coal by
occupying coal power plants and blocking coal shipments and mining operations,
in places such as New Zealand,[84] Svalbard,[85] Australia,[86] and the United
Kingdom.[87] Greenpeace is also critical of extracting petroleum from oil
sands and has used direct action to block operations at the Athabasca oil
sands in Canada.[88][89]

### Kingsnorth court case[edit]

In October 2007, six Greenpeace protesters were arrested for breaking into the
Kingsnorth power station, climbing the 200 metre smokestack, painting the name
Gordon on the chimney, and causing an estimated £30,000 damage. At their
subsequent trial they admitted trying to shut the station down, but argued
that they were legally justified because they were trying to prevent climate
change from causing greater damage to property elsewhere around the world.
Evidence was heard from David Cameron's environment adviser Zac Goldsmith,
climate scientist James E. Hansen and an Inuit leader from Greenland, all
saying that climate change was already seriously affecting life around the
world. The six activists were acquitted. It was the first case where
preventing property damage caused by climate change has been used as part of a
"lawful excuse" defense in court.[90] Both The Daily Telegraph and The
Guardian described the acquittal as embarrassment to the Brown
Ministry.[91][92] In December 2008 _The New York Times_ listed the acquittal
in its annual list of the most influential ideas of the year.[93]

### "Go Beyond Oil"[edit]

As part of their stance on renewable energy commercialisation, Greenpeace have
launched the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign.[94] The campaign is focused on slowing,
and eventually ending, the world's consumption of oil; with activist
activities taking place against companies that pursue oil drilling as a
venture. Much of the activities of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign have been
focused on drilling for oil in the Arctic and areas affected by the _Deepwater
Horizon_ disaster. The activities of Greenpeace in the arctic have mainly
involved the Edinburgh-based oil and gas exploration company, Cairn Energy;
and range from protests at the Cairn Energy's headquarters[95] to scaling
their oil rigs in an attempt to halt the drilling process.[96]

The "Go Beyond Oil" campaign also involves applying political pressure on the
governments who allow oil exploration in their territories; with the group
stating that one of the key aims of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign is to "work
to expose the lengths the oil industry is willing to go to squeeze the last
barrels out of the ground and put pressure on industry and governments to move
beyond oil."[94]

### Nuclear power[edit]

## Anti-nuclear movement

![Smiling Sun English

Language.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Smiling_Sun_English_Language.svg/100px-

Smiling_Sun_English_Language.svg.png)

By country

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * Austria
                            * Canada
                            * France
                            * Germany
                            * India
                            * Ireland
                            * Japan
                            * Kazakhstan
                            * New Zealand
                            * Philippines
                            * Poland
                            * Russia
                            * South Africa
                            * South Korea
                            * Spain
                            * Sweden
                            * Switzerland
                            * Taiwan
                            * Turkey
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                    

Lists

                    
                                                * Anti-nuclear advocates
                            * Anti-nuclear groups
                            * Protests by country
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Greenpeace is opposed to nuclear power because it views it as 'dangerous,
polluting, expensive and non-renewable'. The organization highlights the
Chernobyl nuclear disaster of 1986 and Fukushima nuclear disaster of 2011 as
evidence of the risk nuclear power can pose to peoples lives, the environment
and the economy.[97] Greenpeace views the benefits of nuclear power to be
relatively minor in comparison to its major problems and risks, such as
environmental damage and risks from uranium mining, nuclear weapons
proliferation, and unresolved questions concerning nuclear waste.[98] The
organization argues that the potential of nuclear power to mitigate global
warming is marginal, referring to the IEA energy scenario where an increase in
world's nuclear capacity from 2608 TWh in 2007 to 9857 TWh by 2050 would cut
global greenhouse gas emissions less than 5% and require 32 nuclear reactor
units of 1000MW capacity built per year until 2050. According to Greenpeace
the slow construction times, construction delays, and hidden costs, all negate
the mitigation potential of nuclear power. This makes the IEA scenario
technically and financially unrealistic. They also argue that binding massive
amounts of investments on nuclear energy would take funding away from more
effective solutions.[83] Greenpeace views the construction of Olkiluoto 3
nuclear power plant in Finland as an example of the problems on building new
nuclear power.[99]

#### Anti-nuclear advertisement[edit]

In 1994, Greenpeace published an anti-nuclear newspaper advert which included
a claim that nuclear facilities Sellafield would kill 2,000 people in the next
10 years, and an image of a hydrocephalus-affected child said to be a victim
of nuclear weapons testing in Kazakhstan. Advertising Standards Authority
viewed the claim concerning Sellafield as unsubstantiated, and ASA did not
accept that the child's condition was caused by radiation. This resulted in
the banning of the advert. Greenpeace did not admit fault, stating that a
Kazakhstan doctor had said that the child's condition was due to nuclear
testing. Adam Woolf from Greenpeace also stated that, "fifty years ago there
were many experts who would be lined up and swear there was no link between
smoking and bad health."[100] The UN has estimated that the nuclear weapon
tests in Kazakhstan caused about 100,000 people to suffer over three
generations.[101]

#### EDF spying conviction and appeal[edit]

In 2011, a French court fined Électricité de France (EDF) €1.5m and jailed two
senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's
computer systems. Greenpeace was awarded €500,000 in damages.[102] Although
EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to monitor Greenpeace,
the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of EDF's nuclear
security operation for three years each. EDF appealed the conviction, the
company was cleared of conspiracy to spy on Greenpeace and the fine was
cancelled.[103] Two employees of the security firm, Kargus, run by a former
member of France's secret services, received sentences of three and two years
respectively.[104]

### Cool IT Leaderboard[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This section's **tone or style may not reflect theencyclopedic tone used on
Wikipedia**. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.
_( October 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

In May 2009, Greenpeace started evaluating IT companies through Cool IT
Leaderboard. The central role these companies are playing gives the
opportunity to drive changes in the energy sector and achieve a significant
reduction in the greenhouse gases that cause the climate change.

The Leaderboard examines how the leading IT companies can use their influence
to drive these changes, which in the 6th edition the sector shows slow but
steady improvements in offering new solution that may achieve important
progress. There are companies willing to make major investments to drive clean
energy deployment and the number of companies that are increasing their
commitment, betting for renewable energies, is also growing.

Big companies such as Google, Wipro, Sprint and Softbank have prioritized
changing the laws and policies that govern the energy system and incentivise
investments in advanced energy efficiency technologies and renewable energy
that will have a critical impact in many countries to determine a meaningful
break in energy policies.

In the Leaderboard we can find one main ranking with the overall scores and
another three rankings for each one of the evaluated areas where we can find
the top companies contributing in each.[105]

### Ozone Layer and Greenfreeze[edit]

The Ozone layers surrounding the Earth absorb significant amounts of
ultraviolet radiation. A 1976 report by the US Academy of Sciences supported
the ozone "depletion hypothesis."[106] Its suffering large losses from
chlorinated and nitrogenous compounds was reported in 1985.[107] Earlier
studies had led some countries to enact bans on aerosol sprays, so that the
Vienna Convention was signed in 1985[108] the Montreal Protocol was signed in
1987 to go in force two years later.[109] The use of CFCs and HCFCs in
refrigeration were and are among the banned technologies. A German
technological institute developed an ozone-safe hydrocarbon alternative
refrigerant which came to a Greenpeace campaigner's attention in around
1992.[110][111] The rights to the technology were donated to Greenpeace, which
maintained it as an open source patent. With industry resistance, Greenpeace
was able to rescue and engage a former East German manufacturer near closure.
Greenpeace's resourceful outreach and marketing resulted in the technologies
rapid widespread production in Germany, followed by the banning of CFC
technology. They then succeeded in getting Greenfreeze used in China and
elsewhere in Europe, and after some years in Japan and South America, and
finally in the US by 2012.

## Forest campaign[edit]

Greenpeace aims to protect intact primary forests from deforestation and
degradation with the target of zero deforestation by 2020. Greenpeace has
accused several corporations, such as Unilever,[112] Nike,[113] KFC, Kit Kat
and McDonald's[114] of having links to the deforestation of the tropical
rainforests, resulting in policy changes in several of the companies under
criticism.[115][116][117] Greenpeace, together with other environmental NGOs,
also campaigned for ten years for the EU to ban import of illegal timber. The
EU decided to ban illegal timber in July 2010.[118] As deforestation
contributes to global warming, Greenpeace has demanded that REDD (Reduced
Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) should be included in the
climate treaty following the Kyoto treaty.[119]

Another Greenpeace movement concerning the rain forests is discouraging palm
oil industries.[120] The movement has been the most active in Indonesia where
already 6 million hectares are used for palm oil plantation and has plans for
another 4 million hectares by 2015. Acknowledging that mass production of palm
oil may be disastrous on biodiversity of forests, Greenpeace is actively
campaigning against the production, urging the industries and the government
to turn to other forms of energy resources. One of the positive results of the
campaign was GAR(Golden Agri-Resources),[121] the world's second largest palm
oil production company, deciding to commit itself to forest conservation. The
company signed an agreement which prevents them from developing plantations in
areas where large amounts of carbon are locked up.

On the promotional side, an example of Greenpeace's success in the area is a
viral video from 2016 protesting Nestlé's use of palm oil in Kit Kat bars. The
video received over 1 million views, and resulted in a public statement by
Nestlé claiming to no longer use such practices in their products.[122] In
2018, Greenpeace released an animated short starring a fictional orangutan
named Rang-tan ahead of the World Orangutan Day.[123] In November 2018, UK's
Clearcast have denied a version of Rang-tan video as submitted by Iceland
Foods Ltd.[124]

### Removal of an ancient tree[edit]

In June 1995, Greenpeace took a trunk of a tree from the forests of the
proposed national park of Koitajoki[125] in Ilomantsi, Finland and put it on
display at exhibitions held in Austria and Germany. Greenpeace said in a press
conference that the tree was originally from a logged area in the ancient
forest which was supposed to be protected. Metsähallitus accused Greenpeace of
theft and said that the tree was from a normal forest and had been left
standing because of its old age. Metsähallitus also said that the tree had
actually crashed over a road during a storm.[126] The incident received
publicity in Finland, for example in the large newspapers _Helsingin Sanomat_
and _Ilta-Sanomat_.[127] Greenpeace replied that the tree had fallen down
because the protective forest around it had been clearcut, and that they
wanted to highlight the fate of old forests in general, not the fate of one
particular tree.[128] Greenpeace also highlighted that Metsähallitus admitted
the value of the forest afterwards as Metsähallitus currently refers to
Koitajoki as a distinctive area because of its old growth forests.[129][130]

### Wilmar International Palm Oil Issue[edit]

June 25, 2018 – After an investigation conducted by Greenpeace International,
it has been revealed that Wilmar International (the world's largest palm oil
trader) is still linked to forest destruction in the Indonesian province of
Papua. The deforestation conducted by Gama (a palm oil business run by senior
Wilmar executives) has reached twice the size of Paris. Greenpeace is also
calling Wilmar out for breaking the commitment to end deforestation policy
signed by Wilmar in December 2013 where they promise to incorporate organic
and sustainable ways to collect palm oil.[131]

Global head of Greenpeace on Southeast Asia, Kiki Taufik, argues that “Wilmar
must immediately cut off all palm oil suppliers that can’t prove they aren’t
destroying rainforests.” He also added that “Wilmar has been trading Gama’s
oil all over the world, including top brands like P&G, Nestlé and Unilever.
Brands cannot let this deception pass unchallenged and have no choice but to
suspend all business with Wilmar until it can prove it only trades clean palm
oil from responsible producers.” [132]

Until now, Wilmar's executives have only denied the accusation labeling them
as “false” and are not taking any blame on them. The debate reminds unsolved.

## Tokyo Two[edit]

Main article: Tokyo Two

In 2008, two Greenpeace anti-whaling activists, Junichi Sato and Toru Suzuki,
stole a case of whale meat from a delivery depot in Aomori prefecture, Japan.
Their intention was to expose what they considered embezzlement of the meat
collected during whale hunts. After a brief investigation of their allegations
was ended, Sato and Suzuki were arrested and charged with theft and
trespassing.[133] Amnesty International said that the arrests and following
raids on Greenpeace Japan office and homes of five of Greenpeace staff members
were aimed at intimidating activists and non-governmental organizations.[134]
They were convicted of theft and trespass in September 2010 by the Aomori
district court.

## Genetically modified organisms (GMOs)[edit]

Greenpeace has also supported the rejection of GM food from the US in famine-
stricken Zambia as long as supplies of non-genetically engineered grain exist,
stating that the US "should follow in the European Union's footsteps and allow
aid recipients to choose their food aid, buying it locally if they wish. This
practice can stimulate developing economies and creates more robust food
security", adding that, "if Africans truly have no other alternative, the
controversial GE maize should be milled so it can't be planted. It was this
condition that allowed Zambia's neighbours Zimbabwe and Malawi to accept
it."[135] After Zambia banned all GM food aid, the former agricultural
minister of Zambia criticized, "how the various international NGOs that have
spoken approvingly of the government's action will square the body count with
their various consciences."[136] Concerning the decision of Zambia, Greenpeace
has stated that, "it was obvious to us that if no non-GM aid was being offered
then they should absolutely accept GM food aid. But the Zambian government
decided to refuse the GM food. We offered our opinion to the Zambian
government and, as many governments do, they disregarded our advice."[137]

### Greenpeace on golden rice[edit]

Greenpeace opposes the planned use of golden rice, a variety of _Oryza sativa_
rice produced through genetic engineering to biosynthesize beta-carotene, a
precursor of pro-vitamin A in the edible parts of rice. The addition of beta-
carotene to the rice is seen as preventative to loss of sight in poverty
stricken countries where golden rice is intended for distribution. According
to Greenpeace, golden rice has not managed to do anything about malnutrition
for 10 years during which alternative methods are already tackling
malnutrition. The alternative proposed by Greenpeace is to discourage mono-
cropping and to increase production of crops which are naturally nutrient-rich
(containing other nutrients not found in golden rice in addition to beta-
carotene). Greenpeace argues that resources should be spent on programs that
are already working and helping to relieve malnutrition.[138]

The renewal of these concerns coincided with the publication of a paper in the
journal _Nature_ about a version of golden rice with much higher levels of
beta carotene.[139] This "golden rice 2" was developed and patented by
Syngenta, which provoked Greenpeace to renew its allegation that the project
is driven by profit motives and to serve as propaganda aimed at increasing
public opinion of GMO products.[140][141]

Although Greenpeace had stated that the true efficiency of the golden rice
program in treating malnourished populations was its primary concern as early
as 2001,[142] statements from March and April 2005 also continued to express
concern over human health and environmental safety.[143][144] In particular,
Greenpeace has expressed concern over the lack of safety testing being done on
GMO crops such as golden rice and of "playing with the lives of people...using
Golden Rice to promote more GMOs".[140]

In June 2016, a conglomeration of 107 Nobel Laureates signed an open
letter[21] urging Greenpeace to end its campaign against genetically modified
crops and Golden Rice in particular.[145][146] In the letter, they also called
upon governments of the world to "do everything in their power to oppose
Greenpeace's actions and accelerate the access of farmers to all the tools of
modern biology, especially seeds improved through biotechnology." The letter
states that "Opposition based on emotion and dogma contradicted by data must
be stopped."[21] Greenpeace responded stating that "Accusations that anyone is
blocking genetically engineered 'Golden' rice are false" and that they support
"...investing in climate-resilient ecological agriculture and empowering
farmers to access a balanced and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money
down the drain for GE 'Golden' rice."[147]

## Toxic waste[edit]

In July 2011, Greenpeace released its Dirty Laundry report accusing some of
the world's top fashion and sportswear brands of releasing toxic waste into
China's rivers.[148] The report profiles the problem of water pollution
resulting from the release of toxic chemicals associated with the country's
textile industry. Investigations focused on wastewater discharges from two
facilities in China; one belonging to the Youngor Group located on the Yangtze
River Delta and the other to Well Dyeing Factory Ltd. located on a tributary
of the Pearl River Delta. Scientific analysis of samples from both facilities
revealed the presence of hazardous and persistent hormone disruptor chemicals,
including alkylphenols, perfluorinated compounds and perfluorooctane
sulfonate.

The report goes on to assert that the Youngor Group and Well Dyeing Factory
Ltd. - the two companies behind the facilities - have commercial relationships
with a range of major clothing brands, including Abercrombie & Fitch, Adidas,
Bauer Hockey, Calvin Klein, Converse, Cortefiel, H&M, Lacoste, Li Ning,
Metersbonwe Group, Nike, Phillips-Van Heusen and Puma AG.

In 2013, Greenpeace launched the "Detox Fashion" campaign, which signed up
some fashion brands to stop the discharge of toxic chemicals into rivers as a
result of the production of their clothes.[149]

### Guide to Greener Electronics[edit]

In August 2006, Greenpeace released the first edition of Guide to Greener
Electronics, a magazine where mobile and PC manufacturers were ranked for
their green performance, mainly based in the use of toxic materials in their
products and e-waste.[150] In November 2011, the criteria were updated, as the
industry had progressed since 2006, with the objective to get companies to set
goals for greenhouse gas reduction, the use of renewable power up to 100
percent, producing long lasting products free of hazardous substances and
increasing sustainable practices. To ensure the transparency of the ranking
the companies are assessed based only on their public information. For proving
companies' policies and practices, Greenpeace uses chemical testing of
products, reports from industry observers, media reports and testing of
consumer programs to check if they match with their actions. Since the Guide
was released in 2006, along with other similar campaigns has driven numerous
improvements, when companies ranked eliminate toxic chemicals from their
products and improve their recycling schemes. The last published edition of
Guide to Greener Electronics was in 2017. The 2017 version included 17 major
IT companies and ranked them on three criteria: energy use, resource
consumption and chemical elimination.[151]

## Save the Arctic[edit]

Main article: Save the Arctic

In continuity of the successful campaign to reach the Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, in 2012 and 2013 protests with "Save the Arctic" banners were
started. To stop oil- and gas-drilling, industrial fishing and military
operations in the Arctic region completely, a "global sanctuary in the high
arctic" was demanded from the World leaders at the UN General Assembly: "We
want them to pass a UN resolution expressing international concern for the
Arctic." A resolution to protect the very vulnerable wildlife and
ecosystem.[152] 30 _Arctic Sunrise_ activists were arrested in the Pechora
Sea, 19 September 2013, witnessing oil-drilling and protesting at the Gazprom
platform Prirazlomnaya by the Russian Coast Guard.[153] Greenpeace members
were originally charged with Piracy, then later downgraded to hooliganism,
before being dropped altogether following the passage of an amnesty law by the
Russian government.[154]

In July 2014, Greenpeace launched a global boycott campaign to persuade Lego
to cease producing toys carrying the oil company Shell's logo in response to
Shell's plans to drill for oil in the Arctic.[155] Lego's partnership with
Shell dates back to the 1960s, although the LEGO company created a fictional
oil company called Octan. Octan has appeared in countless sets, computer and
console games, can be seen at Legoland parks, and is featured as the
corporation headed by the villain President Business in The Lego Movie.[156]

### In Norway[edit]

There is a conflict over oil rigs in the Arctic Ocean between the Norwegian
Government and Greenpeace. In 2013, three activists of Greenpeace got on a
Statoil's oil rig, wearing bear suits. According to a spokesman from
Greenpeace Russia, they stayed on the rig for about three hours. The activists
in bear suits "were escorted" to the shore. Statoil reportedly did not intend
to file a suit against them.[157]

Greenpeace had argued that Statoil's drilling plans posed a threat to Bear
Island, an uninhabited wildlife sanctuary that is home to rare species
including polar bears, because an oil spill would be nearly impossible to
clean up in the Arctic because of the harsh conditions.[158] Greenpeace
regards the petroleum activities of Statoil as "illegal".[159] Statoil denies
the Greenpeace statement. According to The Maritime Executive (2014),[160]
Statoil says "Statoil respects people's right to make a legal protest, and we
feel it is important to have a democratic debate around the oil industry. We
have established robust plans for the operation, and feel confident they can
be carried out safely and without accidents."

On May 27, 2014, Greenpeace's ship, MV _Esperanza_ , took over Transocean
Spitsbergen, oil rig of Statoil[161] in the Barents Sea such that it became
incapable of operating. After that, the manager of Greenpeace Norway Norway
Truls Gulowsen answered a phone interview, stating that "Five protesters left
the rig by helicopter last night and three returned to a nearby Greenpeace
ship."[162] There were seven more protesters on the rig at the time, but the
Norwegian police could not remove them immediately because the rig was a flag
of convenience ship registered in the Marshall Islands and thus regarded as a
ship in the open sea, as long as it did not begin drilling. On May 29,
however, the seven activists from Greenpeace were peacefully captured by
Norwegian police on the rig. Soon after, according to Reuters, all the
activists were set free without any fine. On May 30, the Norwegian Coast Guard
finally towed away _Esperanza_ , though in the morning Greenpeace submitted a
plea on which more than 80,000 signatures to the Norwegian Environment
Minister Tine Sundtoft in Oslo were written. Norwegian government and police
reportedly allowed the coast guard to tow the Greenpeace ship.[163]

The Norwegian police stated that Statoil asked Greenpeace to stop preventing
its activities, but Greenpeace ignored the warning. The police have stated
that Greenpeace's interference with the petroleum activities of Statoil was
the contrary to Norwegian law and ordered Greenpeace to leave the Barents Sea
site.[159] Statoil said delays to the start of drilling cost the company about
$1.26 million per day.[163]

According to Reuters, Statoil was slated to begin drilling "three oil wells in
the Apollo, Atlantis and Mercury prospects in the Hoop area, [which is] some
300 km away from the mainland [of Norway]" in the summer of 2014. Greenpeace
has continued to criticize the big oil company for their "green wash," arguing
that Statoil hid the truth that it is doing the risky oil drilling by holding
"Lego League" with Lego and distracting people's attention to the company's
project, and it also argues that Statoil has to alter its attitude toward
environments[164] (Norway's News in English 2014).

## Ships[edit]

Since Greenpeace was founded, seagoing ships have played a vital role in its
campaigns.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/AS_helsinki.jpg/200px-

AS_helsinki.jpg)

Greenpeace's ship MV _Arctic Sunrise_ in the harbour of Helsinki.

### In service[edit]

                    
                                                * _Rainbow Warrior_ is the third vessel to bear the name. Launched in 2011, it is sometimes referred to as _Rainbow Warrior III_.[165]
                            * MV _Arctic Sunrise_
                            * MV _Esperanza_
                    

### Previously in service[edit]

#### First _Rainbow Warrior_ [edit]

Main article: _Rainbow Warrior_ (1955)

See also: Sinking of the _Rainbow Warrior_

In 1978, Greenpeace launched the original _Rainbow Warrior_ , a 40-metre (130
ft), former fishing trawler named after the book _Warriors of the Rainbow_ ,
which inspired early activist Robert Hunter on the first voyage to Amchitka.
Greenpeace purchased the _Rainbow Warrior_ (originally launched as the _Sir
William Hardy_ in 1955) at a cost of £40,000. Volunteers restored and refitted
it over a period of four months. First deployed to disrupt the hunt of the
Icelandic whaling fleet, the _Rainbow Warrior_ would quickly become a mainstay
of Greenpeace campaigns. Between 1978 and 1985, crew members also engaged in
direct action against the ocean-dumping of toxic and radioactive waste, the
grey seal hunt in Orkney and nuclear testing in the Pacific. In May 1985, the
vessel was instrumental for 'Operation Exodus', the evacuation of about 300
Rongelap Atoll islanders whose home had been contaminated with nuclear fallout
from a US nuclear test two decades earlier which had never been cleaned up and
was still having severe health effects on the locals.[166]

Later in 1985 the _Rainbow Warrior_ was to lead a flotilla of protest vessels
into the waters surrounding Moruroa atoll, site of French nuclear testing. The
sinking of the _Rainbow Warrior_ occurred when the French government secretly
bombed the ship in Auckland harbour on orders from François Mitterrand
himself. This killed Dutch freelance photographer Fernando Pereira, who
thought it was safe to enter the boat to get his photographic material after a
first small explosion, but drowned as a result of a second, larger
explosion.[167] The attack was a public relations disaster for France after it
was quickly exposed by the New Zealand police. The French Government in 1987
agreed to pay New Zealand compensation of NZ$13 million and formally
apologised for the bombing. The French Government also paid ₣2.3 million
compensation to the family of the photographer. Later, in 2001, when the
Institute of Cetacean Research of Japan called Greenpeace "eco-terrorists",
Gert Leipold, then Executive Director of Greenpeace, detested the claim,
saying "calling non violent protest terrorism insults those who were injured
or killed in the attacks of real terrorists, including Fernando Pereira,
killed by State terrorism in the 1985 attack on the _Rainbow Warrior_ ".[168]

#### Second _Rainbow Warrior_ [edit]

Main article: _Rainbow Warrior_ (1957)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/38/Greenpeace_Rainbow_Warrior.jpg/200px-

Greenpeace_Rainbow_Warrior.jpg)

Greenpeace's second _Rainbow Warrior_ ship arrives in Bali for the 2007 UN
climate conference.

In 1989 Greenpeace commissioned a replacement Rainbow Warrior vessel,
sometimes referred to as _Rainbow Warrior II_. It retired from service on 16
August 2011, to be replaced by the third generation vessel. In 2005 the
_Rainbow Warrior II_ ran aground on and damaged the Tubbataha Reef in the
Philippines while inspecting the reef for coral bleaching. Greenpeace was
fined US$7,000 for damaging the reef and agreed to pay the fine saying they
felt responsible for the damage, although Greenpeace stated that the
Philippines government had given it outdated charts. The park manager of
Tubbataha appreciated the quick action Greenpeace took to assess the damage to
the reef.[169]

#### Others[edit]

                    
                                                * MV _Sirius_
                            * MV _Solo_
                            * MV _Greenpeace_
                            * MV _Gondwana_
                            * MV _Beluga_ (in German)
                    

## Reactions and responses to Greenpeace activities[edit]

Lawsuits have been filed against Greenpeace for lost profits,[170] reputation
damage[171] and "sailormongering".[172] In 2004 it was revealed that the
Australian government was willing to offer a subsidy to Southern Pacific
Petroleum on the condition that the oil company would take legal action
against Greenpeace, which had campaigned against the Stuart Oil Shale
Project.[173]

Some corporations, such as Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Électricité de France
have reacted to Greenpeace campaigns by spying on Greenpeace activities and
infiltrating Greenpeace offices.[174][175] Greenpeace activists have also been
targets of phone tapping, death threats, violence[39] and even state terrorism
in the case of the bombing of the _Rainbow Warrior_.[176][177]

## Criticism[edit]

Main article: Criticism of Greenpeace

Canadian ecologist Patrick Moore, an early Greenpeace member, left the
organization in 1986 when it, according to Moore, decided to support a
universal ban on chlorine[178] in drinking water.[19] Moore has argued that
Greenpeace today is motivated by politics rather than science and that none of
his "fellow directors had any formal science education".[19] Bruce Cox,
Director of Greenpeace Canada, responded that Greenpeace has never demanded a
universal chlorine ban and that Greenpeace does not oppose use of chlorine in
drinking water or in pharmaceutical uses, adding that "Mr. Moore is alone in
his recollection of a fight over chlorine and/or use of science as his reason
for leaving Greenpeace."[179] Paul Watson, an early member of Greenpeace has
said that Moore "uses his status as a so-called co-founder of Greenpeace to
give credibility to his accusations. I am also a co-founder of Greenpeace and
I have known Patrick Moore for 35 years.[...] Moore makes accusations that
have no basis in fact".[180] More recently Moore has been particularly
critical of Greenpeace's stance on golden rice, an issue where Moore has been
joined by other environmentalists such as Mark Lynas,[181] claiming that
Greenpeace has "waged a campaign of misinformation, trashed the scientists who
are working to bring Golden Rice to the people who need it, and supported the
violent destruction of Golden Rice field trials."[182]

Patrick Moore also reversed his position on nuclear power in 1976,[183] first
opposing it and now supporting it.[184][185][186] In Australian newspaper _The
Age_ , he writes "Greenpeace is wrong—we must consider nuclear power".[187] He
argues that any realistic plan to reduce reliance on fossil fuels or
greenhouse gas emissions need increased use of nuclear energy.[184] Phil
Radford, Executive Director of Greenpeace US responded that nuclear energy is
too risky, takes too long to build to address climate change, and claims that
most countries, including the U.S., could shift to nearly 100% renewable
energy while phasing out nuclear power by 2050.[188][189]

A French journalist under the pen name Olivier Vermont wrote in his book _La
Face cachée de Greenpeace_ ("The Hidden Face of Greenpeace") that he had
joined Greenpeace France and had worked there as a secretary. According to
Vermont he found misconduct, and continued to find it, from Amsterdam to the
International office. Vermont said he found classified documents[190]
according to which half of the organization's €180 million revenue was used
for the organization's salaries and structure. He also accused Greenpeace of
having unofficial agreements with polluting companies where the companies paid
Greenpeace to keep them from attacking the company's image.[191] Animal
protection magazine _Animal People_ reported in March 1997 that Greenpeace
France and Greenpeace International had sued Olivier Vermont and his publisher
Albin Michel for issuing "defamatory statements, untruths, distortions of the
facts and absurd allegations".[192]

Writing in _Cosmos_ , journalist Wilson da Silva reacted to Greenpeace's
destruction of a genetically modified wheat crop in Ginninderra as another
sign that the organization has "lost its way" and had degenerated into a "sad,
dogmatic, reactionary phalanx of anti-science zealots who care not for
evidence, but for publicity".[193]

### Brent Spar tanker[edit]

Research published in natural science journal _Nature_ accused Greenpeace of
not caring for facts, when it criticized the dumping of the Brent Spar tanker,
and accused the group of exaggerating the volume of oil that was stored in the
tanker.[194] Greenpeace had claimed that the tanker contained 5,500 tonnes of
crude oil, while Shell estimated it only contained 50 tonnes.[195] However,
the measurements had been made under duress during a protest occupation of the
platform, since Shell had refused permission, and Greenpeace activists had
been under attack by water cannons and the like.[196][197] The BBC issued an
apology to Greenpeace for having reported that the NGO lied.[198]

Shell UK took three years to evaluate the disposal options, concluding that
the disposal of the tanker in the deep ocean was the "Best Practicable
Environmental Option" (BPEO), an option which gained some support within some
portion of the scientific community, as it was found by some to be of
"negligible" environmental impact.[195] British government and Oslo and Paris
Commissions (OSPAR) accepted the solution.[195]

The resulting NGO campaign against Shell's proposals included letters,
boycotts which even escalated to vandalism in Germany, and lobbying at
intergovernmental conferences. Binding moratoriums supporting Greenpeace's,
ecosystem protection, and the precautionary principle position were issued in
more than one intergovernmental meeting, and at the 1998 OSPAR Convention, WWF
presented a study of toxic effects on deep sea ecosystems. The meeting
confirmed a general prohibition on ocean dumping.[199] Shell had transported
the rig to the dumping site, but in the last hours canceled the operation and
announced that it had failed in communicating its plans sufficiently to the
public, admitting they had underestimated the strength of public opinion.[195]
In January, 1998, Shell issued a new BPEO indicating recycling the rig as a
quay in Norway.[200]

In 1999, the Brent Spar container was decommissioned and one side issue that
emerged was that the legs of the structure were found to contain cold-water
coral species ( _Lophelia pertusa_ ). As a result, the possibility was
suggested of keeping the legs of such platforms on the sea bed in future, to
serve as habitat.[195][201][202] A Greenpeace representative opposed the
suggestion, citing the fact that the reefs formed by the coral are at risk,
not the coral itself, and that such a move would not promote development of
such reefs, and expose coral species to toxic substances found in oil.[203]

### Pascal Husting commute[edit]

In 2013 reports noted that Pascal Husting, the director of Greenpeace
International's "international programme" was commuting 400 km (250 miles) to
work by plane, despite Greenpeace's activism to reduce air travel due to
carbon footprint.[204][205][206] Greenpeace has said "the growth in aviation
is ruining our chances of stopping dangerous climate change".[207] After a
"public uproar" Greenpeace announced that Husting would commute by
train.[208][209]

### Nazca Lines[edit]

In December 2014, Greenpeace activists damaged rock related to the Nazca Lines
in Peru while setting up a banner within the lines of one of the famed
geoglyphs, and there were concerns that the harm might be irreparable. The
activists damaged an area around the hummingbird by walking near the glyph
without regulation footwear. Access to the area around the lines is strictly
prohibited and[27][210] special shoes must be worn to avoid damaging the UN
World Heritage site. Greenpeace claimed the activists were "absolutely careful
to protect the Nazca lines,"[211] but this is contradicted by video and
photographs showing the activists wearing conventional shoes (not special
protective shoes) while walking on the site.[212][213] Greenpeace has
apologized to the Peruvian people,[214] but Loise Jamie Castillo, Peru's Vice
Minister of Cultural Heritage called the apology "a joke", because Greenpeace
refused to identify the vandals or accept responsibility.[215] Culture
Minister Diana Álvarez-Calderón said that evidence gathered during an
investigation by the government will be used as part of a legal suit against
Greenpeace. "The damage done is irreparable and the apologies offered by the
environmental group aren't enough," she said at a news conference.[27] By
January, 2015, Greenpeace had presented statements of four members of the NGO
involved in the action.[216]

### Anti-whaling campaign in Norway in the 1990s[edit]

During the 1990s Greenpeace conducted many anti-whaling expeditions in Norway.
The criticism was that Greenpeace only campaigned against whales to gain
economic donations from the US economy, and it had little to do with saving
the environment. For example, shark hunting is a more pressing issue, but
since sharks are widely feared in the United States, activism to help sharks
doesn't receive as much financial support. Greenpeace has rejected this claim.
However, in Norwegian Newspaper Dagbladet on 11 April 2015 Kumi Naidoo
admitted that the anti-whale campaign was a "miscalculation".[217] Greenpeace
holds that whaling was only resumed by Norway after the IWC ban because of
political election motives, and faces many explicit hurdles, including
decreased demand in Japan and toxic chemical contamination.[218]

### Open letter from Nobel laureates[edit]

In June 2016, 107 Nobel laureates signed an open letter[21] urging Greenpeace
to end its opposition to genetically modified organisms (GMOs).[219] The
letter stated: "We urge Greenpeace and its supporters to re-examine the
experience of farmers and consumers worldwide with crops and foods improved
through biotechnology, recognize the findings of authoritative scientific
bodies and regulatory agencies, and abandon their campaign against "GMOs" in
general and Golden Rice in particular. Scientific and regulatory agencies
around the world have repeatedly and consistently found crops and foods
improved through biotechnology to be as safe as, if not safer than those
derived from any other method of production. There has never been a single
confirmed case of a negative health outcome for humans or animals from their
consumption. Their environmental impacts have been shown repeatedly to be less
damaging to the environment, and a boon to global biodiversity." The Nobel
laureates also called upon governments of the world to "do everything in their
power to oppose Greenpeace's actions and accelerate the access of farmers to
all the tools of modern biology, especially seeds improved through
biotechnology." The letter goes on to say that "Opposition based on emotion
and dogma contradicted by data must be stopped."[21] Greenpeace responded
stating that "Accusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered
'Golden' rice are false" and that they support "[...] investing in climate-
resilient ecological agriculture and empowering farmers to access a balanced
and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money down the drain for GE 'Golden'
rice."[147]

The Nobel laureate letter was criticised by Silvia Ribeiro of the ETC Group,
calling it more of "a propaganda tirade from transgenic companies than
scientists presenting a position," and arguing against its claimed
benefits.[220]

## See also[edit]

                    
                                                * 350.org
                            * Climate Reality Project
                            * European Renewable Energy Council
                            * Friends of Nature
                            * Fund for Wild Nature
                            * _How to Change the World_ (2015 documentary film about Greenpeace)
                            * Sea Shepherd Conservation Society
                            * World Wide Fund for Nature
                    

## References[edit]

                    
                                                1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Greenpeace International home page, Get involved". Greenpeace.org. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            2. **^** Liddick, Don (2006). _Eco-terrorism: Radical Environmental and Animal Liberation Movements_. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 16–. ISBN 978-0-275-98535-6.
                            3. **^** "United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, NGO Branch". Esango.un.org. 24 February 2010. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            4. **^** Background – January 7, 2010 (7 January 2010). "Greenpeace International: Greenpeace worldwide". Greenpeace.org. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Background – January 8, 2009 (8 January 2009). "Greenpeace International FAQ: Questions about Greenpeace in general". Greenpeace.org. Archived from the original on 11 April 2010. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            6. **^** "Greenpeace Protesters Paint Field of Genetically Altered Soybeans". Associated Press. 10 October 1996. Retrieved  10 October 2016.
                            7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Sarah Jane Gilbert (8 September 2008). "Harvard Business School, HBS Cases: The Value of Environmental Activists". Hbswk.hbs.edu. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            8. **^** Greenpeace, Annual Report 2011 (pdf)
                            9. **^** "List of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council as of 1 September 2011" (PDF). Retrieved 23 November 2012.
                            10. **^** "International Non-Governmental Organisations Accountability Charter: Charter Background". Ingoaccountabilitycharter.org. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            11. **^** Henry Mintzberg & Frances Westley – Sustaining the Institutional Environment _BNET.com_
                            12. **^** Canada: A People's History – Greenpeace _CBC_
                            13. **^** EU commissioner hails blockade on waste ship [ _permanent dead link_ ] _EUbusiness_ , 28 September 2006
                            14. **^** Marc Mormont & Christine Dasnoy; Source strategies and the mediatization of climate change. _Media, Culture & Society_, Vol. 17, No. 1, 49–64 (1995)
                            15. **^** Milmo, Cahal (18 February 2009). "The Independent Wednesday, 18 February 2009: Dumped in Africa: Britain's toxic waste". London: Independent.co.uk. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "UNEP: Our Planet: Celebrating 20 Years of Montreal Protocol" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            17. **^** Adidas, Clarks, Nike and Timberland agree moratorium on illegal Amazon leather _Telegraph_ , 4 August 2009
                            18. **^** Paul Huebener, McMaster University. "Paul Huebener: Greenpeace, ''Globalization and Autonomy Online Compendium''". Globalautonomy.ca. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Moore, Patrick (22 April 2008). "Why I Left Greenpeace". _The Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved  22 April 2008.
                            20. **^** "Top Secret: Greenpeace Report Misleading and Incompetent". Roughlydrafted.com. 2 September 2006. Archived from the original on 19 November 2018. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "Laureates Letter Supporting Precision Agriculture (GMOs) | Support Precision Agriculture". _supportprecisionagriculture.org_. Retrieved  30 June 2016.
                            22. **^** Shaw, Anny (7 January 2010). "Greenpeace activists arrested for gatecrashing royal gala dinner in Copenhagen released from jail". London: The Daily Mail. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
                            23. **^** "Greenpeace members charged in Mount Rushmore G-8 protest". CNN.com. 7 January 2010. Retrieved  8 July 2009.
                            24. **^** GMO crops vandalized in Oregon, Karl Haro von Mogel, Biology Fortified, 24 June 2013.
                            25. **^** "Greenpeace activists in costly GM protest". Sydney Morning Herald. 2 August 2012. Retrieved  8 November 2013.
                            26. **^** "GM crop destroyers given suspended sentences". Canberra Times. 19 November 2012. Retrieved  8 November 2013.
                            27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Kozak, Robert (14 December 2014). "Peru Says Greenpeace Permanently Damaged Nazca Lines". _The Wall Street Journal_. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014. Retrieved  3 February 2015.
                            28. **^** "Protests fail to stop Nuclear Test countdown", _The Free-Lance Star_ - Oct 2, 1969, Accessed via Google News Archive November 16, 2012.
                            29. **^** Congressional Record, 1971, p. 18072
                            30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _Michael Brown & John May: The Greenpeace Story_, ISBN 0-86318-691-2
                            31. **^** Hawthorn, Tom (30 March 2011). "Tom Hawthorn's blog: For sale: The house where Greenpeace was born". Tomhawthorn.blogspot.com. Retrieved 6 June 2011.
                            32. **^** _Greenpeace to Amchitka, An Environmental Odyssey_ by Robert Hunter.
                            33. **^** "SPEC Official website".
                            34. **^** Dyck, Lloyd H. Dyck (17 October 1970). "Joni nervous at Greenpeace benefit show". _Vancouver Sun_. **84** (242). Vancouver BC: The Sun Publishing Company. p. 35 - via Newspapers.com.
                            35. **^** Lost 1970 Amchitka Concert Featuring Joni Mitchell and James Taylor Surfaces _The Wall Street Journal_ , November 22, 2009
                            36. **^** "Frank Zelko: Making Greenpeace: The Development of Direct Action Environmentalism in British Columbia(PDF)". Archived from the original on 12 April 2013. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Greenpeace Official page: The Founders". Greenpeace.org. 29 October 2008. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ "Patrick Moore: Who Are the Founders of Greenpeace". Beatty Street Publishing. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Timmer, Vanessa: Agility and Resilence: The Adaptive Capacity of Friends of the Earth International and Greenpeace" (PDF). University of British Columbia. February 2007. Retrieved 19 November 2012.
                            40. **^** "Greenpeace International: The History of Greenpeace". Greenpeace.org. 14 September 2009. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            41. **^** Rex Weyler. "Chronology, the Founding of Greenpeace". www.rexweyler.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 22 November 2012.
                            42. **^** Rex Weyler. "Waves of Compassion. The founding of Greenpeace". Utne.com. p. 19. Retrieved 23 November 2012.
                            43. **^** Rex Weyler. "Who were the Founders?". www.rexweyler.com. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 22 November 2012.
                            44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Interview by Michael Friedrich: Greenpeace Founders". Archive.greenpeace.org. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Sea Shepherd Conservation Society: Greenpeace Attempts to Make Captain Paul Watson 'Disappear '". Seashepherd.org. 15 May 2008. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            46. **^** Broder, John M. (6 December 2011). "Greenpeace Leader Visits Boardroom, Without Forsaking Social Activism". www.greenpeace.org. Retrieved 22 November 2012.
                            47. **^** McDonald, Mark (22 November 2008). "In Battle Against Whaling, Groups Split on Strategy". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            48. **^** Siddique, Haroon (6 January 2010). "Japanese whaling boat clash likely to ignite row over activists' tactics". _The Guardian_. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            49. **^** Vidal, John (2 January 2002). "Greenpeace fights sea battle with rival anti-whaling ship". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            50. **^** "Paul Watson: Sea Shepherd eco-warrior fighting to stop whaling and seal hunts". _The Daily Telegraph_. London. 17 April 2009. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            51. **^** "Animal Planet, Bios: Captain Paul F. Watson". Animal Planet. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            52. **^** "Greenpeace: Paul Watson, Sea Shepherd and Greenpeace: some facts". Greenpeace. 17 December 2008. Retrieved  22 November 2012.
                            53. **^** "The Founders". Greenpeace USA. 1 March 2009. Retrieved  12 March 2019.
                            54. **^** "Patrick Moore background information". Greenpeace.org. 7 December 2010. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            55. **^** https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/01/trump-withdraws-paris-agreement/579733/
                            56. **^** Making Waves the Greenpeace New Zealand Story by Michael Szabo ISBN
                            57. **^** Haas, Michael (5 September 2013). _International Human Rights: A Comprehensive Introduction_. Routledge. ISBN 9781135005788.
                            58. **^** "Greenpeace". Rex Weyler. 1 March 1954. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved  6 June 2011.
                            59. **^** Robert Hunter: Greenpeace to Amchitka, An Environmental Odyssey
                            60. **^** Greenpeace Founder Bob Hunter Dies in Toronto. ens-newswire.com (2005-05-02)
                            61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Weyler, Rex. "Waves of Compassion. The founding of Greenpeace". Utne.com. pp. 14–15. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007. Retrieved 23 November 2012.
                            62. **^** "London Greenpeace – A History of Peace, Protest and Campaigning". McSpotlight. Retrieved  6 June 2011.
                            63. **^** "About the". Greenpeace Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 August 2012. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            64. **^** Background – November 13, 2008 (13 November 2008). "Greenpeace, organization". Greenpeace.org. Archived from the original on 17 January 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2016.
                            65. **^** Background – November 16, 2009 (15 January 2016). "Greenpeace International, Executive Director". Greenpeace.org. Retrieved 20 May 2016.
                            66. **^** Background – June 8, 2009 (21 April 2011). "Greenpeace International, Board of Directors". Greenpeace.org. Archived from the original on 26 April 2008. Retrieved 9 November 2012.
                            67. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Greenpeace, Annual Report 2008 (pdf)
                            68. **^** "Governance Structure". Greenpeace.org. 11 April 2011. Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            69. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Greenpeace Fundraising policies" (PDF). Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            70. **^** Greenpeace International – the reinvention of face-to-face fundraising. sofii.org
                            71. **^** Burnett, Ken (2002) _Relationship Fundraising: A Donor-based Approach to the Business of Raising Money_ , The White Lion Press Limited
                            72. **^** (16 June 2014) Greenpeace loses $5.2M on rogue employee trading The Mail Online/Associated Press, Retrieved 17 December 2014
                            73. **^** Green-Peace, Dirty Money: Tax Violations in the World of Non-Profits. publicinterestwatch.org Archived 17 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine
                            74. **^** "Seeing Greenpeace | National Review Online".
                            75. **^** Stecklow, Steve (21 March 2006). "Did a Group Financed by Exxon Prompt IRS to Audit Greenpeace?". _The Wall Street Journal_.
                            76. **^** Phil Radford (17 May 2013). "Philip Radford: An Open Letter to the Congressional Committee Investigating Politically-Motivated IRS Audits". _Huffington Post_.
                            77. **^** "IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Working Group III: Mitigation of Climate Change". Ipcc.ch. Archived from the original on 19 November 2018. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            78. **^** Marc Mormont & Christine Dasnoy; Source strategies and the mediatization of climate change. Media, Culture & Society, Vol. 17, No. 1, 49–64 (1995)
                            79. **^** "UNEP: The 1997 Ozone Awards". Ozone.unep.org. 16 September 1997. Archived from the original on 12 April 2015. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            80. **^** "Greenfreeze F-Gas Victory! Greener Refrigerators Finally Legal in the U.S." _Greenpeace_.
                            81. **^** Background – March 29, 2007 (29 March 2007). "Who we are". Greenpeace. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            82. **^** Greenpeace Climate Vision, May 2009
                            83. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Energy (R)evolution, A Sustainable Global Energy Outlook, 2010, 3rd edition, Greenpeace & EREC:
                            84. **^** "Climate activists shut down coal mine in protest against Fonterra". Stock & Land. 23 November 2009. Retrieved  4 January 2010.
                            85. **^** Moskwa, Wojciech (2 October 2009). "Greenpeace blocks Arctic coal mine in Svalbard". Thomson Reuters. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
                            86. **^** "BHP Coal Berth Blocked by Greenpeace Ship as Protest Continues". Bloomberg. 6 August 2009. Retrieved  4 January 2010.
                            87. **^** "Greenpeace protestors scale tower in protest at 'Blair's legacy of fumes '". London: Daily Mail. 2 November 2006. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
                            88. **^** "Greenpeace activists block giant tar sands mining operation – Message to Obama and Harper: Climate leaders don't buy tar sands". CNW Group. 15 November 2009. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved  4 January 2010.
                            89. **^** "Greenpeace blocks 2nd Canada oil sands operation". Thomson Reuters. 1 October 2009. Retrieved  4 January 2010.
                            90. **^** Vidal, John (6 October 2008). "Kingsnorth trial: Coal protesters cleared of criminal damage to chimney". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
                            91. **^** Clover, Charles (11 September 2008). "Greenpeace Kingsnorth trial collapse is embarrassing for Gordon Brown". London: The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
                            92. **^** Vidal, John (11 September 2008). "Not guilty: the Greenpeace activists who used climate change as a legal defense". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
                            93. **^** Mingle, Jonathan (14 December 2008). "8th annual year in ideas – Climate-Change Defense". _New York Times_. Retrieved  2 April 2010.
                            94. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Go beyond oil | Greenpeace UK". Greenpeace.org.uk. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved  6 June 2011.
                            95. **^** "Paula Bear: Where's your spill response plan, Cairn? | Greenpeace UK". Greenpeace.org.uk. 29 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 May 2011. Retrieved  6 June 2011.
                            96. **^** "Update from the Arctic pod: 48 hours and going strong! | Greenpeace UK". Greenpeace.org.uk. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved  6 June 2011.
                            97. **^** Nuclear power is part of the problem. Greenpeace (official website). Published 1 July 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2017.
                            98. **^** "Nuclear Problems". Greenpeace.org.uk. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            99. **^** "Greenpeace International: 'Nuclear Power: a dangerous waste of time '" (PDF). Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            100. **^** Williams, Rhys (7 September 1994). "Greenpeace accused of telling lies in advert". London: The Independent. Retrieved 13 December 2009.
                            101. **^** "Kazakhstan highlights nuclear test aftermath". _BBC News_. 30 August 2001.
                            102. **^** Richard Black (10 November 2011). "EDF fined for spying on Greenpeace nuclear campaign". BBC. Retrieved 11 November 2011.
                            103. **^** Reuters (6 November 2013). "French court throws out EDF guilty verdict in hacking case". Reuters. Retrieved 27 August 2013.
                            104. **^** Hanna Gersmann (10 November 2011). "EDF fined €1.5m for spying on Greenpeace". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  11 November 2011.
                            105. **^** "Cool IT Leaderboard, v6" (PDF). Greenpeace. 6 April 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
                            106. **^** _Halocarbons, effects on stratospheric ozone_. Washington, DC.: National Academy of Sciences. 1976.
                            107. **^** Farman, J. C.; Gardiner, B. G.; Shanklin, J. D. (1985). "Large losses of total ozone in Antarctica reveal seasonal ClOx/NOx interaction". Nature. 315 (6016): 207–210. Bibcode: 1985Natur.315..207F
                            108. **^** Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, http://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-2&chapter=27&lang=en
                            109. **^** Morrisette, Peter M. (1989). "The Evolution of Policy Responses to Stratospheric Ozone Depletion". Natural Resources Journal. 29: 793–820., http://www.ciesin.org/docs/003-006/003-006.html ;accessed 10/10/2016.
                            110. **^** "Happy Birthday Greenfreeze," 2013, http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/Blogs/makingwaves/happy-birthday-greenfreeze/blog/44473/
                            111. **^** Stafford, et al, 2002, "Forces Driving Environmental Innovation....", http://www.greenpeace.org/greece/Global/greece/report/2011/greenfreeze/6_Greenfreeze_story_2004_en.pdf Archived 10 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine
                            112. **^** How Unilever Palm Oil Suppliers are burning up Borneo Archived 26 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine
                            113. **^** "Slaughtering the Amazon". Greenpeace USA. 1 June 2009. Archived from the original on 27 July 2010. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            114. **^** "吃掉亚马逊 | Greenpeace International". Greenpeace.org. 6 April 2006. Archived from the original on 24 April 2010. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            115. **^** Adidas, Clarks, Nike and Timberland agree moratorium on illegal Amazon leather Telegraph.co.uk, 4 August 2009
                            116. **^** Two-Way Communication: A Win-Win Model for Facing Activist Pressure: A Case Study on McDonalds and Unilever's Responses to Greenpeace. (PDF) Archived 10 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine
                            117. **^** "Media: Press Releases:2009:Amazon Leather Policy. 2009-07-22". Nikebiz.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            118. **^** EU bans illegal wood imports. carbonpositive.net (2010-07-08)
                            119. **^** Greenpeace Summary of the "REDD from the Conservation Perspective" report, June 2009
                            120. **^** "Palm oil | Greenpeace UK". Greenpeace.org.uk. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            121. **^** "Golden-Agri Resources official website". Goldenagri.com.sg. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            122. **^** "Sweet success for Kit Kat campaign: you asked, Nestlé has answered". _Greenpeace_. Greenpeace 2016. Retrieved  18 March 2017.
                            123. **^** "World Orangutan Day: Numbers in decline despite Indonesian government's claims" (Press release). Greenpeace International. 17 August 2018. Retrieved  14 November 2018.
                            124. **^** "Iceland advert" (Press release). Clearcast. 9 November 2018. Retrieved  14 November 2018.
                            125. **^** "Finland's environmental administration, 1995". Ymparisto.fi. Archived from the original on 12 March 2012. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            126. **^** "Stolen trunk of a tree: references from Iltasanomat. 9.6.1995". Vihreavoima.tripod.com. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            127. **^** "References from Helsingin Sanomat, 1.8.1995". Hs.fi. 8 January 1995. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            128. **^** Häirikkö lintukodossa : Suomen Greenpeace 1989–1998 (vastuullinen julkaisija: Matti Vuori, toimitus: Laura Hakoköngäs, 1998, ISBN 951-97079-3-X)
                            129. **^** Häirikkö lintukodossa : Suomen Greenpeace 1989–1998 (vastuullinen julkaisija: Matti Vuori, toimitus: Laura Hakoköngäs, 1998, ISBN 951-97079-3-X).
                            130. **^** "Metsähallitus: The Nature of Koitajoki (in Finnish)". Luontoon.fi. Archived from the original on 11 August 2007. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            131. **^** "World's largest palm oil trader linked to rainforest destruction twice the size of Paris - Greenpeace International". _Greenpeace International_. Retrieved  26 September 2018.
                            132. **^** Rajanaidu, N.; Mohd Din, A.; Marhalil, M.; Norziha, A.; Meilina, O. A.; Fadila, A. M.; Nor Azwani, A. B.; Adelina, L.; Zulkifli, H. (9 February 2018), "Diversity in the genetic resources of oil palm", _Achieving sustainable cultivation of oil palm Volume 1_ , Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing, pp. 93–116, doi:10.19103/as.2017.0018.05, ISBN 9781786761040
                            133. **^** Georgina Robinson (9 June 2010). "Whaling protesters demand release of Tokyo Two". The Sydney Morning Herald.
                            134. **^** "Japan must respect rights of detained Greenpeace activists". Amnesty.org. 15 July 2008. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            135. **^** Feature story – September 30, 2002 (30 September 2002). "Eat this or die, The poison politics of food aid". Greenpeace. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            136. **^** Rory, Carrol (30 October 2002). "Zambia slams door shut on GM relief food". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  18 October 2010.
                            137. **^** "Greenpeace, GM food aid and Zambia". Greenpeace. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            138. **^** Background – November 5, 2010 (5 November 2010). "and golden rice". Greenpeace. Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            139. **^** Paine JA, Shipton CA, Chaggar S, Howells RM, Kennedy MJ, Vernon G, Wright SY, Hinchliffe E, Adams JL, Silverstone AL, Drake R (2005) A new version of Golden Rice with increased pro-vitamin A content. Nature Biotechnology 23:482–487.
                            140. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Militant Filipino farmers destroy Golden Rice GM crop, New Scientist, 09 August 2013.
                            141. **^** Greenpeace. Patents on Rice: the Genetic Engineering Hypocrisy Archived 3 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine. 26 April 2005.
                            142. **^** "Prof. Dr. Ingo Potrykus Addresses Claims of Anti-Biotechnology Activists". Archived from the original on 23 January 2005. Retrieved  2005-01-23.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link). 15 February 2001.
                            143. **^** Greenpeace. Golden Rice: All glitter, no gold Archived 10 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine. 16 March 2005.
                            144. **^** Greenpeace. Golden Rice is a technical failure standing in way of real solutions for vitamin A deficiency Archived 28 April 2005 at the Wayback Machine
                            145. **^** "107 Nobel laureates sign letter blasting Greenpeace over GMOs".
                            146. **^** MacDonald, Fiona. "107 Nobel Laureates just signed a letter slamming Greenpeace over GMOs".
                            147. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Nobel laureates sign letter on Greenpeace 'Golden' rice position - statement".
                            148. **^** Greenpeace.Dirty Laundry: Unravelling the corporate connections to toxic water pollution in China.
                            149. **^** "Detox". _Greenpeace International_.
                            150. **^** "Guide to Greener Electronics" (PDF). Greenpeace. August 2006. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
                            151. **^** "Guide to Greener Electronics 2017". Greenpeace USA. 2017.
                            152. **^** "FAQ – The melting Arctic is under threat from oil drilling, industrial fishing and conflict". Greenpeace – Save the Arctic. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved  21 September 2013.
                            153. **^** "Protest gegen Ölplattform: Russische Grenzschützer entern Greenpeace-Schiff". Spiegel-Online, Christoph Seidler (German). Retrieved  20 September 2013.
                            154. **^** AP (27 December 2013). "Defiant Greenpeace Activists Return From Russia". Advisories. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
                            155. **^** Tilley, Jonathan (July 2014) "Greenpeace puts pressure on Lego's Shell-branded toys", _PR Week_ , 1 July 2014. Accessed 3 July 2014
                            156. **^** Vaughan, Adam (July 2014). "Greenpeace urges Lego to end Shell partnership", _The Guardian_ , 1 July 2014. Accessed 3 July 2014
                            157. **^** Greenpeace's Polar Bears Board Norwegian Oil Rig. RIA Novosti (2013-0410).
                            158. **^** Offshore Technology.com. (2014-05-30). Norway police arrest Greenpeace activists at Statoil oil rig site.
                            159. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hovland, K. (2014-05-30). Norway Police Order Greenpeace Ship To Leave Statoil Drilling Site, The Wall Street Journal.
                            160. **^** Norwegian Ministry Rejects Greenpeace Appeal. The Maritime Executive (2014-05-30).
                            161. **^** Statoil. (2014-06-02). Ministry rejects Greenpeace appeal.
                            162. **^** Holter, M. (2014-05-28). Statoil Rig Kept Idle in Norway Arctic by Greenpeace Activists. Bloomberg.
                            163. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Norway Moves In to Guard Oil Rig From Greenpeace. The New York Times (2014-05-30).
                            164. **^** Greenpeace: 'We need a new Statoil'. News in English.no (2014-07-10).
                            165. **^** Vidal, John (18 January 2010). "Greenpeace commissions third Warrior". _The New Zealand Herald_. Retrieved  2 October 2011.
                            166. **^** ""The evacuation of Rongelap Archived 13 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine
                            167. **^** Goldenberg, Suzanne (25 May 2007). "Rainbow Warrior ringleader heads firm selling arms to US government". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 21 January 2010.
                            168. **^** "Greenpeace Rejects Terrorism Label, 14 December 2001". Archive.greenpeace.org. 14 December 2001. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            169. **^** BBC News. Greenpeace fined for reef damage. 1 November 2005.
                            170. **^** "Suncor sues Greenpeace over protest". _CBC News_. 14 October 2009. Archived from the original on 6 August 2010.
                            171. **^** "Greenpeace sued for Esso logo abuse | Pinsent Masons LLP. 2002-06-27". Out-law.com. 27 June 2002. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            172. **^** "U.S. Suit Against Greenpeace Dismissed". _Los Angeles Times_. 20 May 2004. Retrieved  4 May 2010.
                            173. **^** "Howard Government Offered Oil Firm Millions to Sue Greenpeace". Ens-newswire.com. Retrieved  23 November 2012.
                            174. **^** Campbell, Matthew; Gourlay, Chris (26 April 2009). "French spies targeted UK Greenpeace". London: Times. Retrieved 4 April 2010.
                            175. **^** "MI6 'Firm' Spied on Green Groups". London: The Sunday Times. 17 June 2001. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved  4 April 2010.
                            176. **^** "The Rainbow Warrior bombers, the media and the judiciary, Robie, David, 2007" (PDF). Retrieved 21 February 2011.
                            177. **^** Suter, Keith (2003). _Global order and global disorder: globalization and the nation-state_. Praeger Publishers. p. 57. ISBN 0-275-97388-3.
                            178. **^** Baden, John A. "The anti-chlorine chorus is hitting some bum notes". Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011.
                            179. **^** Cox, Bruce (20 May 2008). "Bruce Cox defends Greenpeace (and takes on Patrick Moore)". _National Post_. Retrieved  4 January 2010.[ _dead link_ ]
                            180. **^** Watson, Paul (31 July 2005). "Solutions instead of sensationalism". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on 12 October 2008.
                            181. **^** Mark Lynas (28 August 2013), The True Story About Who Destroyed a Genetically Modified Rice Crop _Slate_
                            182. **^** Patrick Moore (8 October 2013), By opposing Golden Rice, Greenpeace defies its own values – and harms children _The Globe and Mail_
                            183. **^** Moore, Patrick (1976) _Assault on Future Generations_, Greenpeace report, pp. 47-49.
                            184. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Moore, Patrick (16 April 2006). "Going Nuclear". Washington Post.
                            185. **^** Going Nuclear. _Washington Post_ (2006-04-16)
                            186. **^** Nuclear energy? Yes please! _The Independent_ (2007-02-15)
                            187. **^** Moore, Patrick (2007-12-10) Greenpeace is wrong—we must consider nuclear power. _The Age_
                            188. **^** _Energy Revolution_ , Greenpeace report. June 2010
                            189. **^** "Radford, New Greenpeace Boss on Climate Change, Coal, and Nuclear Power". _The Wall Street Journal_. 14 April 2009.
                            190. **^** Olivier Vermont (1997), Albin Michel (ed.), _La Face cachée de Greenpeace_ (in French), p. 337, ISBN 978-2-226-08775-1
                            191. **^** Développement durable : le concept dévoyé qui ne doit plus durer !, from the Author of "La Servitude Climatique".
                            192. **^** "Animal People, March 1997". Animalpeoplenews.org. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved  21 February 2011.
                            193. **^** Wilson da Silva. "The sad, sad demise of Greenpeace". _Cosmos_. August 2011
                            194. **^** _Editorial comment_ (1995). "Brent Spar, broken spur". _Nature_. **375** (6534): 708–709. Bibcode:1995Natur.375..708.. doi:10.1038/375708a0.
                            195. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Case Study: The Environmental Conflict Surrounding the Decommissioning of Brent Spar, IAEA. The article refers to "Case Study: Brent Spar", Fisheries Research Services, FRS Marine Laboratory, PO Box 101, 375, Victoria Road, Aberdeen. AB11 9DB UK.
                            196. **^** Mitchener, 1995, "Environmentalists Apologize...." ; https://www.nytimes.com/1995/09/06/news/06iht-brent_.html ; accessed 10/10/2016
                            197. **^** 1995: Shell Makes Dramatic U-Turn ; accessed 10/10/2016 http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/june/20/newsid_4509000/4509527.stm
                            198. **^** "BBC Apologizes to Greenpeace," 1999, accessed 10/10/2016 ; http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/536533.stm
                            199. **^** De LaFayette, Louise "New Developments in the Disposal of Offshore Installations" The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 14:4 1999.
                            200. **^** "Brent Spar....", 2010, ; http://www.ethicalcorp.com/business-strategy/brent-spar-battle-launched-modern-activism ; accessed 10/10/2016
                            201. **^** Bell, N. & Smith, J.; McClive; Western; Reed; Sinclair (1999). "Coral growing on North Sea oil rigs". _Nature_. **402** (6762): 601–2. Bibcode:1999Natur.402..601B. doi:10.1038/45127. PMID 10604464. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
                            202. **^** Gass, S. & Roberts, J.M.; Roberts (2006). "The occurrence of the cold-water coral Lophelia pertusa (Scleractinia) on oil and gas platforms in the North Sea : Colony growth, recruitment and environmental controls on distribution". _Marine pollution bulletin_. **52** (5): 549–559. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2005.10.002. PMID 16300800. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)http://cat.inist.fr/?aModele=afficheN&cpsidt=17830117
                            203. **^** "Oil rig home to rare coral". _BBC News, Sci/Tech, Oil rig home to rare coral_. 8 December 1999. Retrieved  11 February 2007.
                            204. **^** Gosden, Emily (23 June 2014). "Greenpeace executive flies 250 miles to work". _Telegraph.co.uk_. London.
                            205. **^** Adam Vaughan. "Greenpeace losses: leaked documents reveal extent of financial disarray". _the Guardian_.
                            206. **^** Davies, Emily (23 June 2014). "Greenpeace chief Pascal Husting commutes by plane - Daily Mail Online". _Mail Online_. London.
                            207. **^** "Greenpeace chief travels to the office by aircraft". _The Times_.
                            208. **^** "Greenpeace says programme director to stop commuting by plane". _reuters.com_. 24 June 2014.
                            209. **^** Adam Vaughan. "Greenpeace executive to commute by train instead of plane". _the Guardian_.
                            210. **^** Neuman, William (12 December 2014). "Peru is Indignant After Greenpeace Makes Its Mark on Ancient Site". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 December 2014.
                            211. **^** Briceno, Franklin (9 December 2014). "Peru Riled by Greenpeace Stunt at Nazca Lines". Retrieved 11 December 2014.
                            212. **^** "Video of Greenpeace Nazca Lines Protest". Retrieved  13 December 2014.
                            213. **^** Vice News: "Drone Footage Shows Extent of Damage From Greenpeace Stunt at Nazca Lines" By Kayla Ruble December 17, 2014
                            214. **^** "Greenpeace apologizes for Nazca lines stunt". 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 16 December 2014. Retrieved  11 December 2014.
                            215. **^** "Greenpeace Won't Name Activists Linked to Damage". 16 December 2014. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014.
                            216. **^** "Greenpeace Offers Apology...timeline", http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/features/Nazca-Timeline/ ; accessed 10/10/2016
                            217. **^** "Norges oljeøkonomi bidrar til krig og folkemord, hevder Greenpeace-sjef Kumi Naidoo". Dagbladet. 11 April 2015.
                            218. **^** "Norway and whaling," accessed 10/10/2016 ; http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/oceans/fit-for-the-future/whaling/norwegian-whaling/
                            219. **^** "107 Nobel laureates sign letter blasting Greenpeace over GMOs". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  29 June 2016.
                            220. **^** "Silvia Ribeiro". _ETC Group (AGETC)_. Retrieved  19 March 2017.
                    

## Further reading[edit]

                    
                                                * Hunter, Robert (2004). _The Greenpeace to Amchitka: an environmental odyssey_. Arsenal Pulp Press. ISBN 1-55152-178-4.
                            * Hunter, Robert and McTaggart, David (1978) _Greenpeace III: Journey into the Bomb_ (Collins). ISBN 0002118858
                            * Hunter, Robert (1979) _Warriors of the Rainbow: A Chronicle of the Greenpeace Movement_ (Holt, Rinehart and Winston). ISBN 0-03-043736-9
                            * King, Michael (1986) _Death of the Rainbow Warrior_ (Penguin Books). ISBN 0-14-009738-4
                            * McCormick, John (1995) _The Global Environmental Movement_ (John Wiley)
                            * Robie, David (1987) _Eyes of Fire: The Last Voyage of the Rainbow Warrior_ (New Society Press). ISBN 0-86571-114-3
                            * Brown, Michael; May, John (1989) _The Greenpeace Story_ (Dorling Kindersley, 1991). ISBN 1-879431-02-5
                            * Ostopowich, Melanie (2002). _Greenpeace_. Weigl Publishers. ISBN 1-59036-020-6.
                            * Weyler, Rex (2004), _Greenpeace: How a Group of Ecologists, Journalists and Visionaries Changed the World_, Rodale ISBN 1594861064
                            * Mulvaney, Kieran; Warford, Mark (1996): _Witness: Twenty-Five Years on the Environmental Front Line_ , Andre Deutsch.
                            * Zelko, Frank (2013): _Make it a Green Peace. The Rise of Countercultural Environmentalism_ (Oxford University Press, 2013) ISBN 978-0-19-994708-9, book review: Jan-Henrik Meyer (2016): _Where did Environmentalism come from_
                            * Zelko, Frank (2017): Scaling Greenpeace: From Local Activism to Global Governance, in: Historical Social Research 42 (2), 318-342.
                    

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to
_**Greenpeace**_.  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-

logo.svg/40px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) | Wikinews has news related to:

_**Greenpeace**_

---|---  
* Official website * FBI file on Greenpeace
                    
                                                * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Greenpeace

* * *

People|

                    
                                                * Phil Radford
                            * Michael Bailey
                            * Kumi Naidoo
                            * Irving Stowe
                            * Ben Metcalfe
                            * Paul Watson
                            * Rex Weyler
                            * Jim Bohlen
                            * Will E. Jackson
                            * David McTaggart
                            * Robert Hunter
                            * Patrick Moore
                            * Oscar Soria
                            * John Sauven
                            * Andy Stirling
                            * Stephen Tindale
                            * Jean McSorley
                            * Dorothy Stowe
                            * Peter Willcox
                            * Fernando Pereira
                            * Daniel Beltrá
                            * Dennis Delaney
                            * Von Hernandez
                    

Ships|

                    
                                                * _Rainbow Warrior_ (I)
                            * _Rainbow Warrior_ (II)
                            * _Rainbow Warrior_ (III)
                            * _Esperanza_
                            * _Arctic Sunrise_
                            * _Sirius_
                            * _Solo_
                            * _Greenpeace_
                            * _Gondwana_
                            * _Yellow Thing_
                            * _Fri (yacht)_
                    

Regional offices|

                    
                                                * Greenpeace Aotearoa New Zealand
                            * Greenpeace Australia Pacific
                            * Greenpeace East Asia
                            * Greenpeace Nordic
                            * Greenpeace Southeast Asia
                            * Greenpeace USA
                    

Related organisations|

                    
                                                * Sea Shepherd Conservation Society
                            * Greenpeace Foundation
                            * London Greenpeace
                            * Don't Make a Wave Committee
                            * Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (NZ)
                    

Other related topics|

                    
                                                * _Golden Rule (ketch)_
                            * _Greenpeace – The Album_
                            * Sinking of the _Rainbow Warrior_
                            * Rainbow Warrior Case
                            * _How to Change the World_ (film)
                            * _The Rainbow Warrior_ (film)
                            * Mister Splashy Pants
                            * Public Eye Award
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Sustainability

* * *

Principles|

                    
                                                * Anthropocene
                            * Earth system governance
                            * Ecological modernization
                            * Environmental governance
                            * Environmentalism
                            * Global catastrophic risk
                            * Human impact on the environment
                            * Planetary boundaries
                            * Social sustainability
                            * Stewardship
                            * Sustainable development
                    

Consumption|

                    
                                                * Anthropization
                            * Anti-consumerism
                            * Earth Overshoot Day
                            * Ecological footprint
                            * Ethical
                            * Over-consumption
                            * Simple living
                            * Sustainability advertising
                            * Sustainability brand
                            * Sustainability marketing myopia
                            * Sustainable
                            * Systemic change resistance
                            * Tragedy of the commons
                    

Population|

                    
                                                * Birth control
                            * Family planning
                            * Control
                            * Overpopulation
                            * Zero growth
                    

Technology|

                    
                                                * Appropriate
                            * Environmental
                            * Sustainable
                    

Biodiversity|

                    
                                                * Biosecurity
                            * Biosphere
                            * Conservation biology
                            * Deep ecology
                            * Endangered species
                            * Holocene extinction
                            * Invasive species
                    

Energy|

                    
                                                * Carbon footprint
                            * Climate change mitigation
                            * Conservation
                            * Descent
                            * Efficiency
                            * Emissions trading
                            * Fossil-fuel phase-out
                            * Peak oil
                            * Poverty
                            * Rebound effect
                            * Renewable
                    

Food|

                    
                                                * Forest gardening
                            * Local
                            * Permaculture
                            * Security
                            * Sustainable agriculture
                            * Sustainable fishery
                            * Urban horticulture
                    

Water|

                    
                                                * Conservation
                            * Crisis
                            * Efficiency
                            * Footprint
                            * Reclaimed
                    

Accountability|

                    
                                                * Sustainability accounting
                            * Sustainability measurement
                            * Sustainability metrics and indices
                            * Sustainability reporting
                            * Standards and certification
                            * Sustainable yield
                    

Applications|

                    
                                                * Advertising
                            * Architecture
                            * Art
                            * Business
                            * City
                            * College programs
                            * Community
                            * Design
                            * Ecovillage
                            * Education for Sustainable Development
                            * Fashion
                            * Gardening
                            * Geopark
                            * Green marketing
                            * Industries
                            * Landscape architecture
                            * Living
                            * Low-impact development
                            * Sustainable market
                            * Organizations
                            * Packaging
                            * Practices
                            * Procurement
                            * Tourism
                            * Transport
                            * Urban drainage systems
                            * Urban infrastructure
                            * Urbanism
                    

Management|

                    
                                                * Environmental
                            * Fisheries
                            * Forest
                            * Materials
                            * Natural resource
                            * Planetary
                            * Waste
                    

Agreements|

                    
                                                * UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
                            * Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
                            * _Our Common Future_ (1987)
                            * Earth Summit (1992)
                            * Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
                            * Agenda 21 (1992)
                            * Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
                            * ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
                            * Earth Charter
                            * Lisbon Principles
                            * UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
                            * Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
                            * United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
                            * Sustainable Development Goals
                    
                            * Category
                            * Lists
                            * Outline
                            * Portal
                            * Science
                            * Studies
                            * Degrees
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Anti-nuclear movement

* * *

Protests  
and groups|

                    
                                                * Anti-nuclear organizations
                            * Anti-nuclear power groups
                            * Anti-nuclear protests
                            * Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
                            * Greenpeace
                            * International Association of Lawyers against Nuclear Arms
                            * International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons
                            * International Day against Nuclear Tests
                            * International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War
                            * Mayors for Peace
                            * Nuclear Information and Resource Service
                            * Nevada Desert Experience
                            * Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign
                            * Peace Action and SANE
                            * Physicians for Social Responsibility
                            * Pembina Institute
                            * Sortir du nucléaire
                            * World Uranium Hearing
                    

|

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Smiling_Sun_English_Language.svg/80px-

Smiling_Sun_English_Language.svg.png)

By country|

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * Austria
                            * Canada
                            * France
                            * Germany
                            * India
                            * Japan
                            * Kazakhstan
                            * New Zealand
                            * Philippines
                            * Poland
                            * Russia
                            * South Africa
                            * South Korea
                            * Spain
                            * Sweden
                            * Switzerland
                            * Taiwan
                            * Turkey
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                    

People|

                    
                                                * Tadatoshi Akiba
                            * Daniel Berrigan
                            * Albert Bigelow
                            * Helen Caldicott
                            * Norman Cousins
                            * Gordon Edwards
                            * Albert Einstein
                            * Randall Forsberg
                            * John Gofman
                            * Jim Green
                            * Paul Gunter
                            * Otto Hahn
                            * Nobuto Hosaka
                            * Jackie Hudson
                            * Kate Hudson
                            * Ole Kopreitan
                            * David Lange
                            * Amory Lovins
                            * Bernard Lown
                            * Caroline Lucas
                            * Freda Meissner-Blau
                            * Gregory Minor
                            * Hermann Joseph Muller
                            * Kenzaburō Ōe
                            * Linus Pauling
                            * Mike Pentz
                            * C. F. Powell
                            * Adi Roche
                            * Joseph Rotblat
                            * Tilman Ruff
                            * Bertrand Russell
                            * Jens Scheer
                            * Jonathan Schell
                            * Christopher Weeramantry
                    

Media|

                    
                                                * Books about nuclear issues
                            * Films about nuclear issues
                            * Nuclear holocaust fiction
                            * Nuclear weapons in popular culture
                            * Songs about nuclear war and weapons
                    

Related  
topics|

                    
                                                * Anti-war movement
                            * Bikini Atoll
                            * _Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists_
                            * France and weapons of mass destruction
                            * Göttingen Manifesto
                            * History of the anti-nuclear movement
                            * International Court of Justice advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons
                            * Lists of nuclear disasters and radioactive incidents
                            * Mainau Declaration
                            * Nuclear-Free Future Award
                            * Nuclear-free zone
                            * Nuclear power debate
                            * Nuclear power phase-out
                            * Nuclear weapons debate
                            * Peace activists
                            * Otto Hahn Peace Medal
                            * Peace movement
                            * Peace camp
                            * Russell–Einstein Manifesto
                            * Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
                            * Smiling Sun
                            * _The Bomb_
                    
                            * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Companies based in the Metro Vancouver area

* * *
                    
                                                * 604 Records
                            * A&W Canada
                            * Advanced Cyclotron Systems
                            * Apparent Networks
                            * Avigilon
                            * Aritzia
                            * Army & Navy Stores
                            * Ballard Power Systems
                            * British Columbia Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
                            * Best Buy Canada
                            * Black Box Games
                            * Blenz Coffee
                            * BlueShore Financial
                            * Boston Pizza
                            * Brightlight Pictures
                            * British Columbia Maritime Employers' Association
                            * BroadbandTV Corp
                            * Cactus Club Cafe
                            * Canada Wide Media
                            * Canfor
                            * Canucks Sports & Entertainment
                            * Carl's Jr. Canada
                            * Central 1 Credit Union
                            * Central Heat Distribution
                            * CHC Helicopter
                            * Choices Market
                            * Citizens Bank of Canada
                            * Clearly.ca
                            * Coast Capital Savings
                            * Coast Mountain Bus Company
                            * Commodore Books
                            * CTBC Bank (Canada)
                            * Cymax Stores
                            * Dairyland Canada
                            * Dan-D Foods
                            * Dollar Tree Canada
                            * D-Wave Systems
                            * E-Comm
                            * EA Canada
                            * Ebco Industries
                            * Eldorado Gold
                            * Electra Meccanica
                            * Envision Financial
                            * Fairchild Group
                            * Finning
                            * First Quantum Minerals
                            * FortisBC
                            * Freshslice Pizza
                            * Gardein
                            * Goldcorp
                            * Great Northern Way Campus
                            * Greenpeace
                            * Gulf and Fraser Fishermen's Credit Union
                            * Happy Planet
                            * Heffel Gallery
                            * Hellbent Games
                            * Hootsuite
                            * Hothead Games
                            * HSBC Bank Canada
                            * Insights West
                            * Intrawest
                            * Ironclad Games
                            * Ivanhoe Mines Limited
                            * Jim Pattison Group
                            * Justason Market Intelligence
                            * Kerberos Productions
                            * Kin's Farm Market
                            * Klei Entertainment
                            * London Drugs
                            * Lululemon Athletica
                            * Lush North America
                            * MacDonald Dettwiler
                            * Macdonald Realty
                            * Magma Energy
                            * McLean Group of Companies
                            * Methanex
                            * MetroLyrics
                            * Modo Car Co-Op
                            * Mountain Equipment Co-op
                            * Nature's Path
                            * Netsentron
                            * Nettwerk
                            * Nevada Geothermal Power
                            * New Gold
                            * Next Level Games
                            * Nintendo of Canada
                            * O2E Brands
                            * Ocean Productions
                            * Panago
                            * The Pantry
                            * Piranha Games
                            * PlentyofFish
                            * Premium Brands Holdings Corporation
                            * Radical Entertainment
                            * Relic Entertainment
                            * Ricky's All Day Grill
                            * Ritchie Bros. Auctioneers
                            * Shavick Entertainment
                            * Sierra Wireless
                            * Silver Standard Resources
                            * Silver Wheaton
                            * Slack Technologies
                            * Slant Six Games
                            * SoftQuad Software
                            * Sustainable Produce Urban Delivery
                            * Synthetic Entertainment
                            * T & T Supermarket
                            * Teck Resources
                            * Telus
                            * Tenke Mining
                            * Teradici
                            * United Front Games
                            * Univar Canada
                            * Vancity
                            * Vancouver Film Studios
                            * Vancouver Orphan Kitten Rescue Association
                            * Vantage Airport Group
                            * VersaCold
                            * Vision Critical
                            * West Fraser Timber
                            * West Coast Air
                            * White Spot
                            * Zulu Records
                    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                    
                                                * BNE: XX164135
                            * BNF: cb124362013 (data)
                            * GND: 2070367-3
                            * HDS: 15292
                            * ISNI: 0000 0001 1086 8215
                            * LCCN: n85273073
                            * MusicBrainz: 8bc0359d-157a-4c9e-96bd-dd403d2b2066
                            * MusicBrainz: 51aa88f0-4a1e-4640-a8f2-0fd5dfbf4461
                            * NKC: kn20061128022
                            * NLA: 35097650
                            * SUDOC: 028123212
                            * ULAN: 500352356
                            * VIAF: 123227460
                            * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 123227460
                    

---|--- 
                    
                                                * ![Peace sign.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d2/Peace_sign.svg/21px-Peace_sign.svg.png)Social movements portal
                            * ![Aegopodium podagraria1 ies.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/24px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal
                    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greenpeace&oldid=900670016"

Categories:

                    
                                                * Greenpeace
                            * Environmental organizations established in 1971
                            * Organizations with general consultative status to the United Nations Economic and Social Council
                    

Hidden categories:

                    
                                                * All articles with dead external links
                            * Articles with dead external links from March 2017
                            * Articles with permanently dead external links
                            * Webarchive template wayback links
                            * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
                            * Articles with dead external links from January 2017
                            * CS1 French-language sources (fr)
                            * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
                            * Use dmy dates from May 2016
                            * Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2018
                            * All articles with style issues
                            * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with HDS identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz label identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
                    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                    
                                                * Not logged in
                            * Talk
                            * Contributions
                            * Create account
                            * Log in
                    

### Namespaces

                    
                                                * Article
                            * Talk
                    

### Variants

### Views

                    
                                                * Read
                            * Edit
                            * View history
                    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                    
                                                * Main page
                            * Contents
                            * Featured content
                            * Current events
                            * Random article
                            * Donate to Wikipedia
                            * Wikipedia store
                    

### Interaction

                    
                                                * Help
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Community portal
                            * Recent changes
                            * Contact page
                    

### Tools

                    
                                                * What links here
                            * Related changes
                            * Upload file
                            * Special pages
                            * Permanent link
                            * Page information
                            * Wikidata item
                            * Cite this page
                    

### In other projects

                    
                                                * Wikimedia Commons
                            * Wikinews
                    

### Print/export

                    
                                                * Create a book
                            * Download as PDF
                            * Printable version
                    

### Languages

                    
                                                * Afrikaans
                            * العربية
                            * Asturianu
                            * Azərbaycanca
                            * বাংলা
                            * Bân-lâm-gú
                            * Башҡортса
                            * Беларуская
                            * Български
                            * Brezhoneg
                            * Català
                            * Čeština
                            * Cymraeg
                            * Dansk
                            * Deutsch
                            * Eesti
                            * Ελληνικά
                            * Español
                            * Esperanto
                            * Euskara
                            * فارسی
                            * Français
                            * Gaeilge
                            * Galego
                            * 한국어
                            * Հայերեն
                            * हिन्दी
                            * Hrvatski
                            * Bahasa Indonesia
                            * Íslenska
                            * Italiano
                            * עברית
                            * ქართული
                            * Қазақша
                            * Kinyarwanda
                            * Kurdî
                            * Latina
                            * Latviešu
                            * Lëtzebuergesch
                            * Lietuvių
                            * Magyar
                            * മലയാളം
                            * Malti
                            * Bahasa Melayu
                            * Nederlands
                            * 日本語
                            * Нохчийн
                            * Norsk
                            * Norsk nynorsk
                            * Occitan
                            * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
                            * Polski
                            * Português
                            * Română
                            * Rumantsch
                            * Русский
                            * Саха тыла
                            * Scots
                            * Shqip
                            * Sicilianu
                            * Simple English
                            * Slovenčina
                            * Slovenščina
                            * کوردی
                            * Српски / srpski
                            * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                            * Suomi
                            * Svenska
                            * தமிழ்
                            * Татарча/tatarça
                            * ไทย
                            * Türkçe
                            * Українська
                            * اردو
                            * Tiếng Việt
                            * 吴语
                            * 粵語
                            * Zazaki
                            * 中文
                    

Edit links

                    
                                                * This page was last edited on 6 June 2019, at 23:58 (UTC).
                            * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                            * Privacy policy
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Disclaimers
                            * Contact Wikipedia
                            * Developers
                            * Cookie statement
                            * Mobile view
                            * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                            * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

