

the economist

Topicsdown icon

#### Sections

                    
                                                * Latest updates
                            * Leaders
                            * Briefing
                            * United States
                            * The Americas
                            * Asia
                            * China
                            * Middle East and Africa
                            * Europe
                            * Britain
                            * International
                            * Business
                            * Finance and economics
                            * Science and technology
                            * Books and arts
                            * Graphic detail
                            * Obituary
                            * Special reports
                            * Debates
                            * Open Future
                    

#### Blogs

                    
                                                * Bagehot’s notebook
                            * Bartleby
                            * Charlemagne’s notebook
                            * Democracy in America
                            * Erasmus
                            * Free exchange
                            * Game theory
                            * Gulliver
                            * Prospero
                            * The Economist explains
                    

Current edition

Moredown icon

#### Apps & Digital Editions

                    
                                                * The Economist apps
                            * Espresso
                            * Global Business Review
                            * World in Figures
                    

#### Other Publications

                    
                                                * 1843 magazine
                            * The World In
                            * The World If
                    

#### From The Economist Group

                    
                                                * Events
                            * Online GMAT prep
                            * Online GRE prep
                            * Executive Education Navigator
                            * Which MBA
                            * Jobs Board
                            * Learning.ly
                            * The Economist Store
                            * The Economist Intelligence Unit
                            * The Economist Corporate Network
                    

#### Media

                    
                                                * Audio edition
                            * Economist Films
                            * Podcasts
                    
                          2. About _The Economist_
                    

Subscribe

user iconLog in or sign upManage subscriptiondown icon

                    
                                                * Log In
                            * Forgot password?
                            * New to The Economist? Sign up now
                            * Activate your digital subscription
                            * Manage your subscription
                            * Renew your subscription
                    

magnifier iconSearch

hamburger iconclose icon

Topicsup icon

                    
                                                * Latest updates
                            * Leaders
                            * Briefing
                            * United States
                            * The Americas
                            * Asia
                            * China
                            * Middle East and Africa
                            * Europe
                            * Britain
                            * International
                            * Business
                            * Finance and economics
                            * Science and technology
                            * Books and arts
                            * Graphic detail
                            * Obituary
                            * Special reports
                            * Debates
                            * Open Future
                    

Blogsup icon

                    
                                                * Bagehot’s notebook
                            * Bartleby
                            * Charlemagne’s notebook
                            * Democracy in America
                            * Erasmus
                            * Free exchange
                            * Game theory
                            * Gulliver
                            * Prospero
                            * The Economist explains
                    

Current edition

Audio edition

Economist Films

Podcasts

The Economist apps

Moreup icon

                    
                                                * Apps & Digital Editions
                            * The Economist apps
                            * Espresso
                            * Global Business Review
                            * World in Figures
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * Other Publications
                            * 1843 magazine
                            * The World In
                            * The World If
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * From The Economist Group
                            * Events
                            * Online GMAT prep
                            * Online GRE prep
                            * Executive Education Navigator
                            * Which MBA
                            * Jobs Board
                            * Learning.ly
                            * The Economist Store
                            * The Economist Intelligence Unit
                            * The Economist Corporate Network
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * About _The Economist_
                    

Subscribe

# Daily chartWeather-related disasters are increasing

But the number of deaths caused by them is falling

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/20170902_WOC211_1.png)

### Graphic detail

Aug 29th 2017

by THE DATA TEAM

twitter icon

facebook icon

linkedin icon

mail icon

print icon

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/20170902_WOC211_0.png)

HOUSTON is being battered by its worst storm in 50 years. Tropical Storm
Harvey dumped almost 50 inches (1.27 metres) of rain in some areas in just
over four days, with more set to come. That is a record for a tropical system
in mainland America. A lack of sufficient drainage in the city of 6.5m people,
which is built on thick clay soil on a floodplain, has exacerbated the
flooding. The storm has caused nine deaths so far; thousands have fled their
homes.

**Get our daily newsletter**

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/blogs/graphic-

detail/20170902_woc212.png)

Texas and its neighbouring states are prone to such natural disasters—as is
the country as a whole. According to the UN’s disaster-monitoring system,
America sits alongside China and India in suffering the greatest number of
natural disasters globally between 1995 and 2015. These include earthquakes,
storms, floods and heatwaves that either cause at least ten deaths, affect
more than 100 people or prompt the declaration of a national emergency. Since
1970, the number of disasters worldwide has more than quadrupled to around 400
a year. Another dataset of less serious types of weather- and climate-related
events, defined as causing at least one death or a set amount of monetary
damage, shows an increase, too. By this measure, compiled by Munich Re, there
are six times more hydrological events now than in 1980. Last year’s total was
the highest ever seen.

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/blogs/graphic-

detail/20170902_woc210.png)

Although the number of such disasters keeps rising, far fewer people are dying
as a result of them. In 1970, 200,000 people perished annually. That figure
has been dramatically reduced, thanks to safety measures such as improved
buildings and flood-prevention schemes. To reduce it still further, urban
planners may have to operate on the assumption of even more extreme events.

### Graphic detail

Aug 29th 2017

by THE DATA TEAM

twitter icon

facebook icon

linkedin icon

mail icon

print icon

Reuse this content

About _The Economist_

                    
                                                * ![Weapons of mass disruption](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/print-edition/20190608_LDD001_0.jpg)
                    

### Weapons of mass disruptionAmerica is deploying a new economic arsenal to

assert its power

That is counterproductive and dangerous

                    
                                                * ![The Economist asks](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20190608_opp505.jpg)
                    

### The Economist asksWho can lead Britain through Brexit?

Podcasts

                    
                                                * ![Braking bad](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2019/06/articles/main/20190608_wbp506.jpg)
                    

### Braking badA merger of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles and Renault is no more

                    
                                                * ![An unequal sequel](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/print-edition/20190608_ASP002_0.jpg)
                    

### An unequal sequelThe leader of the Thai junta tortures the rules to remain

in power

When it's a matter of opinion, make your opinion matter

Subscribe now

**Each week, over one million subscribers  
trust us to help them make sense of the world.**

Join them. Subscribe to _The Economist_ today

or Sign up to continue reading five free articles

                    
                                                * Subscribe
                            * Group subscriptions
                            * Contact us
                            * Help
                    

#### Keep updated

                    
                                                * facebook icon
                            * twitter icon
                            * linkedin icon
                            * instagram icon
                            * youtube icon
                            * rss icon
                    

mail iconSubscribe to The Economist newsletters

**Sign up to get more from _The Economist_**

Get 5 free articles per month, daily newsletters and more.

                    
                                                * About _The Economist_
                            * Advertise
                            * Reprints
                            * Careers
                            * Media Centre
                    

Published since September 1843 to take part in  
_“a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward,  
and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.”_

                    
                                                * Terms of Use
                            * Privacy
                            * Cookie Policy
                            * Manage Cookies
                            * Accessibility
                            * Modern Slavery Statement
                    

Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2019. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

