

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# United Nations

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For a list of United Nations member states, see Member states of the United
Nations. For other uses, see United Nations (disambiguation) and UN
(disambiguation).

Intergovernmental organization

United Nations

        
                  * | Arabic:| الأمم المتحدة
        

---|---  
Chinese:| 联合国  
French:| Organisation des Nations unies  
Russian:| Организация Объединённых Наций  
Spanish:| Organización de las Naciones Unidas

![Flag of the United

Nations](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg/125px-

Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png)

Flag

![Emblem of the United

Nations](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/52/Emblem_of_the_United_Nations.svg/85px-

Emblem_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png)

Emblem

![Map showing the member states of the United

Nations\[a\]](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/United_Nations_Members_%28green%E2%80%93grey_scheme%29.svg/250px-

United_Nations_Members_%28green%E2%80%93grey_scheme%29.svg.png)

Map showing the member states of the United Nations[a]

Headquarters| New York City (international territory)  
Official languages|

        
                  * Arabic
          * Chinese
          * English
          * French
          * Russian
          * Spanish[2]
        

Type| Intergovernmental organization  
Membership| 193 member states  
2 observer states  
Leaders

• Secretary‑General

| António Guterres

• Deputy Secretary-General

| Amina J. Mohammed

• General Assembly President

| María Fernanda Espinosa

• Economic and Social Council President

| Inga Rhonda King

• Security Council President

| Mansour Ayyad alOtaibi  
Establishment

• UN Charter signed

| 26 June 1945 (73 years ago) (1945-06-26)

• Charter entered into force

| 24 October 1945 (73 years ago) (1945-10-24)

**Website**  
www.un.org  
www.un.int

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Arabic_albayancalligraphy.svg/40px-

Arabic_albayancalligraphy.svg.png) | **This article containsArabic text.**
Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other
symbols.  
---|--- 

The **United Nations** ( **UN** ) is an intergovernmental organization tasked
with maintaining international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, achieving international co-operation, and being a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.[3] It was established after
World War II, with the aim of preventing future wars, and succeeded the
ineffective League of Nations.[4] Its headquarters, which are subject to
extraterritoriality, are in Manhattan, New York City, and it has other main
offices in Geneva, Nairobi, Vienna and The Hague. The organization is financed
by assessed and voluntary contributions from its member states. Its objectives
include maintaining international peace and security, protecting human rights,
delivering humanitarian aid, promoting sustainable development, and upholding
international law.[5] The UN is the largest, most familiar, most
internationally represented and most powerful intergovernmental organization
in the world. At its founding, the UN had 51 member states; there are now 193.

On 25 April 1945, 50 governments met in San Francisco for a conference and
started drafting the UN Charter, which was adopted on 25 June 1945 in the San
Francisco Opera House, and signed on 26 June 1945 in the Herbst Theatre
auditorium in the Veterans War Memorial Building. This charter took effect on
24 October 1945, when the UN began operations. The organisation's mission to
preserve world peace was complicated in its early decades during the Cold War
between the United States and Soviet Union and their respective allies. Its
missions have consisted primarily of unarmed military observers and lightly
armed troops with primarily monitoring, reporting and confidence-building
roles.[6] The organization's membership grew significantly following
widespread decolonization which started in the 1960s. Since then, 80 former
colonies had gained independence, including 11 trust territories, which were
monitored by the Trusteeship Council.[7] By the 1970s its budget for economic
and social development programmes far outstripped its spending on
peacekeeping. After the end of the Cold War, the UN shifted and expanded its
field operations, undertaking a wide variety of complex tasks.[8]

The UN has six principal organs: the General Assembly; the Security Council;
the Economic and Social Council; the Trusteeship Council; the International
Court of Justice; and the UN Secretariat. The UN System agencies include the
World Bank Group, the World Health Organization, the World Food Programme,
UNESCO, and UNICEF. The UN's most prominent officer is the Secretary-General,
an office held by Portuguese politician and diplomat António Guterres since 1
January 2017. Non-governmental organizations may be granted consultative
status with ECOSOC and other agencies to participate in the UN's work.

The organization, its officers, and its agencies have won many Nobel Peace
Prizes. Other evaluations of the UN's effectiveness have been mixed. Some
commentators believe the organization to be an important force for peace and
human development, while others have called the organization ineffective,
biased, or corrupt.

## Contents

        
                  * 1 History
            * 1.1 Background
            * 1.2 1942 "Declaration of United Nations" by the Allies of World War II
            * 1.3 Founding
            * 1.4 Cold War era
            * 1.5 Post-Cold War
          * 2 Structure
            * 2.1 General Assembly
            * 2.2 Security Council
            * 2.3 UN Secretariat
            * 2.4 International Court of Justice
            * 2.5 Economic and Social Council
            * 2.6 Specialized agencies
          * 3 Membership
            * 3.1 Group of 77
          * 4 Objectives
            * 4.1 Peacekeeping and security
            * 4.2 Human rights
            * 4.3 Economic development and humanitarian assistance
            * 4.4 Other
          * 5 Funding
          * 6 Evaluations, awards, and criticism
          * 7 See also
          * 8 Notes
          * 9 References
            * 9.1 Citations
            * 9.2 Bibliography
          * 10 Further reading
          * 11 External links
        

## History

Main article: History of the United Nations

### Background

In the century prior to the UN's creation, several international treaty
organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross was formed
to ensure protection and assistance for victims of armed conflict and
strife.[9] In 1914, a political assassination in Sarajevo set off a chain of
events that led to the outbreak of World War I. As more and more young men
were sent down into the trenches, influential voices in the United States and
Britain began calling for the establishment of a permanent international body
to maintain peace in the postwar world. President Woodrow Wilson became a
vocal advocate of this concept, and in 1918 he included a sketch of the
international body in his 14-point proposal to end the war. In November 1918,
the Central Powers agreed to an armistice to halt the killing in World War I.
Two months later, the Allies met with Germany and Austria-Hungary at
Versailles to hammer out formal peace terms. President Wilson wanted peace,
but the United Kingdom and France disagreed, forcing harsh war reparations on
their former enemies. The League of Nations was approved, and in the summer of
1919 Wilson presented the Treaty of Versailles and the Covenant of the League
of Nations to the US Senate for ratification. On January 10, 1920, the League
of Nations formally comes into being when the Covenant of the League of
Nations, ratified by 42 nations in 1919, takes effect.[10] However, at some
point the League became ineffective when it failed to act against the Japanese
invasion of Manchuria as in February 1933, 40 nations voted for Japan to
withdraw from Manchuria but Japan voted against it and walked out of the
League instead of withdrawing from Manchuria.[11] It also failed against the
Second Italo-Ethiopian War despite trying to talk to Benito Mussolini as he
used the time to send an army to Africa, so the League had a plan for
Mussolini to just take a part of Ethiopia, but he ignored the League and
invaded Ethiopia, the League tried putting sanctions on Italy, but Italy had
already conquered Ethiopia and the League had failed.[12] After Italy
conquered Ethiopia, Italy and other nations left the league. But all of them
realised that it had failed and they began to re-arm as fast as possible.
During 1938, Britain and France tried negotiating directly with Hitler but
this failed in 1939 when Hitler invaded Czechoslovakia. When war broke out in
1939, the League closed down and its headquarters in Geneva remained empty
throughout the war.[13]

### 1942 "Declaration of United Nations" by the Allies of World War II

Main article: Declaration by United Nations

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/88/United_Nations_organization_sketch_by_Franklin_Roosevelt_with_the_Four_Policemen_in_1943.jpg/220px-

United_Nations_organization_sketch_by_Franklin_Roosevelt_with_the_Four_Policemen_in_1943.jpg)

1943 sketch by Franklin Roosevelt of the UN original three branches: The Four
Policemen, an executive branch, and an international assembly of forty UN
member states

The earliest concrete plan for a new world organization began under the aegis
of the U.S. State Department in 1939.[14] The text of the "Declaration by
United Nations" was drafted at the White House on December 29, 1941, by
President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and
Roosevelt aide Harry Hopkins. It incorporated Soviet suggestions, but left no
role for France. "Four Policemen" was coined to refer to four major Allied
countries, United States, United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and Republic of China,
which emerged in the Declaration by United Nations.[15] Roosevelt first coined
the term _United Nations_ to describe the Allied countries.[b] "On New Year's
Day 1942, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, Maxim Litvinov, of
the USSR, and T. V. Soong, of China, signed a short document which later came
to be known as the United Nations Declaration and the next day the
representatives of twenty-two other nations added their signatures."[16] The
term _United Nations_ was first officially used when 26 governments signed
this Declaration. One major change from the Atlantic Charter was the addition
of a provision for religious freedom, which Stalin approved after Roosevelt
insisted.[17][18] By 1 March 1945, 21 additional states had signed.[19]

> A JOINT DECLARATION BY THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
CHINA, AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, CANADA, COSTA RICA, CUBA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC, EL SALVADOR, GREECE, GUATEMALA, HAITI, HONDURAS, INDIA, LUXEMBOURG,
NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NORWAY, PANAMA, POLAND, SOUTH AFRICA,
YUGOSLAVIA

>

> The Governments signatory hereto,

>

> Having subscribed to a common program of purposes and principles embodied in
the Joint Declaration of the President of the United States of America and the
Prime Minister of Great Britain dated August 14, 1941, known as the Atlantic
Charter,

>

> Being convinced that complete victory over their enemies is essential to
defend life, liberty, independence and religious freedom, and to preserve
human rights and justice in their own lands as well as in other lands, and
that they are now engaged in a common struggle against savage and brutal
forces seeking to subjugate the world,

>

> DECLARE:

>  
>         >           1. Each Government pledges itself to employ its full
resources,

>  
>

> military or economic, against those members of the Tripartite Pact and its
adherents with which such government is at war.

>  
>         >           2. Each Government pledges itself to cooperate with the
Governments

>  
>

> signatory hereto and not to make a separate armistice or peace with the
enemies.

>

> The foregoing declaration may be adhered to by other nations which are, or
which may be, rendering material assistance and contributions in the struggle
for victory over Hitlerism.

>

> — The Washington Conference 1941–1942

During the war, "the United Nations" became the official term for the Allies.
To join, countries had to sign the Declaration and declare war on the
Axis.[20]

### Founding

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/United_Nations_Member_States-1945.png/440px-

United_Nations_Member_States-1945.png)

The UN in 1945: founding members in light blue, protectorates and territories
of the founding members in dark blue

The UN was formulated and negotiated among the delegations from the Allied Big
Four (the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China) at
the Dumbarton Oaks Conference from 21 September 1944 to October 7, 1944 and
they agreed on the aims, structure and functioning of the UN.[21][22][23]
After months of planning, the UN Conference on International Organization
opened in San Francisco, 25 April 1945, attended by 50 governments and a
number of non-governmental organizations involved in drafting the UN
Charter.[24][25][26] "The heads of the delegations of the sponsoring countries
took turns as chairman of the plenary meetings: Anthony Eden, of Britain,
Edward Stettinius, of the United States, T. V. Soong, of China, and Vyacheslav
Molotov, of the Soviet Union. At the later meetings, Lord Halifax deputized
for Mister Eden, Wellington Koo for T. V. Soong, and Mister Gromyko for Mister
Molotov."[27] The UN officially came into existence 24 October 1945, upon
ratification of the Charter by the five permanent members of the Security
Council—France, the Republic of China, the Soviet Union, the UK and the US—and
by a majority of the other 46 signatories.[28]

The first meetings of the General Assembly, with 51 nations represented,[c]
and the Security Council took place in Methodist Central Hall, Westminster,
London beginning on 10 January 1946.[28] The General Assembly selected New
York City as the site for the headquarters of the UN, construction began on 14
September 1948 and the facility was completed on 9 October 1952. Its site—like
UN headquarters buildings in Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi—is designated as
international territory.[31] The Norwegian Foreign Minister, Trygve Lie, was
elected as the first UN Secretary-General.[28]

### Cold War era

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Dag-

hammarskjold_2.jpg/170px-Dag-hammarskjold_2.jpg)

Dag Hammarskjöld was a particularly active Secretary-General from 1953 until
his death in 1961.

Though the UN's primary mandate was peacekeeping, the division between the US
and USSR often paralysed the organization, generally allowing it to intervene
only in conflicts distant from the Cold War.[32] Two notable exceptions were a
Security Council resolution on 7 July 1950 authorizing a US-led coalition to
repel the North Korean invasion of South Korea, passed in the absence of the
USSR,[28][33] and the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement in 27 July
1953.[34]

On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly approved a resolution to partition
Palestine, approving the creation of the state of Israel.[35] Two years later,
Ralph Bunche, a UN official, negotiated an armistice to the resulting
conflict.[36] On November 7, 1956, the first UN peacekeeping force was
established to end the Suez Crisis;[37] however, the UN was unable to
intervene against the USSR's simultaneous invasion of Hungary following that
country's revolution.[38]

On 14 July 1960, the UN established United Nations Operation in the Congo
(UNOC), the largest military force of its early decades, to bring order to the
breakaway State of Katanga, restoring it to the control of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by 11 May 1964.[39] While travelling to meet rebel
leader Moise Tshombe during the conflict, Dag Hammarskjöld, often named as one
of the UN's most effective Secretaries-General,[40] died in a plane crash;
months later he was posthumously awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[41] In 1964,
Hammarskjöld's successor, U Thant, deployed the UN Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, which would become one of the UN's longest-running peacekeeping
missions.[42]

With the spread of decolonization in the 1960s, the organization's membership
saw an influx of newly independent nations. In 1960 alone, 17 new states
joined the UN, 16 of them from Africa.[37] On 25 October 1971, with opposition
from the United States, but with the support of many Third World nations, the
mainland, communist People's Republic of China was given the Chinese seat on
the Security Council in place of the Republic of China that occupied Taiwan;
the vote was widely seen as a sign of waning US influence in the
organization.[43] Third World nations organized into the Group of 77 coalition
under the leadership of Algeria, which briefly became a dominant power at the
UN.[44] On 10 November 1975, a bloc comprising the USSR and Third World
nations passed a resolution, over strenuous US and Israeli opposition,
declaring Zionism to be racism; the resolution was repealed on 16 December
1991, shortly after the end of the Cold War.[45][46]

With an increasing Third World presence and the failure of UN mediation in
conflicts in the Middle East, Vietnam, and Kashmir, the UN increasingly
shifted its attention to its ostensibly secondary goals of economic
development and cultural exchange.[47] By the 1970s, the UN budget for social
and economic development was far greater than its peacekeeping budget.

### Post-Cold War

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Kofi_Annan.jpg/170px-

Kofi_Annan.jpg)

Kofi Annan, Secretary-General from 1997 to 2006

After the Cold War, the UN saw a radical expansion in its peacekeeping duties,
taking on more missions in ten years than it had in the previous four
decades.[48] Between 1988 and 2000, the number of adopted Security Council
resolutions more than doubled, and the peacekeeping budget increased more than
tenfold.[49][50][51] The UN negotiated an end to the Salvadoran Civil War,
launched a successful peacekeeping mission in Namibia, and oversaw democratic
elections in post-apartheid South Africa and post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia.[52] In
1991, the UN authorized a US-led coalition that repulsed the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait.[53] Brian Urquhart, Under-Secretary-General from 1971 to 1985, later
described the hopes raised by these successes as a "false renaissance" for the
organization, given the more troubled missions that followed.[54]

Though the UN Charter had been written primarily to prevent aggression by one
nation against another, in the early 1990s the UN faced a number of
simultaneous, serious crises within nations such as Somalia, Haiti,
Mozambique, and the former Yugoslavia.[55] The UN mission in Somalia was
widely viewed as a failure after the US withdrawal following casualties in the
Battle of Mogadishu, and the UN mission to Bosnia faced "worldwide ridicule"
for its indecisive and confused mission in the face of ethnic cleansing.[56]
In 1994, the UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda failed to intervene in the
Rwandan genocide amid indecision in the Security Council.[57]

Beginning in the last decades of the Cold War, American and European critics
of the UN condemned the organization for perceived mismanagement and
corruption.[58] In 1984, the US President, Ronald Reagan, withdrew his
nation's funding from UNESCO (the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, founded 1946) over allegations of mismanagement,
followed by Britain and Singapore.[59][60] Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-
General from 1992 to 1996, initiated a reform of the Secretariat, reducing the
size of the organization somewhat.[61][62] His successor, Kofi Annan
(1997–2006), initiated further management reforms in the face of threats from
the United States to withhold its UN dues.[62]

In the late 1990s and 2000s, international interventions authorized by the UN
took a wider variety of forms. The UN mission in the Sierra Leone Civil War of
1991–2002 was supplemented by British Royal Marines, and the invasion of
Afghanistan in 2001 was overseen by NATO.[63]In 2003, the United States
invaded Iraq despite failing to pass a UN Security Council resolution for
authorization, prompting a new round of questioning of the organization's
effectiveness.[64] Under the eighth Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, the UN has
intervened with peacekeepers in crises including the War in Darfur in Sudan
and the Kivu conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo and sent observers
and chemical weapons inspectors to the Syrian Civil War.[65] In 2013, an
internal review of UN actions in the final battles of the Sri Lankan Civil War
in 2009 concluded that the organization had suffered "systemic failure".[66]
One hundred and one UN personnel died in the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the worst
loss of life in the organization's history.[67]

The Millennium Summit was held in 2000 to discuss the UN's role in the 21st
century.[68] The three day meeting was the largest gathering of world leaders
in history, and culminated in the adoption by all member states of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), a commitment to achieve international
development in areas such as poverty reduction, gender equality, and public
health. Progress towards these goals, which were to be met by 2015, was
ultimately uneven. The 2005 World Summit reaffirmed the UN's focus on
promoting development, peacekeeping, human rights, and global security.[69]
The Sustainable Development Goals were launched in 2015 to succeed the
Millennium Development Goals.[70]

In addition to addressing global challenges, the UN has sought to improve its
accountability and democratic legitimacy by engaging more with civil society
and fostering a global constituency.[71] In an effort to enhance transparency,
in 2016 the organization held its first public debate between candidates for
Secretary-General.[72] On 1 January 2017, Portuguese diplomat António
Guterres, who previously served as UN High Commissioner for Refugees, became
the ninth Secretary-General. Guterres has highlighted several key goals for
his administration, including an emphasis on diplomacy for preventing
conflicts, more effective peacekeeping efforts, and streamlining the
organization to be more responsive and versatile to global needs.[73]

## Structure

Main article: United Nations System

The UN system is based on five principal organs: the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), the International
Court of Justice and the UN Secretariat.[74] A sixth principal organ, the
Trusteeship Council, suspended operations on 1 November 1994, upon the
independence of Palau, the last remaining UN trustee territory.[75]

Four of the five principal organs are located at the main UN Headquarters in
New York City.[76] The International Court of Justice is located in The Hague,
while other major agencies are based in the UN offices at Geneva,[77]
Vienna,[78] and Nairobi.[79] Other UN institutions are located throughout the
world. The six official languages of the UN, used in intergovernmental
meetings and documents, are Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and
Spanish.[80] On the basis of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations, the UN and its agencies are immune from the laws of the
countries where they operate, safeguarding the UN's impartiality with regard
to the host and member countries.[81]

Below the six organs sit, in the words of the author Linda Fasulo, "an amazing
collection of entities and organizations, some of which are actually older
than the UN itself and operate with almost complete independence from it".[82]
These include specialized agencies, research and training institutions,
programmes and funds, and other UN entities.[83]

The UN obey the _Noblemaire principle_ , which is binding on any organization
that belongs to the UN system. This principle calls for salaries that will
draw and keep citizens of countries where salaries are highest, and also calls
for equal pay for work of equal value independent of the employee's
nationality.[84][85] In practice, the ICSC takes reference to the highest-
paying national civil service.[86] Staff salaries are subject to an internal
tax that is administered by the UN organizations.[84][87]

**Principal organs of the United Nations** [88]

        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

**UN General Assembly**  
-- Deliberative assembly of all UN member states -- | | **UN Secretariat**  
-- Administrative organ of the UN -- | | **International Court of Justice**  
-- Universal court for international law --  
---|---|---|---|--- 

![UN General Assembly

hall](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/05/UN_General_Assembly_hall.jpg/260px-

UN_General_Assembly_hall.jpg)

|

![Headquarters of the UN in New York

City](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ea/United_Nations_Headquarters_in_New_York_City%2C_view_from_Roosevelt_Island.jpg/260px-

United_Nations_Headquarters_in_New_York_City%2C_view_from_Roosevelt_Island.jpg)

|

![International Court of

Justice](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fb/International_Court_of_Justice.jpg/260px-

International_Court_of_Justice.jpg)

        
                  * May resolve non-compulsory recommendations to states or suggestions to the Security Council (UNSC);
          * Decides on the admission of new members, following proposal by the UNSC;
          * Adopts the budget;
          * Elects the non-permanent members of the UNSC; all members of ECOSOC; the UN Secretary General (following his/her proposal by the UNSC); and the fifteen judges of the International Court of Justice (ICJ). Each country has one vote.
        

|

        
                  * Supports the other UN bodies administratively (for example, in the organization of conferences, the writing of reports and studies and the preparation of the budget);
          * Its chairperson – the UN Secretary General – is elected by the General Assembly for a five-year mandate and is the UN's foremost representative.
        

|

        
                  * Decides disputes between states that recognize its jurisdiction;
          * Issues legal opinions;
          * Renders judgement by relative majority. Its fifteen judges are elected by the UN General Assembly for nine-year terms.
        

**UN Security Council**  
-- For international security issues -- | **UN Economic and Social Council**  
-- For global economic and social affairs -- | **UN Trusteeship Council**  
-- For administering trust territories ( _currently inactive_ ) --

![UN security council](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/95/UN-

Sicherheitsrat_-_UN_Security_Council_-_New_York_City_-_2014_01_06.jpg/260px-

UN-Sicherheitsrat_-_UN_Security_Council_-_New_York_City_-_2014_01_06.jpg)

|

![UN Economic and Social

Council](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e1/United_Nations_Economic_and_Social_Council.jpg/260px-

United_Nations_Economic_and_Social_Council.jpg)

|

![UN Trusteeship

Council](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/United_Nations_Trusteeship_Council_chamber_in_New_York_City_2.JPG/260px-

United_Nations_Trusteeship_Council_chamber_in_New_York_City_2.JPG)

        
                  * Responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security;
          * May adopt compulsory resolutions;
          * Has fifteen members: five permanent members with veto power and ten elected members.
        

|

        
                  * Responsible for co-operation between states as regards economic and social matters;
          * Co-ordinates co-operation between the UN's numerous specialized agencies;
          * Has 54 members, elected by the General Assembly to serve staggered three-year mandates.
        

|

        
                  * Was originally designed to manage colonial possessions that were former League of Nations mandates;
          * Has been inactive since 1994, when Palau, the last trust territory, attained independence.
        

### General Assembly

Main article: United Nations General Assembly

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/RIAN_archive_828797_Mikhail_Gorbachev_addressing_UN_General_Assembly_session.jpg/220px-

RIAN_archive_828797_Mikhail_Gorbachev_addressing_UN_General_Assembly_session.jpg)

Mikhail Gorbachev, Soviet general secretary, addresses the UN General Assembly
in December 1988.

The General Assembly is the main deliberative assembly of the UN. Composed of
all UN member states, the assembly meets in regular yearly sessions, but
emergency sessions can also be called.[89] The assembly is led by a president,
elected from among the member states on a rotating regional basis, and 21
vice-presidents.[90] The first session convened 10 January 1946 in the
Methodist Central Hall in London and included representatives of 51
nations.[28]

When the General Assembly decides on important questions such as those on
peace and security, admission of new members and budgetary matters, a two-
thirds majority of those present and voting is required.[91][92] All other
questions are decided by a majority vote. Each member country has one vote.
Apart from approval of budgetary matters, resolutions are not binding on the
members. The Assembly may make recommendations on any matters within the scope
of the UN, except matters of peace and security that are under consideration
by the Security Council.[89]

Draft resolutions can be forwarded to the General Assembly by its six main
committees:[93]

        
                  * First Committee (Disarmament and International Security)
          * Second Committee (Economic and Financial)
          * Third Committee (Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural)
          * Fourth Committee (Special Political and Decolonization)
          * Fifth Committee (Administrative and Budgetary)
          * Sixth Committee (Legal)
        

As well as by the following two committees:

        
                  * General Committee – a supervisory committee consisting of the assembly's president, vice-president, and committee heads
          * Credentials Committee – responsible for determining the credentials of each member nation's UN representatives
        

### Security Council

Main article: United Nations Security Council

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/ba/Colin_Powell_anthrax_vial._5_Feb_2003_at_the_UN.jpg/220px-

Colin_Powell_anthrax_vial._5_Feb_2003_at_the_UN.jpg)

Colin Powell, the US Secretary of State, demonstrates a vial with alleged
Iraqi chemical weapon probes to the UN Security Council on Iraq war hearings,
5 February 2003.

The Security Council is charged with maintaining peace and security among
countries. While other organs of the UN can only make "recommendations" to
member states, the Security Council has the power to make binding decisions
that member states have agreed to carry out, under the terms of Charter
Article 25.[94] The decisions of the Council are known as United Nations
Security Council resolutions.[95]

The Security Council is made up of fifteen member states, consisting of five
permanent members—China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United
States—and ten non-permanent members elected for two-year terms by the General
Assembly (with end of term date)—Belgium (term ends 2020), Côte d'Ivoire
(2019), Dominican Republic (2020), Equatorial Guinea (2019), Germany (2020),
Indonesia (2020), Kuwait (2019), Peru (2019), Poland (2019), and South Africa
(2020).[96] The five permanent members hold veto power over UN resolutions,
allowing a permanent member to block adoption of a resolution, though not
debate. The ten temporary seats are held for two-year terms, with five member
states per year voted in by the General Assembly on a regional basis.[97] The
presidency of the Security Council rotates alphabetically each month.[98]

### UN Secretariat

Main articles: United Nations Secretariat and Secretary-General of the United
Nations

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/Ant%C3%B3nio_Guterres_November_2016.jpg/170px-

Ant%C3%B3nio_Guterres_November_2016.jpg)

The current Secretary-General, António Guterres

The UN Secretariat is headed by the Secretary-General, assisted by the Deputy
Secretary-General and a staff of international civil servants worldwide.[99]
It provides studies, information, and facilities needed by UN bodies for their
meetings. It also carries out tasks as directed by the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and other UN bodies.[100]

The Secretary-General acts as the _de facto_ spokesperson and leader of the
UN. The position is defined in the UN Charter as the organization's "chief
administrative officer".[101] Article 99 of the charter states that the
Secretary-General can bring to the Security Council's attention "any matter
which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security", a phrase that Secretaries-General since Trygve Lie have interpreted
as giving the position broad scope for action on the world stage.[102] The
office has evolved into a dual role of an administrator of the UN organization
and a diplomat and mediator addressing disputes between member states and
finding consensus to global issues.[103]

The Secretary-General is appointed by the General Assembly, after being
recommended by the Security Council, where the permanent members have veto
power. There are no specific criteria for the post, but over the years it has
become accepted that the post shall be held for one or two terms of five
years.[104] The current Secretary-General is António Guterres, who replaced
Ban Ki-moon in 2017.

Secretaries-General of the United Nations[105] No. | Name | Country of origin
| Took office | Left office | Notes  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 | **Trygve Lie** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Norway.svg/21px-

Flag_of_Norway.svg.png) Norway | 2 February 1946 | 10 November 1952 | Resigned  
2 | **Dag Hammarskjöld** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Sweden.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Sweden.svg.png) Sweden | 10 April 1953 | 18 September 1961 | Died in
office  
3 | **U Thant** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/51/Flag_of_Burma_%281948%E2%80%931974%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Burma_%281948%E2%80%931974%29.svg.png) Burma | 30 November 1961 | 31
December 1971 |  
4 | **Kurt Waldheim** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_Austria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Austria.svg.png) Austria | 1 January 1972 | 31 December 1981 |  
5 | **Javier Pérez de Cuéllar** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Flag_of_Peru.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Peru.svg.png) Peru | 1 January 1982 | 31 December 1991 |  
6 | **Boutros Boutros-Ghali** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Flag_of_Egypt.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Egypt.svg.png) Egypt | 1 January 1992 | 31 December 1996 |  
7 | **Kofi Annan** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/Flag_of_Ghana.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ghana.svg.png) Ghana | 1 January 1997 | 31 December 2006 |  
8 | **Ban Ki-moon** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Flag_of_South_Korea.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Korea.svg.png) South Korea | 1 January 2007 | 31 December 2016 |  
9 | **António Guterres** |
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Flag_of_Portugal.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Portugal.svg.png) Portugal | 1 January 2017 | – |

### International Court of Justice

Main article: International Court of Justice

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Grand_Hall_de_Justice_de_Palais_de_La_Paix_%C3%A0_La_Haye_Pays-

Bas.jpg/220px-Grand_Hall_de_Justice_de_Palais_de_La_Paix_%C3%A0_La_Haye_Pays-

Bas.jpg)

The court ruled that Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from
Serbia in 2008 did not violate international law.

The International Court of Justice (ICJ), located in The Hague, in the
Netherlands, is the primary judicial organ of the UN. Established in 1945 by
the UN Charter, the Court began work in 1946 as the successor to the Permanent
Court of International Justice. The ICJ is composed of 15 judges who serve
9-year terms and are appointed by the General Assembly; every sitting judge
must be from a different nation.[106][107]

It is based in the Peace Palace in The Hague, sharing the building with the
Hague Academy of International Law, a private centre for the study of
international law. The ICJ's primary purpose is to adjudicate disputes among
states. The court has heard cases related to war crimes, illegal state
interference, ethnic cleansing, and other issues.[108] The ICJ can also be
called upon by other UN organs to provide advisory opinions.[106] It is the
only organ that is not located in New York.

### Economic and Social Council

Main article: United Nations Economic and Social Council

The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) assists the General Assembly in
promoting international economic and social co-operation and development.
ECOSOC has 54 members, which are elected by the General Assembly for a three-
year term. The president is elected for a one-year term and chosen amongst the
small or middle powers represented on ECOSOC. The council has one annual
meeting in July, held in either New York or Geneva. Viewed as separate from
the specialized bodies it co-ordinates, ECOSOC's functions include information
gathering, advising member nations, and making recommendations.[109][110]
Owing to its broad mandate of co-ordinating many agencies, ECOSOC has at times
been criticized as unfocused or irrelevant.[109][111]

ECOSOC's subsidiary bodies include the United Nations Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues, which advises UN agencies on issues relating to indigenous
peoples; the United Nations Forum on Forests, which co-ordinates and promotes
sustainable forest management; the United Nations Statistical Commission,
which co-ordinates information-gathering efforts between agencies; and the
Commission on Sustainable Development, which co-ordinates efforts between UN
agencies and NGOs working towards sustainable development. ECOSOC may also
grant consultative status to non-governmental organizations;[109] by 2004,
more than 2,200 organizations had received this status.[112]

### Specialized agencies

Main article: List of specialized agencies of the United Nations

The UN Charter stipulates that each primary organ of the United Nations can
establish various specialized agencies to fulfil its duties.[113] Some best-
known agencies are the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Food and
Agriculture Organization, UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization), the World Bank, and the World Health Organization
(WHO). The UN performs most of its humanitarian work through these agencies.
Examples include mass vaccination programmes (through WHO), the avoidance of
famine and malnutrition (through the work of the WFP), and the protection of
vulnerable and displaced people (for example, by UNHCR).[114]

**Organizations and specialized agencies of the United Nations** No. | Acronym
| Agency | Headquarters | Head | Established in  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 | FAO | **Food and Agriculture Organization** |
![Italy](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/03/Flag_of_Italy.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Italy.svg.png) Rome, Italy |
![Brazil](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/05/Flag_of_Brazil.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Brazil.svg.png) José Graziano da Silva | 1945  
2 | IAEA | **International Atomic Energy Agency** |
![Austria](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_Austria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Austria.svg.png) Vienna, Austria |
![Japan](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Japan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Japan.svg.png) Yukiya Amano | 1957  
3 | ICAO | **International Civil Aviation Organization** |
![Canada](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg.png) Montreal, Quebec, Canada |
![China](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png) Fang Liu | 1947  
4 | IFAD | **International Fund for Agricultural Development** |
![Italy](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/03/Flag_of_Italy.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Italy.svg.png) Rome, Italy |
![Nigeria](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Flag_of_Nigeria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Nigeria.svg.png) Kanayo F. Nwanze | 1977  
5 | ILO | **International Labour Organization** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Geneva, Switzerland | ![United

Kingdom](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg.png) Guy Ryder | 1946 (1919)  
6 | IMO | **International Maritime Organization** | ![United

Kingdom](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg.png) London, United Kingdom | ![South

Korea](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Flag_of_South_Korea.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Korea.svg.png) Kitack Lim | 1948  
7 | IMF | **International Monetary Fund** | ![United

States](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) Washington, D.C., United States |
![France](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-

Flag_of_France.svg.png) Christine Lagarde | 1945 (1944)  
8 | ITU | **International Telecommunication Union** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Geneva, Switzerland |
![China](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png) Houlin Zhao | 1947 (1865)  
9 | UNESCO | **United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization** |
![France](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-

Flag_of_France.svg.png) Paris, France |
![France](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-

Flag_of_France.svg.png) Audrey Azoulay | 1946  
10 | UNIDO | **United Nations Industrial Development Organization** |
![Austria](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_Austria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Austria.svg.png) Vienna, Austria |
![China](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png) Li Yong | 1967  
11 | UNWTO | **World Tourism Organization** |
![Spain](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/9a/Flag_of_Spain.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Spain.svg.png) Madrid, Spain |
![Jordan](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c0/Flag_of_Jordan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Jordan.svg.png) Taleb Rifai | 1974  
12 | UPU | **Universal Postal Union** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Bern, Switzerland |
![Kenya](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Flag_of_Kenya.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kenya.svg.png) Bishar Abdirahman Hussein | 1947 (1874)  
13 | WBG | **World Bank Group** | ![United

States](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) Washington, D.C., United States |
![Bulgaria](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/Flag_of_Bulgaria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Bulgaria.svg.png) Kristalina Georgieva | 1945 (1944)  
14 | WFP | **World Food Programme** |
![Italy](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/03/Flag_of_Italy.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Italy.svg.png) Rome, Italy | ![United

States](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) David Beasley | 1963  
15 | WHO | **World Health Organization** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Geneva, Switzerland |
![Ethiopia](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/71/Flag_of_Ethiopia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ethiopia.svg.png) Tedros Adhanom | 1948  
16 | WIPO | **World Intellectual Property Organization** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Geneva, Switzerland |
![Australia](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/88/Flag_of_Australia_%28converted%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Australia_%28converted%29.svg.png) Francis Gurry | 1974  
17 | WMO | **World Meteorological Organization** |
![Switzerland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png) Geneva, Switzerland |
![Finland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Flag_of_Finland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Finland.svg.png) Petteri Taalas (Secretary-General)  
![France](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-

Flag_of_France.svg.png) Michel Jarraud (President) | 1950 (1873)

## Membership

Main article: Member states of the United Nations

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/15/UN_Member_Countries_World.svg/440px-

UN_Member_Countries_World.svg.png)

Map of the current UN member states by their dates of admission[115]

1945 (original members)

1946–1959

1960–1989

1990–present

non-member observer states

With the addition of South Sudan 14 July 2011,[116] there are 193 UN member
states, including all undisputed independent states apart from Vatican
City.[117][d] The UN Charter outlines the rules for membership:

> >           1. Membership in the United Nations is open to all other peace-
loving

>  
>

> states that accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in
the judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.

>  
>         >           2. The admission of any such state to membership in the
United Nations

>  
>

> will be effected by a decision of the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council. Chapter II, Article 4.[118]

In addition, there are two non-member observer states of the United Nations
General Assembly: the Holy See (which holds sovereignty over Vatican City) and
the State of Palestine.[119] The Cook Islands and Niue, both states in free
association with New Zealand, are full members of several UN specialized
agencies and have had their "full treaty-making capacity" recognized by the
Secretariat.[120]

### Group of 77

Main article: Group of 77

The Group of 77 at the UN is a loose coalition of developing nations, designed
to promote its members' collective economic interests and create an enhanced
joint negotiating capacity in the UN. Seventy-seven nations founded the
organization, but by November 2013 the organization had since expanded to 133
member countries.[121] The group was founded 15 June 1964 by the "Joint
Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries" issued at the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). The group held its first major
meeting in Algiers in 1967, where it adopted the Charter of Algiers and
established the basis for permanent institutional structures.[122]

## Objectives

### Peacekeeping and security

Main articles: United Nations peacekeeping and List of United Nations
peacekeeping missions

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3b/Bolivian_Army_2nd_Lt._Mauricio_Vidangos_stands_guard_at_the_entry_control_point_of_an_Observation_Point.jpg/220px-

Bolivian_Army_2nd_Lt._Mauricio_Vidangos_stands_guard_at_the_entry_control_point_of_an_Observation_Point.jpg)

Bolivian "Blue Helmet" at an exercise in Chile, 21 October 2002

The UN, after approval by the Security Council, sends peacekeepers to regions
where armed conflict has recently ceased or paused to enforce the terms of
peace agreements and to discourage combatants from resuming hostilities. Since
the UN does not maintain its own military, peacekeeping forces are voluntarily
provided by member states. These soldiers are sometimes nicknamed "Blue
Helmets" for their distinctive gear.[123][124] The peacekeeping force as a
whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988.[125]

In September 2013, the UN had peacekeeping soldiers deployed on 15 missions.
The largest was the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which included 20,688 uniformed
personnel. The smallest, United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan (UNMOGIP), included 42 uniformed personnel responsible for monitoring
the ceasefire in Jammu and Kashmir. UN peacekeepers with the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) have been stationed in the Middle East
since 1948, the longest-running active peacekeeping mission.[126]

A study by the RAND Corporation in 2005 found the UN to be successful in two
out of three peacekeeping efforts. It compared efforts at nation-building by
the UN to those of the United States, and found that seven out of eight UN
cases are at peace, as compared with four out of eight US cases at peace.[127]
Also in 2005, the Human Security Report documented a decline in the number of
wars, genocides, and human rights abuses since the end of the Cold War, and
presented evidence, albeit circumstantial, that international activism—mostly
spearheaded by the UN—has been the main cause of the decline in armed conflict
in that period.[128] Situations in which the UN has not only acted to keep the
peace but also intervened include the Korean War (1950–53) and the
authorization of intervention in Iraq after the Gulf War (1990–91).[129]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9b/GreenLine_BufferZone_Large.JPG/210px-

GreenLine_BufferZone_Large.JPG)

UN Buffer Zone in Cyprus was established in 1974 following the Turkish
invasion of Cyprus.

The UN has also drawn criticism for perceived failures. In many cases, member
states have shown reluctance to achieve or enforce Security Council
resolutions. Disagreements in the Security Council about military action and
intervention are seen as having failed to prevent the Bangladesh genocide in
1971,[130] the Cambodian genocide in the 1970s,[131] and the Rwandan genocide
in 1994.[132] Similarly, UN inaction is blamed for failing to either prevent
the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 or complete the peacekeeping operations in
1992–93 during the Somali Civil War.[133] UN peacekeepers have also been
accused of child rape, soliciting prostitutes, and sexual abuse during various
peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,[134]
Haiti,[135] Liberia,[136] Sudan and what is now South Sudan,[137] Burundi, and
Ivory Coast.[138] Scientists cited UN peacekeepers from Nepal as the likely
source of the 2010–13 Haiti cholera outbreak, which killed more than 8,000
Haitians following the 2010 Haiti earthquake.[139]

In addition to peacekeeping, the UN is also active in encouraging disarmament.
Regulation of armaments was included in the writing of the UN Charter in 1945
and was envisioned as a way of limiting the use of human and economic
resources for their creation.[94] The advent of nuclear weapons came only
weeks after the signing of the charter, resulting in the first resolution of
the first General Assembly meeting calling for specific proposals for "the
elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major
weapons adaptable to mass destruction".[140] The UN has been involved with
arms-limitation treaties, such as the Outer Space Treaty (1967), the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968), the Seabed Arms Control
Treaty (1971), the Biological Weapons Convention (1972), the Chemical Weapons
Convention (1992), and the Ottawa Treaty (1997), which prohibits
landmines.[141] Three UN bodies oversee arms proliferation issues: the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Preparatory Commission.[142]

### Human rights

One of the UN's primary purposes is "promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language, or religion", and member states pledge to undertake
"joint and separate action" to protect these rights.[113][143]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/EleanorRooseveltHumanRights.png/220px-

EleanorRooseveltHumanRights.png)

Eleanor Roosevelt with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Spanish,
1949

In 1948, the General Assembly adopted a Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
drafted by a committee headed by American diplomat and activist Eleanor
Roosevelt, and including the French lawyer René Cassin. The document proclaims
basic civil, political, and economic rights common to all human beings, though
its effectiveness towards achieving these ends has been disputed since its
drafting.[144] The Declaration serves as a "common standard of achievement for
all peoples and all nations" rather than a legally binding document, but it
has become the basis of two binding treaties, the 1966 International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights.[145] In practice, the UN is unable to take significant
action against human rights abuses without a Security Council resolution,
though it does substantial work in investigating and reporting abuses.[146]

In 1979, the General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, followed by the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in 1989.[147] With the end of the Cold War, the push for
human rights action took on new impetus.[148] The United Nations Commission on
Human Rights was formed in 1993 to oversee human rights issues for the UN,
following the recommendation of that year's World Conference on Human Rights.
Jacques Fomerand, a scholar of the UN, describes this organization's mandate
as "broad and vague", with only "meagre" resources to carry it out.[149] In
2006, it was replaced by a Human Rights Council consisting of 47 nations.[150]
Also in 2006, the General Assembly passed a Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples,[151] and in 2011 it passed its first resolution
recognizing the rights of LGBT people.[152]

Other UN bodies responsible for women's rights issues include United Nations
Commission on the Status of Women, a commission of ECOSOC founded in 1946; the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, created in 1976; and the United
Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, founded in 1979.[153] The UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, one
of three bodies with a mandate to oversee issues related to indigenous
peoples, held its first session in 2002.[154]

### Economic development and humanitarian assistance

**Millennium Development Goals[155]**

* * *
        
                  1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
          2. Achieve universal primary education
          3. Promote gender equality and empower women
          4. Reduce child mortality
          5. Improve maternal health
          6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
          7. Ensure environmental sustainability
          8. Develop a global partnership for development
        

Another primary purpose of the UN is "to achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or
humanitarian character".[143] Numerous bodies have been created to work
towards this goal, primarily under the authority of the General Assembly and
ECOSOC.[156] In 2000, the 192 UN member states agreed to achieve eight
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.[157] The Sustainable Development Goals
were launched in 2015 to succeed the Millennium Development Goals.[70] The
SDGs have an associated financing framework called the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda.

The UN Development Programme (UNDP), an organization for grant-based technical
assistance founded in 1945, is one of the leading bodies in the field of
international development. The organization also publishes the UN Human
Development Index, a comparative measure ranking countries by poverty,
literacy, education, life expectancy, and other factors.[158][159] The Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), also founded in 1945, promotes
agricultural development and food security.[160] UNICEF (the United Nations
Children's Fund) was created in 1946 to aid European children after the Second
World War and expanded its mission to provide aid around the world and to
uphold the Convention on the Rights of the Child.[161][162]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Directors_of_Global_Smallpox_Eradication_Program.jpg/200px-

Directors_of_Global_Smallpox_Eradication_Program.jpg)

Three former directors of the Global Smallpox Eradication Programme read the
news that smallpox had been globally eradicated, 1980.

The World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund (IMF) are independent,
specialized agencies and observers within the UN framework, according to a
1947 agreement. They were initially formed separately from the UN through the
Bretton Woods Agreement in 1944.[163] The World Bank provides loans for
international development, while the IMF promotes international economic co-
operation and gives emergency loans to indebted countries.[164]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/Iman_Mutlaq_visits_Zaatari_Refugee_Camp.jpg/200px-

Iman_Mutlaq_visits_Zaatari_Refugee_Camp.jpg)

In Jordan, UNHCR remains responsible for the Syrian refugees and the Zaatari
refugee camp.

The World Health Organization (WHO), which focuses on international health
issues and disease eradication, is another of the UN's largest agencies. In
1980, the agency announced that the eradication of smallpox had been
completed. In subsequent decades, WHO largely eradicated polio, river
blindness, and leprosy.[165] The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), begun in 1996, co-ordinates the organization's response to the AIDS
epidemic.[166] The UN Population Fund, which also dedicates part of its
resources to combating HIV, is the world's largest source of funding for
reproductive health and family planning services.[167]

Along with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the UN often
takes a leading role in co-ordinating emergency relief.[168] The World Food
Programme (WFP), created in 1961, provides food aid in response to famine,
natural disasters, and armed conflict. The organization reports that it feeds
an average of 90 million people in 80 nations each year.[168][169] The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), established in
1950, works to protect the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless
people.[170] UNHCR and WFP programmes are funded by voluntary contributions
from governments, corporations, and individuals, though the UNHCR's
administrative costs are paid for by the UN's primary budget.[171]

### Other

Since the UN's creation, over 80 colonies have attained independence. The
General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in 1960 with no votes against but abstentions
from all major colonial powers. The UN works towards decolonization through
groups including the UN Committee on Decolonization, created in 1962.[172] The
committee lists seventeen remaining "Non-Self-Governing Territories", the
largest and most populous of which is Western Sahara.[173]

Beginning with the formation of the UN Environmental Programme (UNEP) in 1972,
the UN has made environmental issues a prominent part of its agenda. A lack of
success in the first two decades of UN work in this area led to the 1992 Earth
Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, which sought to give new impetus to these
efforts.[174] In 1988, the UNEP and the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), another UN organization, established the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, which assesses and reports on research on global warming.[175]
The UN-sponsored Kyoto Protocol, signed in 1997, set legally binding emissions
reduction targets for ratifying states.[176]

The UN also declares and co-ordinates international observances, periods of
time to observe issues of international interest or concern. Examples include
World Tuberculosis Day, Earth Day, and the International Year of Deserts and
Desertification.[177]

## Funding

Top 25 contributors to the United Nations budget for the period 2019 -
2021[178] Member state | Contribution  
(% of UN budget)  
---|---  
**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png)United States** |

22.000

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png)China** |

12.005

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Japan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Japan.svg.png)Japan** |

8.564

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/ba/Flag_of_Germany.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Germany.svg.png)Germany** |

6.090

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg.png)United Kingdom** |

4.567

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-

Flag_of_France.svg.png)France** |

4.427

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/03/Flag_of_Italy.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Italy.svg.png)Italy** |

3.307

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/05/Flag_of_Brazil.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Brazil.svg.png)Brazil** |

2.948

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg.png)Canada** |

2.734

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Russia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Russia.svg.png)Russia** |

2.405

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Flag_of_South_Korea.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Korea.svg.png)South Korea** |

2.267

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/88/Flag_of_Australia_%28converted%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Australia_%28converted%29.svg.png)Australia** |

2.210

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/9a/Flag_of_Spain.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Spain.svg.png)Spain** |

2.146

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b4/Flag_of_Turkey.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Turkey.svg.png)Turkey** |

1.371

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/20/Flag_of_the_Netherlands.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_Netherlands.svg.png)Netherlands** |

1.356

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fc/Flag_of_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mexico.svg.png)Mexico** |

1.292

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0d/Flag_of_Saudi_Arabia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Saudi_Arabia.svg.png)Saudi Arabia** |

1.172

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Flag_of_Switzerland.svg/16px-

Flag_of_Switzerland.svg.png)Switzerland** |

1.151

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_Argentina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Argentina.svg.png)Argentina** |

0.915

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Sweden.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Sweden.svg.png)Sweden** |

0.906

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_India.svg/23px-

Flag_of_India.svg.png)India** |

0.834

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Flag_of_Belgium_%28civil%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Belgium_%28civil%29.svg.png)Belgium** |

0.821

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/12/Flag_of_Poland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Poland.svg.png)Poland** |

0.802

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/77/Flag_of_Algeria.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Algeria.svg.png)Algeria** |

0.788

**![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Norway.svg/21px-

Flag_of_Norway.svg.png)Norway** |

0.754

The UN is financed from assessed and voluntary contributions from member
states. The General Assembly approves the regular budget and determines the
assessment for each member. This is broadly based on the relative capacity of
each country to pay, as measured by its gross national income (GNI), with
adjustments for external debt and low per capita income.[179] The two-year
budget for 2012–13 was $5.512 billion in total.[180]

The Assembly has established the principle that the UN should not be unduly
dependent on any one member to finance its operations. Thus, there is a
"ceiling" rate, setting the maximum amount that any member can be assessed for
the regular budget. In December 2000, the Assembly revised the scale of
assessments in response to pressure from the United States. As part of that
revision, the regular budget ceiling was reduced from 25% to 22%.[181] For the
least developed countries (LDCs), a ceiling rate of 0.01% is applied.[179] In
addition to the ceiling rates, the minimum amount assessed to any member
nation (or "floor" rate) is set at 0.001% of the UN budget ($55,120 for the
two year budget 2013–2014).[182]

A large share of the UN's expenditure addresses its core mission of peace and
security, and this budget is assessed separately from the main organizational
budget.[183] The peacekeeping budget for the 2015–16 fiscal year was $8.27
billion, supporting 82,318 troops deployed in 15 missions around the
world.[126] UN peace operations are funded by assessments, using a formula
derived from the regular funding scale that includes a weighted surcharge for
the five permanent Security Council members, who must approve all peacekeeping
operations. This surcharge serves to offset discounted peacekeeping assessment
rates for less developed countries. In 2017, the top eight providers of
assessed financial contributions to UN peacekeeping operations were the United
States (28.47%), China (10.25%), Japan (9.68%), Germany (6.39%), France
(6.28%), United Kingdom (5.77%), Russian Federation (3.99%) and Italy
(3.75%).[184]

Special UN programmes not included in the regular budget, such as UNICEF and
the World Food Programme, are financed by voluntary contributions from member
governments, corporations, and private individuals.[185][186]

## Evaluations, awards, and criticism

Main articles: Reform of the United Nations and Reform of the United Nations
Security Council

See also: Criticism of the United Nations

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Friedensnobelpreis_2001_Vereinte_Nationen.jpg/220px-

Friedensnobelpreis_2001_Vereinte_Nationen.jpg)

The 2001 Nobel Peace Prize to the UN—diploma in the lobby of the UN
Headquarters in New York City

A number of agencies and individuals associated with the UN have won the Nobel
Peace Prize in recognition of their work. Two Secretaries-General, Dag
Hammarskjöld and Kofi Annan, were each awarded the prize (in 1961 and 2001,
respectively), as were Ralph Bunche (1950), a UN negotiator, René Cassin
(1968), a contributor to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the US
Secretary of State Cordell Hull (1945), the latter for his role in the
organization's founding. Lester B. Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of State
for External Affairs, was awarded the prize in 1957 for his role in organizing
the UN's first peacekeeping force to resolve the Suez Crisis. UNICEF won the
prize in 1965, the International Labour Organization in 1969, the UN Peace-
Keeping Forces in 1988, the International Atomic Energy Agency (which reports
to the UN) in 2005, and the UN-supported Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in 2013. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees was awarded in
1954 and 1981, becoming one of only two recipients to win the prize twice. The
UN as a whole was awarded the prize in 2001, sharing it with Annan.[187] In
2007, IPCC received the prize "for their efforts to build up and disseminate
greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations
for the measures that are needed to counteract such change."[188]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/UN70.JPG/220px-

UN70.JPG)

To mark the UN's 70th anniversary – Budapest, 2015

Since its founding, there have been many calls for reform of the UN but little
consensus on how to do so. Some want the UN to play a greater or more
effective role in world affairs, while others want its role reduced to
humanitarian work. There have also been numerous calls for the UN Security
Council's membership to be increased, for different ways of electing the UN's
Secretary-General, and for a UN Parliamentary Assembly. Jacques Fomerand
states the most enduring divide in views of the UN is "the North–South split"
between richer Northern nations and developing Southern nations. Southern
nations tend to favour a more empowered UN with a stronger General Assembly,
allowing them a greater voice in world affairs, while Northern nations prefer
an economically laissez-faire UN that focuses on transnational threats such as
terrorism.[189]

After World War II, the French Committee of National Liberation was late to be
recognized by the US as the government of France, and so the country was
initially excluded from the conferences that created the new organization. The
future French president Charles de Gaulle criticized the UN, famously calling
it a _machin_ ("contraption"), and was not convinced that a global security
alliance would help maintain world peace, preferring direct defence treaties
between countries.[190] Throughout the Cold War, both the US and USSR
repeatedly accused the UN of favouring the other. In 1953, the USSR
effectively forced the resignation of Trygve Lie, the Secretary-General,
through its refusal to deal with him, while in the 1950s and 1960s, a popular
US bumper sticker read, "You can't spell communism without U.N."[191] In a
sometimes-misquoted statement, President George W. Bush stated in February
2003 (referring to UN uncertainty towards Iraqi provocations under the Saddam
Hussein regime) that "free nations will not allow the UN to fade into history
as an ineffective, irrelevant debating society."[192][193][194] In contrast,
the French President, François Hollande, stated in 2012 that "France trusts
the United Nations. She knows that no state, no matter how powerful, can solve
urgent problems, fight for development and bring an end to all crises ...
France wants the UN to be the centre of global governance."[195] Critics such
as Dore Gold, an Israeli diplomat, Robert S. Wistrich, a British scholar, Alan
Dershowitz, an American legal scholar, Mark Dreyfus, an Australian politician,
and the Anti-Defamation League consider UN attention to Israel's treatment of
Palestinians to be excessive.[196] In September 2015, Saudi Arabia's Faisal
bin Hassan Trad has been elected Chair of the UN Human Rights Council panel
that appoints independent experts,[197] a move criticized by human rights
groups.[198][199]

Since 1971, the Republic of China on Taiwan has been excluded from the UN and
since then has always been rejected in new applications. Taiwanese citizens
are also not allowed to enter the buildings of the United Nations with ROC
passports. In this way, critics agree that the UN is failing its own
development goals and guidelines. This criticism also brought pressure from
the People's Republic of China, which regards the territories administered by
the ROC as their own territory.[200][201]

Critics have also accused the UN of bureaucratic inefficiency, waste, and
corruption. In 1976, the General Assembly established the Joint Inspection
Unit to seek out inefficiencies within the UN system. During the 1990s, the US
withheld dues citing inefficiency and only started repayment on the condition
that a major reforms initiative was introduced. In 1994, the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) was established by the General Assembly to
serve as an efficiency watchdog.[202] In 1994, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of the UN to Somalia Mohamed Sahnoun published
"Somalia: The Missed Opportunities",[203] a book in which he analyses the
reasons for the failure of the 1992 UN intervention in Somalia, showing that,
between the start of the Somali civil war in 1988 and the fall of the Siad
Barre regime in January 1991, the UN missed at least three opportunities to
prevent major human tragedies; when the UN tried to provide humanitarian
assistance, they were totally outperformed by NGOs, whose competence and
dedication sharply contrasted with the UN's excessive caution and bureaucratic
inefficiencies. If radical reform was not undertaken, warned Mohamed Sahnoun,
then the UN would continue to respond to such crisis with inept
improvization.[204] In 2004, the UN faced accusations that its recently ended
Oil-for-Food Programme—in which Iraq had been allowed to trade oil for basic
needs to relieve the pressure of sanctions—had suffered from widespread
corruption, including billions of dollars of kickbacks. An independent inquiry
created by the UN found that many of its officials had been involved, as well
as raising "significant" questions about the role of Kojo Annan, the son of
Kofi Annan.[205]

In evaluating the UN as a whole, Jacques Fomerand writes that the
"accomplishments of the United Nations in the last 60 years are impressive in
their own terms. Progress in human development during the 20th century has
been dramatic and the UN and its agencies have certainly helped the world
become a more hospitable and livable place for millions."[206] Evaluating the
first 50 years of the UN's history, the author Stanley Meisler writes that
"the United Nations never fulfilled the hopes of its founders, but it
accomplished a great deal nevertheless", citing its role in decolonization and
its many successful peacekeeping efforts.[207] The British historian Paul
Kennedy states that while the organization has suffered some major setbacks,
"when all its aspects are considered, the UN has brought great benefits to our
generation and ... will bring benefits to our children's and grandchildren's
generations as well."[208]

## See also

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-

logo.svg/40px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) | Wikinews has related news: _**United
Nations General Assembly votes to establish UN Human Rights Council**_  
---|--- 
        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/UN_emblem_blue.svg/32px-UN_emblem_blue.svg.png)United Nations portal
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Terra.png/28px-Terra.png)International relations portal
        
          * International relations
          * List of current Permanent Representatives to the United Nations
          * Model United Nations
          * United Nations in popular culture
          * United Nations television film series
          * World Summit on the Information Society
          * List of country groupings
          * List of multilateral free-trade agreements
          * United Nations Memorial Cemetery
        

## Notes

        
                  1. **^** This map does not represent the view of its members or the UN concerning the legal status of any country,[1] nor does it accurately reflect which areas' governments have UN representation. This map shows partially recognized states such as Kosovo or Taiwan as part of their claiming governments (Serbia and China respectively)
          2. **^** Roosevelt suggested the name as an alternative to the name "Associated Powers." The British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, accepted it, noting that the phase was used by Lord Byron in the poem _Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_ (Stanza 35).
          3. **^** Poland had not been represented among the fifty nations at the San Francisco conference due to the reluctance of the Western superpowers to recognize its post-war communist government. However, the Charter was later amended to list Poland as a founding member, and Poland ratified the Charter on 16 October 1945.[29][30]
          4. **^** For details on Vatican City's status, see Holy See and the United Nations.
        

## References

### Citations

        
                  1. **^** "The World Today" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 18 June 2009. "The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country"
          2. **^** Official Languages Archived 12 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine, www.un.org. Retrieved 22 May 2015.
          3. **^** "Charter of UN Chapter I". _www.un.org_. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          4. **^** "Nat Geo UN". _www.nationalgeographic.org_. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved  27 April 2017.
          5. **^** "UN Objectives". _www.un.org_. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          6. **^** "UN Early years of the Cold War". _peacekeeping.un.org_. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          7. **^** "UN Decolonization". _www.un.org_. 10 February 2016. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          8. **^** "Post Cold War UN". _peacekeeping.un.org_. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          9. **^** "Red Cross-History-Objective". _International Committee of the Red Cross_. 11 September 2017. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved  28 November 2018.
          10. **^** "League of Nations instituted". _www.history.com_. Archived from the original on 4 December 2018. Retrieved  3 December 2018.
          11. **^** "League of Nations and Manchuria invasion". _www.johndclare.net_. Archived from the original on 27 November 2018. Retrieved  30 November 2018.
          12. **^** "League of Nations and Italo-Ethiopian War". _johndclare.net_. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved  3 December 2018.
          13. **^** "Why the League failed". _johndclare.net_. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved  3 December 2018.
          14. **^** Hoopes & Brinkley 2000, pp. 1–55.
          15. **^** Urquhart, Brian (16 July 1998). "Looking for the Sheriff". _New York Review of Books_. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved  14 February 2007.
          16. **^** "1942: Declaration of The United Nations". United Nations. Archived from the original on 8 November 2015. Retrieved  1 July 2015.
          17. **^** Roll, David (4 January 2013). _The Hopkins Touch: Harry Hopkins and the Forging of the Alliance to Defeat Hitler_. pp. 172–175. ISBN 978-0199891955.
          18. **^** Sherwood 1948, pp. 447–453.
          19. **^** Osmańczyk 2004, p. 2445.
          20. **^** Schlesinger 2003.
          21. **^** Bohlen, C.E. (1973). _Witness to History, 1929–1969_. New York. p. 159.
          22. **^** _Video: Allies Study Post-War Security Etc. (1944)_. Universal Newsreel. 1944. Archived from the original on 4 December 2014. Retrieved  28 November 2014.
          23. **^** "UN Milestone Dumbarton Oaks Conference". _www.un.org_. 4 August 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          24. **^** "Charter of the United Nations|United Nations". _www.un.org_. 10 August 2015. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved  29 December 2016.
          25. **^** "History of the United Nations|United Nations". _www.un.org_. 21 August 2015. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved  29 December 2016.
          26. **^** "San Francisco – the birthplace of the United Nations". _San Francisco Chronicle_. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved  29 December 2016.
          27. **^** "1945: The San Francisco Conference". United Nations. Archived from the original on 12 January 2017. Retrieved  1 July 2015.
          28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "UN Milestones 1941-1950". _www.un.org_. 4 August 2015. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved  1 November 2017.
          29. **^** Grant 2009, pp. 25–26.
          30. **^** "Poland and the United Nations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved  29 November 2013.
          31. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 149–151.
          32. **^** Meisler 1995, p. 35.
          33. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 58–59.
          34. **^** "UN Milestones Korean War". _www.un.org_. 4 August 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          35. **^** "Creation of Israel". _www.nytimes.com_. 29 November 2011. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved  22 November 2018.
          36. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 51–54.
          37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "UN Milestones 1951-1960". _www.un.org_. 6 August 2015. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Retrieved  1 November 2017.
          38. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 114.
          39. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 115–134.
          40. **^** See Meisler, p. 76; Kennedy, p. 60; Fasulo, pp. 17, 20
          41. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 127–128, 134.
          42. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 156–157.
          43. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 195–197.
          44. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 208–210.
          45. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 204–226, 213, 220–221.
          46. **^** https://web.archive.org/web/20121206052903/http://unispal.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/0/761C1063530766A7052566A2005B74D1
          47. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 167–168, 224–225.
          48. **^** Meisler 1995, p. 286.
          49. **^** "Is China contributing to the United Nations' mission?". CSIS China Power. 7 March 2016. Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved  25 August 2016.
          50. **^** Fasulo, p. 43; Meisler, p. 334
          51. **^** Renner, Michael. "Peacekeeping Operations Expenditures: 1947–2005" (PDF). _Global Policy Forum_. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2014.
          52. **^** Meisler, pp. 252–56
          53. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 264–277.
          54. **^** Meisler 1995, p. 334.
          55. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 66–67.
          56. **^** For quotation "worldwide ridicule", see Meisler, p. 293; for description of UN missions in Somalia and Bosnia, see Meisler, pp. 312–29.
          57. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 104.
          58. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 226–227.
          59. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 234–237.
          60. **^** Lewis, Paul (6 August 1996). "Jean Gerard, 58, Reagan Envoy Who Led U.S. to Leave Unesco". _New York Times_. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved  6 January 2014.
          61. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 285–286.
          62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Are UN reforms just reshuffling of the deck?". _New Straits Times_. 16 January 1998. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved  5 November 2013.
          63. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 110–111.
          64. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 111.
          65. **^** Smith-Spark, Laura (8 October 2013). "Syria: Chemical weapons team faces many dangers, says UN chief Ban". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2013.
          66. **^** "UN failed during final days of Lankan ethnic war: Ban Ki-moon". _FirstPost_. Press Trust of India. 25 September 2013. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved  5 November 2013.
          67. **^** "UN Milestones 2001-2010". _www.un.org_. 21 August 2015. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved  1 November 2017.
          68. **^** "UN summit agenda; The largest gathering of world leaders in history meets in New York to discuss the role of the United Nations in the 21st century". BBC News. 7 December 2000. Archived from the original on 7 July 2007. Retrieved  22 November 2006.
          69. **^** "2005 World Summit Outcome" (PDF). United Nations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017.
          70. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Sustainable Development Goals". _Un.org_. Archived from the original on 2 November 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          71. **^** "Communicating to a global constituency: UN Day in Paris". _unu.edu_. United Nations University. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016. Retrieved  24 November 2016.
          72. **^** Falk, Pamela. "Can U.N. regain trust with an experiment in transparency?". _www.cbsnews.com_. CBS News. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016. Retrieved  24 November 2016.
          73. **^** Guterres, António (9 January 2017). "U.N. SECRETARY-GENERAL ANTÓNIO GUTERRES: MY VISION FOR REVITALIZING THE UNITED NATIONS". _Newsweek.com_. Newsweek. Archived from the original on 12 January 2017. Retrieved  13 January 2017.
          74. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 3–4.
          75. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 8.
          76. **^** "United Nations Visitors Centre". United Nations. 2017. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          77. **^** "United Nations Office at Geneva". United Nations Office at Geneva. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved  6 November 2013.
          78. **^** "Welcome to the United Nations Office at Vienna!". United Nations Office at Vienna. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved  6 November 2013.
          79. **^** "Welcome to the United Nations Office at Nairobi". United Nations Office at Nairobi. Archived from the original on 25 February 2011. Retrieved  6 November 2013.
          80. **^** "General Assembly of the United Nations – Rules of Procedure". UN Department for General Assembly. Archived from the original on 19 December 2010. Retrieved  15 December 2010.
          81. **^** "Jerusalem Court: No Immunity for UN Employee for Private Acts—Diplomatic/Consular Law and Sovereign Immunity in Israel". Diplomaticlaw.com. 23 March 2009. Archived from the original on 28 June 2012. Retrieved  27 April 2010.
          82. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 4.
          83. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 4–7.
          84. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Salaries Archived 3 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine, United Nations website
          85. **^** ILO: _Noblemaire principle_ Archived 14 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Judgement 986, consideration 7, and Judgment 831, Consideration 1.
          86. **^** The Noblemaire principle Archived 17 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, ICSC
          87. **^** Americans Working at the U.N Archived 22 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine, World, New York Times, 28 September 2009
          88. **^** "UN Charter: Chapter III". United Nations. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fomerand 2009, pp. 131–133.
          90. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 69–70.
          91. **^** "Main Organs". 18 November 2014. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved  21 November 2018.
          92. **^** "General Assembly of the United Nations: Rules of Procedure: XII – Plenary Meetings". United Nations. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved  4 December 2013. "Decisions of the General Assembly on important questions shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting. These questions shall include: recommendations with respect to the maintenance of international peace and security, the election of the non-permanent members of the Security Council, the election of the members of the Economic and Social Council, the election of members of the Trusteeship Council in accordance with paragraph 1 c of Article 86 of the Charter, the admission of new Members to the United Nations, the suspension of the rights and privileges of membership, the expulsion of Members, questions relating to the operation of the trusteeship system, and budgetary questions."
          93. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 70–73.
          94. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United Nations Charter: Chapter V". United Nations. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          95. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 39–43.
          96. **^** "Members of the United Nations Security Council". United Nations. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved  26 August 2018.
          97. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 40–41.
          98. **^** "Security Council Presidency in 2017". United Nations. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          99. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 21.
          100. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. 285.
          101. **^** "United Nations Charter: Chapter XV". United Nations. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          102. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 31–32.
          103. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 59–62.
          104. **^** "Appointment Process". United Nations. 22 April 2015. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          105. **^** "Former Secretaries-General". United Nations. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved  6 November 2013.
          106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fomerand 2009, p. 183.
          107. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 100–101.
          108. **^** "The Court". International Court of Justice. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Fomerand 2009, pp. 103–104.
          110. **^** "About ECOSOC". ECOSOC. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved  5 November 2013.
          111. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 153–155.
          112. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 156.
          113. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United Nations Charter: Chapter IX". United Nations. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          114. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 171–177.
          115. **^** "Growth in United Nations membership, 1945–present". United Nations. 6 August 2015. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved  5 July 2017.
          116. **^** "UN welcomes South Sudan as 193rd Member State". United Nations. 28 June 2006. Archived from the original on 3 August 2015. Retrieved  4 November 2011.
          117. **^** "United Nations Member States". United Nations. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          118. **^** "Charter of the United Nations: Chapter II". United Nations. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          119. **^** "Non-member States". United Nations. 7 August 2015. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          120. **^** "Repertory of Practice". United Nations. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          121. **^** "The Member States of the Group of 77". Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved  7 November 2013.
          122. **^** "About the G77". Group of 77. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved  5 November 2013.
          123. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 52.
          124. **^** Coulon 1998, p. ix.
          125. **^** Nobel Prize. "The Nobel Peace Prize 1988". Archived from the original on 2 April 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011.
          126. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United Nations Peacekeeping Operations". United Nations. 29 February 2016. Archived from the original on 23 March 2016. Retrieved  24 March 2016.
          127. **^** "The UN's Role in Nation Building: From the Congo to Iraq" (PDF). RAND Corporation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 30 December 2008.
          128. **^** "The Human Security Report 2005". Human Security Centre. Archived from the original on 28 July 2009. Retrieved  8 February 2007.
          129. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 56.
          130. **^** Ball 2011, p. 46.
          131. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 187.
          132. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 102–105.
          133. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 294–311.
          134. **^** Lynch, Colum (16 December 2004). "U.N. Sexual Abuse Alleged in Congo". _The Washington Post_. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          135. **^** "UN troops face child abuse claims". _BBC News_. 30 November 2006. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          136. **^** "Aid workers in Liberia accused of sex abuse". _The New York Times_. 8 May 2006. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014. Retrieved  22 November 2013.
          137. **^** Holt, Kate (4 January 2007). "UN staff accused of raping children in Sudan". _The Daily Telegraph_. Archived from the original on 7 November 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          138. **^** "Peacekeepers 'abusing children '". _BBC News_. 28 May 2007. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          139. **^** Watson, Ivan; Vaccarello, Joe (10 October 2013). "U.N. sued for 'bringing cholera to Haiti,' causing outbreak that killed thousands". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2013.
          140. **^** "Resolutions Adopted by the General Assembly During its First Session". United Nations. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved  24 March 2008.
          141. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 188–189.
          142. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 189–190.
          143. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United Nations Charter: Chapter I". United Nations. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved  2 November 2017.
          144. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 178–182.
          145. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. 377.
          146. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 185, 188.
          147. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 70, 73.
          148. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 192.
          149. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. 347.
          150. **^** "UN creates new human rights body". _BBC News_. 15 March 2006. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved  18 November 2013.
          151. **^** "Frequently Asked Questions: Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" (PDF). United Nations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2013.
          152. **^** Jordans, Frank (17 June 2011). "U.N. Gay Rights Protection Resolution Passes, Hailed As 'Historic Moment'". _The Huffington Post_. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved  18 November 2013.
          153. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 57, 194, 341.
          154. **^** "United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues". United Nations. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved  18 November 2013.
          155. **^** "We Can End Poverty". United Nations. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved  18 November 2013.
          156. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 143–144.
          157. **^** "The UN Millennium Development Goals". United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 May 2007. Retrieved  4 May 2007.
          158. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 169–170, 172.
          159. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 341–342.
          160. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. 126.
          161. **^** "About UNICEF: Who we are: Our History". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          162. **^** "About UNICEF: Who We Are". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          163. **^** "About Us–United Nations". The World Bank. 30 June 2003. Archived from the original on 24 March 2007. Retrieved  2 August 2007.
          164. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 175, 191–192.
          165. **^** Fasulo 2004, pp. 176–177.
          166. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 199–200.
          167. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. 368.
          168. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fasulo 2004, p. 183.
          169. **^** "Our Work". World Food Programme. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved  22 November 2013.
          170. **^** "About Us". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved  22 November 2013.
          171. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. 348, 398.
          172. **^** "The United Nations and Decolonization". United Nations. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved  6 November 2013.
          173. **^** "Non-Self-Governing Territories". United Nations. Archived from the original on 27 February 2014. Retrieved  7 February 2014.
          174. **^** Kennedy 2007, pp. 160–162.
          175. **^** "Organizations". Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved  21 November 2013.
          176. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 179.
          177. **^** "United Nations Observances". United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved  17 November 2013.
          178. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 29 January 2019. Retrieved  28 January 2019.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
          179. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Fifth Committee Approves Assessment Scale for Regular, Peacekeeping Budgets, Texts on Common System, Pension Fund, as it Concludes Session (Press Release)". United Nations. 22 December 2006. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013. Retrieved  8 November 2013.
          180. **^** "Regular Budget 2012–2013" (PDF). United Nations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013.
          181. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 117.
          182. **^** Weiss & Daws 2009, p. 682.
          183. **^** Fasulo 2004, p. 115.
          184. **^** "Financing peacekeeping. United Nations Peacekeeping". _www.un.org_. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved  29 June 2017.
          185. **^** "Where Your Money Goes". World Food Programme. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved  9 November 2013.
          186. **^** "Overall funding trends". UNICEF. 21 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved  9 November 2013.
          187. **^** "All Nobel Peace Prizes". Nobel Prize. Archived from the original on 22 November 2013. Retrieved  5 November 2013.
          188. **^** "The Nobel Peace Prize 2007". _NobelPrize.org_. Archived from the original on 23 November 2018. Retrieved  23 November 2018.
          189. **^** Fomerand 2009, p. civ.
          190. **^** Gerbet, Pierre (1995). "Naissance des Nations Unies". _Espoir_ (in French). No. 102. Archived from the original on 10 July 2009.
          191. **^** Meisler 1995, pp. 72–73, 82.
          192. **^** Greene, David L. (14 February 2003). "Bush implores U.N. to show 'backbone'". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
          193. **^** Singh, Jasvir (2008). _Problem of Ethicity: Role of United Nations in Kosovo Crisis_. Unistar Books. p. 150. ISBN 9788171427017. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
          194. **^** Normand, Roger; Zaidi, Sarah (13 February 2003). _Human Rights at the UN: The Political History of Universal Justice_. Indiana University Press. p. 455. ISBN 978-0253000118. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
          195. **^** "France's role at the UN". Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved  25 November 2013.
          196. **^**
            * For Gold, see Gold, p. 20
            * For Wistrich, see Wistrich, p. 487
            * For Dershowitz, see Dershowitz, Alan. _The Case for Peace: How the Arab-Israeli Conflict Can Be Resolved_. Hoboken: John Wiley  & Sons, Inc., 2005.
            * For Dreyfus, see "Don't be lynch mob, lawyers urge U.N.." Archived 10 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine _JTA_. 8 July 2009.
            * For Anti-Defamation League, see "ADL: UN Human Rights Council Resolution Reveals 'Cancerous Bias' Against Israel." Archived 2 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 7 July 2009.
          197. **^** "UK helped Saudi Arabia get UN human rights role through 'secret deal' to exchange votes, leaked documents suggest Archived 3 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine". _The Independent_. 30 September 2015.
          198. **^** "U.N. Watchdog Slams 'Scandalous' Choice of Saudi Arabia to Head Human Rights Panel Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Yahoo News. 21 September 2015.
          199. **^** "When Beheading Won't Do the Job, the Saudis Resort to Crucifixion  Archived 21 October 2015 at WebCite". _The Atlantic_. 24 September 2015.
          200. **^** Lee, David Tawei (11 September 2017). "The United Nations Needs to Treat Taiwan Fairly". _The National Interest_. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved  14 September 2017.
          201. **^** Moody, John (14 July 2017). "UN tours open to terror and thug states - but not Taiwan". _Fox News_. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved  14 September 2017.
          202. **^** Reddy, Shravanti (29 October 2002). "Watchdog Organization Struggles to Decrease UN Bureaucracy". Global Policy Forum. Archived from the original on 20 September 2006. Retrieved 21 September 2006.
          203. **^** USIP Press Books, October 1994, ISBN 978-1-878379-35-1
          204. **^** Book Review by Gail M. Gerhart in _Foreign Affairs_ , March/April 1995 [1] Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine
          205. **^** "Q&A: Oil-for-food scandal". _BBC News_. 7 September 2005. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved  27 November 2013.
          206. **^** Fomerand 2009, pp. cviii.
          207. **^** Meisler 1995, p. 339.
          208. **^** Kennedy 2007, p. 290.
        

### Bibliography

        
                  * Ball, Howard (2011). _Genocide: A Reference Handbook_. Contemporary World Issues. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-59884-488-7.
          * Coulon, Jocelyn (1998). _Soldiers of Diplomacy: The United Nations, Peacekeeping, and the New World Order_. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-0899-2.
          * Fasulo, Linda (2004). _An Insider's Guide to the UN_. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10155-3.
          * Fomerand, Jacques (2009). _The A to Z of the United Nations_. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-5547-2.
          * Gold, Dore (2004). _Tower of Babble: How the United Nations Has Fueled Global Chaos_. New York: Crown Forum. ISBN 978-1-4000-5475-6.
          * Grant, Thomas D. (2009). _Admission to the United Nations: Charter Article 4 and the Rise of Universal Organization_. Legal Aspects of International Organization. **50**. Leiden, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-900417363-7. ISSN 0924-4883.
          * Hoopes, Townsend; Brinkley, Douglas (2000) [1997]. _FDR and the Creation of the U.N_. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08553-2.
          * Kennedy, Paul (2007) [2006]. _The Parliament of Man: The Past, Present, and Future of the United Nations_. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-70341-6.
          * Manchester, William; Reid, Paul (2012). _The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill_. Volume 3: Defender of the Realm, 1940–1965. New York: Little Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-54770-3.
          * Meisler, Stanley (1995). _United Nations: The First Fifty Years_. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. ISBN 978-0-87113-616-9.
          * Mires, Charlene (2013). _Capital of the World: The Race to Host the United Nations_. New York University Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-0794-4.
          * Osmańczyk, Edmund Jan (2004). Mango, Anthony (ed.). _Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements_. **4**. Taylor  & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-93924-9.
          * Schlesinger, Stephen C. (2003). _Act of Creation: The Founding of the United Nations: A Story of Super Powers, Secret Agents, Wartime Allies and Enemies, and Their Quest for a Peaceful World_. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-3324-3.
          * Sherwood, Robert E. (1948). _Roosevelt and Hopkins: An Intimate History_. New York: Harper and Brothers.
          * Weiss, Thomas G.; Daws, Sam, eds. (2009) [2007]. _The Oxford Handbook on the United Nations_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-956010-3.
          * Wistrich, Robert S. (2010). _A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad_. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6097-9.
        

## Further reading

        
                  * Lowe, Vaughan; Roberts, Adam; Welsh, Jennifer; Zaum, Dominik, eds. (2008). _The United Nations Security Council and War: The Evolution of Thought and Practice since 1945_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-953343-5.
          * Roberts, Adam; Kingsbury, Benedict, eds. (1994). _United Nations, Divided World: The UN's Roles in International Relations_ (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-827926-6.
        

## External links

**United Nations** at Wikipedia's sister projects

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/27px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png)Definitions from Wiktionary
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/27px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News from Wikinews
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations from Wikiquote
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/27px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png)Textbooks from Wikibooks
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dd/Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg/27px-Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg.png)Travel guide from Wikivoyage
          * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Wikiversity-logo-en.svg/27px-Wikiversity-logo-en.svg.png)Resources from Wikiversity
        

**Official websites**

        
                  * Official website ![Edit this at Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-Blue_pencil.svg.png) of The United Nations
          * The United Nations Regional Information Centre (UNRIC)
          * United Nations Volunteers
          * United Nations Documentation Research Guide
          * Official YouTube channel (English)
        

**Other**

        
                  * Searchable archive of UN discussions and votes
          * United Nations Association of the UK – independent policy authority on the UN
          * Website of the Global Policy Forum, an independent think tank on the UN
          * UN Watch – NGO monitoring UN activities
          * Works by or about United Nations at Internet Archive
          * Works by United Nations at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/21/Speaker_Icon.svg/15px-Speaker_Icon.svg.png)
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png) United Nations

* * *
        
                  * António Guterres, Secretary-General
          * Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
          * María Fernanda Espinosa, General Assembly President
        

United Nations System|

| United Nations Charter|

        
                  * Preamble
        

---|---  
Principal organs|

        
                  * Secretariat
            * Secretary-General
            * Deputy Secretary-General
            * Under-Secretary-General
          * General Assembly
            * President
          * International Court of Justice
            * Statute
          * Security Council
            * Members
          * Economic and Social Council
            * President
          * Trusteeship Council
        

Secretariat Offices  
and Departments|

        
                  * Headquarters
          * Envoy on Youth
          * Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
          * Geneva
          * Palace of Nations
          * Nairobi
          * Vienna
          * Economic and Social Affairs
          * Political Affairs
          * Public Information
            * Dag Hammarskjöld Library
          * Safety and Security
          * Palestinian Rights
          * Peacekeeping Operations
          * Internal Oversight
          * Legal Affairs
          * Developing Countries
          * Sport for Development and Peace
          * Disarmament Affairs
          * Outer Space Affairs
          * Partnerships
          * Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
          * UN organizations by location
          * United Nations Office for Developing Countries
          * Sexual Violence in Conflict
        

Programmes and  
specialized agencies

|

        
                  * Culture of peace
          * FAO
          * ICAO
          * IFAD
          * ILO
          * IMO
          * ITC
          * IPCC
          * IAEA
          * MINURSO
          * UNIDO
          * ITU
          * UNAIDS
          * SCSL
          * UNCTAD
          * UNCITRAL
          * UNCDF
          * UNDG
          * UNDP
          * UNDPI
          * UNDPKO
            * peacekeeping
          * UNEP
            * OzonAction
            * UNEP/GRID-Arendal
            * UNEP-WCMC
          * UNESCO
          * UNFIP
          * UNFPA
          * UN-HABITAT
          * OHCHR
          * UNHCR
          * UNHRC
          * UNICEF
          * UNICRI
          * UNIDIR
          * UNITAR
          * UN-Oceans
          * UNODC
          * UNOPS
          * UNOSAT
          * UNRISD
          * UNRWA
          * UNSSC
          * UNU
            * UNU-OP
            * UNU-CRIS
          * UNV
          * UN Women
          * UNWTO
          * UPU
          * WFP
          * WHO
          * WIPO
          * WMO
        

Members and observers|

        
                  * Full members
          * Founding members
            * UNSC Permanent members
          * Observers
            * European Union
        

History|

        
                  * League of Nations
          * Four Policemen
          * Declaration by United Nations
          * Peacekeeping missions
            * history
            * timeline
          * Universal Declaration of Human Rights
            * Human Rights Day
          * Enlargement
        

Resolutions|

        
                  * Security Council vetoes
          * General Assembly
            * 66th
            * 67th
          * Security Council
            * Cyprus
            * Iran
            * Iraq
            * Israel
            * Lebanon
            * Nagorno-Karabakh
            * North Korea
            * Palestine
            * Syria
            * Western Sahara
        

Elections|

        
                  * Secretary-General (2016)
          * International Court of Justice 2011
          * General Assembly President (2016)
          * Security Council (2016)
        

Related|

        
                  * Bretton Woods system
          * Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
          * Criticism
          * _Delivering as One_
          * Flag
            * Honour Flag
          * Four Nations Initiative
          * Genocide Convention
          * UN Global Compact
          * International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
          * International Criminal Court
          * International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World
          * International Years
          * Interpreters
          * UN laissez-passer
          * Military Staff Committee
          * Official languages
          * Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
          * Peacekeeping
          * Ralph Bunche Park
          * United Nations Postal Administration
          * Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
          * Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules)
          * Treaty Series
          * UN Day
          * Millennium Declaration
            * Summit
            * Development Goals
          * Security Council veto power
          * UN reform
            * Security Council reform
          * UN Art Collection
          * UN Federal Credit Union
          * UN Memorial Cemetery Korea
          * Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
          * _Woodrow Wilson Memorial_
          * World Federation of United Nations Associations
        

Other|

        
                  * Outline
          * UN television film series (1964–1966)
          * In popular culture
          * Model UN
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Relations of the United Nations with its member states

* * *

Americas|

        
                  * Brazil
          * Canada
          * Mexico
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Asia|

        
                  * Afghanistan
          * Bangladesh
          * People's Republic of China
          * India
          * Indonesia
          * Iraq
          * Israel
          * Japan
          * Kazakhstan
          * Korea
          * Lebanon
          * Malaysia
          * Pakistan
          * Philippines
          * Russia
          * Singapore
        

Europe|

        
                  * Albania
          * Armenia
          * Azerbaijan
          * France
          * Germany
          * Kazakhstan
          * Luxembourg
          * Poland
          * Russia
          * Serbia
          * Ukraine
          * United Kingdom
        

Oceania|

        
                  * Australia
          * Fiji
          * Marshall Islands
          * Micronesia
          * New Zealand
          * Tuvalu
          * Vanuatu
        

Others|

        
                  * Holy See
          * European Union
          * Palestine
        

Former members|

        
                  * Republic of China
          * German Democratic Republic
          * Soviet Union
            * Ukrainian SSR
          * Yugoslavia
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Secretaries-General of the League of Nations and the United Nations

* * *

League of Nations  
(1919–1945)

|

        
                  * James Eric Drummond ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg/23px-Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg.png) (United Kingdom)
          * Joseph Avenol ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c3/Flag_of_France.svg/23px-Flag_of_France.svg.png) (France)
          * Seán Lester ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/45/Flag_of_Ireland.svg/23px-Flag_of_Ireland.svg.png) (Irish Free State)
        

|

![League of Nations flag: a white star in a

pentagon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c5/Flag_of_the_League_of_Nations_%281939%29.svg/60px-

Flag_of_the_League_of_Nations_%281939%29.svg.png)  
![UN flag: a white map on a blue

background](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg/60px-

Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png)

United Nations  
(since 1945)

|

        
                  * _Gladwyn Jebb_ 1 ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/ae/Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg/23px-Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg.png) (United Kingdom)
          * Trygve Lie ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Norway.svg/21px-Flag_of_Norway.svg.png) (Norway)
          * Dag Hammarskjöld ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4c/Flag_of_Sweden.svg/23px-Flag_of_Sweden.svg.png) (Sweden)
          * U Thant ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/51/Flag_of_Burma_%281948%E2%80%931974%29.svg/23px-Flag_of_Burma_%281948%E2%80%931974%29.svg.png) (Burma)
          * Kurt Waldheim ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_Austria.svg/23px-Flag_of_Austria.svg.png) (Austria)
          * Javier Pérez de Cuéllar ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Flag_of_Peru.svg/23px-Flag_of_Peru.svg.png) (Peru)
          * Boutros Boutros-Ghali ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Flag_of_Egypt.svg/23px-Flag_of_Egypt.svg.png) (Egypt)
          * Kofi Annan ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/Flag_of_Ghana.svg/23px-Flag_of_Ghana.svg.png) (Ghana)
          * Ban Ki-moon ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Flag_of_South_Korea.svg/23px-Flag_of_South_Korea.svg.png) (South Korea)
          * António Guterres ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Flag_of_Portugal.svg/23px-Flag_of_Portugal.svg.png) (Portugal)
        

Related|

        
                  * United Nations Secretariat
          * Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations
          * Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
          * U.N. Secretary General Memoirs
        

1 Provisional Secretary-General prior to the election of Trygve Lie.

Links to related articles

* * *

|

        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

International organizations

* * *

Intergovernmental  
organizations|

| Non-cultural IGOs|

        
                  * International Criminal Court
          * International Monetary Fund
          * International Seabed Authority
          * World Customs Organization
          * Inter-Parliamentary Union
          * Interpol
          * New Development Bank
          * Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
          * United Nations
          * World Bank Group
          * World Trade Organization
        

---|---  
Cultural IGOs|

        
                  * Commonwealth of Nations
          * Community of Portuguese Language Countries
          * Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

International years proclaimed by the United Nations

* * *
        
                  * Human Rights (1968)
          * Women (1975)
          * The Child (1979)
          * Disabled Persons (1981)
          * Youth (1985)
          * Peace (1986)
          * Shelter for the Homeless (1987)
          * Space (1992)
          * Family (1994)
          * Tolerance (1995)
          * Older Persons (1999)
          * Culture of Peace (2000)
          * Volunteers (2001)
          * Mobilization against Racism (2001)
          * Rice (2004)
          * Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition (2004)
          * Microcredit (2005)
          * Physics (2005)
          * Deserts and Desertification (2006)
          * Polar (2007–2008)
          * Languages (2008)
          * The Potato (2008)
          * Sanitation (2008)
          * Planet Earth (2008)
          * Astronomy (2009)
          * Natural Fibres (2009)
          * Biodiversity (2010)
          * Youth (2010–2011)
          * Forests (2011)
          * Chemistry (2011)
          * People of African Descent (2011)
          * Cooperatives (2012)
          * Water Cooperation (2013)
          * Crystallography (2014)
          * Light (2015)
          * Soil (2015)
          * Pulses (2016)
          * Sustainable Tourism for Development (2017)
          * Indigenous Languages (2019)
          * Moderation (2019)
          * Periodic Table of Chemical Elements (2019)
        

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

        
                  * BIBSYS: 90058028
          * BNE: XX89609
          * BNF: cb118650631 (data)
          * GND: 333-5
          * HDS: 26469
          * ISNI: 0000 0001 2331 7789
          * LCCN: n79021345
          * NDL: 00288555
          * NKC: kn20010711348
          * NLA: 35561510
          * SELIBR: 133482
          * SUDOC: 026395258
          * ULAN: 500354403
          * VIAF: 144904638
          * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 144904638
        

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations&oldid=900690956"

Categories:

        
                  * United Nations
          * Intergovernmental organizations established by treaty
          * Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes
          * Organizations based in New York City
          * Organizations established in 1945
          * 1945 establishments in the United States
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Webarchive template wayback links
          * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
          * CS1 French-language sources (fr)
          * Webarchive template webcite links
          * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
          * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
          * Articles with short description
          * Good articles
          * Use British English Oxford spelling from February 2014
          * Use dmy dates from July 2018
          * Articles containing Arabic-language text
          * Articles containing Chinese-language text
          * Articles containing French-language text
          * Articles containing Russian-language text
          * Articles containing Spanish-language text
          * Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters
          * Use dmy dates from February 2014
          * CS1: long volume value
          * Articles with Internet Archive links
          * Articles with LibriVox links
          * Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with HDS identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
          * AC with 14 elements
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
          * Wikinews
          * Wikiquote
          * Wikivoyage
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Адыгэбзэ
          * Адыгабзэ
          * Afrikaans
          * Alemannisch
          * አማርኛ
          * Аҧсшәа
          * العربية
          * Aragonés
          * Armãneashti
          * Arpetan
          * অসমীয়া
          * Asturianu
          * Avañe'ẽ
          * Авар
          * Azərbaycanca
          * تۆرکجه
          * বাংলা
          * Bân-lâm-gú
          * Basa Banyumasan
          * Башҡортса
          * Беларуская
          * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
          * भोजपुरी
          * Bikol Central
          * Bislama
          * Български
          * Boarisch
          * བོད་ཡིག
          * Bosanski
          * Brezhoneg
          * Буряад
          * Català
          * Чӑвашла
          * Cebuano
          * Čeština
          * ChiShona
          * Cymraeg
          * Dansk
          * Davvisámegiella
          * Deutsch
          * ދިވެހިބަސް
          * Diné bizaad
          * Dolnoserbski
          * डोटेली
          * Eesti
          * Ελληνικά
          * Español
          * Esperanto
          * Estremeñu
          * Euskara
          * فارسی
          * Fiji Hindi
          * Føroyskt
          * Français
          * Frysk
          * Furlan
          * Gaeilge
          * Gaelg
          * Gàidhlig
          * Galego
          * ГӀалгӀай
          * 贛語
          * ગુજરાતી
          * गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni
          * 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
          * 한국어
          * Hausa
          * Հայերեն
          * Արեւմտահայերէն
          * हिन्दी
          * Hornjoserbsce
          * Hrvatski
          * Ido
          * Ilokano
          * বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
          * Bahasa Indonesia
          * Interlingua
          * Interlingue
          * Ирон
          * IsiXhosa
          * Íslenska
          * Italiano
          * עברית
          * Jawa
          * Kabɩyɛ
          * Kalaallisut
          * ಕನ್ನಡ
          * Kapampangan
          * Къарачай-малкъар
          * ქართული
          * Қазақша
          * Kernowek
          * Kinyarwanda
          * Kiswahili
          * Коми
          * Kreyòl ayisyen
          * Kurdî
          * Кыргызча
          * Ladino
          * ລາວ
          * Latina
          * Latviešu
          * Lëtzebuergesch
          * Лезги
          * Lietuvių
          * Ligure
          * Limburgs
          * Lingála
          * Lingua Franca Nova
          * La .lojban.
          * Lumbaart
          * Magyar
          * मैथिली
          * Македонски
          * Malagasy
          * മലയാളം
          * Malti
          * मराठी
          * მარგალური
          * مصرى
          * مازِرونی
          * Bahasa Melayu
          * Baso Minangkabau
          * Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
          * Mirandés
          * Монгол
          * မြန်မာဘာသာ
          * Nāhuatl
          * Nederlands
          * नेपाली
          * नेपाल भाषा
          * 日本語
          * Napulitano
          * Нохчийн
          * Nordfriisk
          * Norsk
          * Norsk nynorsk
          * Nouormand
          * Novial
          * Occitan
          * Олык марий
          * ଓଡ଼ିଆ
          * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
          * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
          * Pälzisch
          * پنجابی
          * Papiamentu
          * پښتو
          * Patois
          * ភាសាខ្មែរ
          * Piemontèis
          * Plattdüütsch
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Qaraqalpaqsha
          * Qırımtatarca
          * Română
          * Rumantsch
          * Runa Simi
          * Русиньскый
          * Русский
          * Саха тыла
          * ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
          * Gagana Samoa
          * संस्कृतम्
          * Sardu
          * Scots
          * Seeltersk
          * Shqip
          * Sicilianu
          * සිංහල
          * Simple English
          * سنڌي
          * SiSwati
          * Slovenčina
          * Slovenščina
          * Soomaaliga
          * کوردی
          * Српски / srpski
          * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
          * Basa Sunda
          * Suomi
          * Svenska
          * Tagalog
          * தமிழ்
          * Taqbaylit
          * Татарча/tatarça
          * తెలుగు
          * ไทย
          * Тоҷикӣ
          * Türkçe
          * Türkmençe
          * Удмурт
          * Українська
          * اردو
          * ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
          * Vahcuengh
          * Vèneto
          * Vepsän kel’
          * Tiếng Việt
          * Volapük
          * Võro
          * Walon
          * 文言
          * Winaray
          * Wolof
          * 吴语
          * Xitsonga
          * ייִדיש
          * Yorùbá
          * 粵語
          * Zazaki
          * Žemaitėška
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 7 June 2019, at 02:57 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

