

NASA

Global Climate Change

Vital Signs of the Planet

![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

Skip Navigation

# Facts

        
                  * Evidence 
          * Causes 
          * Effects 
          * Scientific Consensus 
          * Vital Signs 
          * Questions (FAQ)
        

Evidence Causes Effects Scientific Consensus Vital Signs Questions (FAQ)

# Scientific Consensus: Earth's Climate is Warming

![Temperature data from four international science institutions. All show

rapid warming in the past few decades and that the last decade has been the

warmest on

record.](/system/content_pages/main_images/1309_globaltemps_agency_comparison_2018.gif)

Temperature data showing rapid warming in the past few decades, the latest
data going up to 2018. According to NASA data, 2016 was the warmest year since
1880, continuing a long-term trend of rising global temperatures. The 10
warmest years in the 139-year record all have occurred since 2005, with the
five warmest years being the five most recent years. Credit: NASA's Earth
Observatory. Download still image.

Multiple studies published in peer-reviewed scientific journals1 show that 97
percent or more of actively publishing climate scientists agree*: Climate-
warming trends over the past century are extremely likely due to human
activities. In addition, most of the leading scientific organizations
worldwide have issued public statements endorsing this position. The following
is a partial list of these organizations, along with links to their published
statements and a selection of related resources.

### AMERICAN SCIENTIFIC SOCIETIES

* * *

#### Statement on Climate Change from 18 Scientific Associations

"Observations throughout the world make it clear that climate change is
occurring, and rigorous scientific research demonstrates that the greenhouse
gases emitted by human activities are the primary driver." (2009)2

        
                  * ![AAAS emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/476_AAAS_320x240.jpg)
        

American Association for the Advancement of Science

"The scientific evidence is clear: global climate change caused by human
activities is occurring now, and it is a growing threat to society." (2006)3

        
                  * ![ACS emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/478_americanchemicalsociety_320x240.jpg )
        

American Chemical Society

"Comprehensive scientific assessments of our current and potential future
climates clearly indicate that climate change is real, largely attributable to
emissions from human activities, and potentially a very serious problem."
(2004)4

        
                  * ![AGU emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/479_americangeophysicalunion_320x240.jpg)
        

American Geophysical Union

"Human‐induced climate change requires urgent action. Humanity is the major
influence on the global climate change observed over the past 50 years. Rapid
societal responses can significantly lessen negative outcomes." (Adopted 2003,
revised and reaffirmed 2007, 2012, 2013)5

        
                  * ![AMA emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/480_americanmedicalassociation_320x240.jpg)
        

American Medical Association

"Our AMA ... supports the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change's fourth assessment report and concurs with the scientific consensus
that the Earth is undergoing adverse global climate change and that
anthropogenic contributions are significant." (2013)6

        
                  * ![AMS emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/481_americanmeteorologicalsociety_320x240.jpg)
        

American Meteorological Society

"It is clear from extensive scientific evidence that the dominant cause of the
rapid change in climate of the past half century is human-induced increases in
the amount of atmospheric greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide (CO2),
chlorofluorocarbons, methane, and nitrous oxide." (2012)7

        
                  * ![APS emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/482_americanphysicalsociety_320x240.jpg)
        

American Physical Society

"The evidence is incontrovertible: Global warming is occurring. If no
mitigating actions are taken, significant disruptions in the Earth's physical
and ecological systems, social systems, security and human health are likely
to occur. We must reduce emissions of greenhouse gases beginning now." (2007)8

        
                  * ![GSA emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/484_geologicalsocietyamerica_320x240.jpg)
        

The Geological Society of America

"The Geological Society of America (GSA) concurs with assessments by the
National Academies of Science (2005), the National Research Council (2006),
and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007) that global
climate has warmed and that human activities (mainly greenhouse‐gas emissions)
account for most of the warming since the middle 1900s." (2006; revised 2010)9

### SCIENCE ACADEMIES

* * *

#### International Academies: Joint Statement

"Climate change is real. There will always be uncertainty in understanding a
system as complex as the world's climate. However there is now strong evidence
that significant global warming is occurring. The evidence comes from direct
measurements of rising surface air temperatures and subsurface ocean
temperatures and from phenomena such as increases in average global sea
levels, retreating glaciers, and changes to many physical and biological
systems. It is likely that most of the warming in recent decades can be
attributed to human activities (IPCC 2001)." (2005, 11 international science
academies)10

        
                  * ![UNSAS emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/485_nationalacademyscience_320x240.jpg)
        

U.S. National Academy of Sciences

"The scientific understanding of climate change is now sufficiently clear to
justify taking steps to reduce the amount of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere." (2005)11

### U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

* * *
        
                  * ![USGCRP emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/486_usgcrp_320x240.jpg)
        

U.S. Global Change Research Program

"The global warming of the past 50 years is due primarily to human-induced
increases in heat-trapping gases. Human 'fingerprints' also have been
identified in many other aspects of the climate system, including changes in
ocean heat content, precipitation, atmospheric moisture, and Arctic sea ice."
(2009, 13 U.S. government departments and agencies)12

### INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES

* * *
        
                  * ![IPCC emblem](/system/internal_resources/details/original/487_ipcc_320x240.jpg)
        

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

"Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of
the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The
atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished,
and sea level has risen."13

"Human influence on the climate system is clear, and recent anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases are the highest in history. Recent climate
changes have had widespread impacts on human and natural systems."14

### OTHER RESOURCES

* * *

#### List of Worldwide Scientific Organizations

The following page lists the nearly 200 worldwide scientific organizations
that hold the position that climate change has been caused by human action.  
http://www.opr.ca.gov/facts/list-of-scientific-organizations.html

#### U.S. Agencies

The following page contains information on what federal agencies are doing to
adapt to climate change.  
https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2012/02/climate-change-adaptation-
what-federal-agencies-are-doing.pdf

* * *

      * _Technically, a "consensus" is a general agreement of opinion, but the scientific method steers us away from this to an objective framework. In science, facts or observations are explained by a hypothesis (a statement of a possible explanation for some natural phenomenon), which can then be tested and retested until it is refuted (or disproved)._

_As scientists gather more observations, they will build off one explanation
and add details to complete the picture. Eventually, a group of hypotheses
might be integrated and generalized into a scientific theory, a scientifically
acceptable general principle or body of principles offered to explain
phenomena._

* * *

#### References​

        
                  1. J. Cook, et al, "Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming," _Environmental Research Letters_ Vol. 11 No. 4, (13 April 2016); DOI:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002
        

Quotation from page 6: "The number of papers rejecting AGW [Anthropogenic, or
human-caused, Global Warming] is a miniscule proportion of the published
research, with the percentage slightly decreasing over time. Among papers
expressing a position on AGW, an overwhelming percentage (97.2% based on self-
ratings, 97.1% based on abstract ratings) endorses the scientific consensus on
AGW."

J. Cook, et al, "Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in
the scientific literature," _Environmental Research Letters_ Vol. 8 No. 2, (15
May 2013); DOI:10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024

Quotation from page 3: "Among abstracts that expressed a position on AGW,
97.1% endorsed the scientific consensus. Among scientists who expressed a
position on AGW in their abstract, 98.4% endorsed the consensus."

W. R. L. Anderegg, "Expert Credibility in Climate Change," _Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences_ Vol. 107 No. 27, 12107-12109 (21 June 2010);
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1003187107.

P. T. Doran & M. K. Zimmerman, "Examining the Scientific Consensus on Climate
Change," _Eos Transactions American Geophysical Union_ Vol. 90 Issue 3 (2009),
22; DOI: 10.1029/2009EO030002.

N. Oreskes, "Beyond the Ivory Tower: The Scientific Consensus on Climate
Change," _Science_ Vol. 306 no. 5702, p. 1686 (3 December 2004); DOI:
10.1126/science.1103618.

        
                  2. Statement on climate change from 18 scientific associations (2009)
          3. AAAS Board Statement on Climate Change (2006)
          4. ACS Public Policy Statement: Climate Change (2010-2013)
          5. Human‐Induced Climate Change Requires Urgent Action (2013)
          6. Global Climate Change and Human Health (2013)
          7. Climate Change: An Information Statement of the American Meteorological Society (2012)
          8. APS National Policy 07.1 Climate Change (2007)
          9. GSA Position Statement on Climate Change (2015)
          10. Joint science academies' statement: Global response to climate change (2005)
          11. Understanding and Responding to Climate Change (2005)
          12. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States (2009)
          13. IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Summary for Policymakers (2014)
          14. IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Summary for Policymakers (2014)
        

## Latest resources

        
                  * ![Video: Ozonewatch 2018](/system/resources/list_images/186_ozone_dec31_1979-2018_print-320x240.jpg)
        

Video: Ozonewatch 2018

        
                  * ![Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science](/system/resources/list_images/184_list_call_of_science.jpg)
        

Earth 360 Video: The Call of Science

        
                  * ![Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world](/system/resources/list_images/167_Screen-Shot-2018-05-16-at-12.37.30-PM.jpg)
        

Video: For 15 years, GRACE tracked freshwater movements around the world

# Explore

## Interactives, galleries and apps

![Images of Change](/system/feature_items/images/9_images_of_change.jpg)

##

# Images of Change

Explore a stunning gallery of before-and-after images of Earth from land and
space that reveal our home planet in a state of flux.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Mobile

Apps](/system/feature_items/images/26_climate_mobile_apps.jpg)

##

# Climate Mobile Apps

Keep track of Earth's vital signs, see the planet in a state of flux and slow
the pace of global warming with NASA's free mobile apps.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Time

Machine](/system/feature_items/images/27_climate_time_machine.jpg)

##

# Climate Time Machine

Travel through Earth's recent climate history and see how increasing carbon
dioxide, global temperature and sea ice have changed over time.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Eyes on the Earth](/system/feature_items/images/37_eyes_on_earth-2.jpg)

##

# Eyes on the Earth

Track Earth's vital signs from space and fly along with NASA's Earth-observing
satellites in an interactive 3D visualization.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Global Ice Viewer](/system/feature_items/images/28_global_ice_viewer.jpg)

##

# Global Ice Viewer

Earth's ice cover is shrinking. See how climate change has affected glaciers,
sea ice, and continental ice sheets.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

more multimedia

## Get the Newsletter

## Stay Connected

![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

### Facts

        
                  *         * Evidence
            * Causes
            * Effects
            * Scientific Consensus
            * Vital Signs
            * Questions (FAQ)
        

### Articles

        
                  *         * News and Features
            * Blog
            * Fun Facts
        

### Solutions

        
                  *         * Mitigation and Adaptation
            * Government Resources
        

### Explore

        
                  *         * Images of Change
            * Earth Minute Videos
            * Interactives
            * Mobile Apps
            * Beautiful Earth Gallery
            * Earth 360
        

### Resources

        
                  *         * Graphics and Multimedia
            * For Educators
            * Climate Kids
            * About Global Warming
            * About Climate Change
        

### NASA Science

        
                  *         * Science Mission Directorate
            * Earth System Science
            * Earth Science Missions
            * History
        
          * About Us
        

|

        
                  * Feedback
        

|

        
                  * Awards
        

|

        
                  * Earth Observatory
        

|

        
                  * SEA LEVEL CHANGE
        

|

        
                  * Privacy
        

|

        
                  * Climate Data Initiative
        

|

        
                  * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT
        

This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
Science Editor: Susan Callery

Site last updated: May 28, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

