

NASA

Global Climate Change

Vital Signs of the Planet

![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

Skip Navigation

## Explore

# Graphic: The relentless rise of carbon dioxide

![The inexorable rise of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere.

](/system/resources/detail_files/24_co2-graph-051619.jpg)

Ancient air bubbles trapped in ice enable us to step back in time and see what
Earth's atmosphere, and climate, were like in the distant past. They tell us
that levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere are higher than they
have been at any time in the past 400,000 years. During ice ages, CO2 levels
were around 200 parts per million (ppm), and during the warmer interglacial
periods, they hovered around 280 ppm (see fluctuations in the graph). In 2013,
CO2 levels surpassed 400 ppm for the first time in recorded history. This
recent relentless rise in CO2 shows a remarkably constant relationship with
fossil-fuel burning, and can be well accounted for based on the simple premise
that about 60 percent of fossil-fuel emissions stay in the air.

Today, we stand on the threshold of a new geologic era, which some term the
"Anthropocene", one where the climate is very different to the one our
ancestors knew.

If fossil-fuel burning continues at a business-as-usual rate, such that
humanity exhausts the reserves over the next few centuries, CO2 will continue
to rise to levels of order of 1500 ppm. The atmosphere would then not return
to pre-industrial levels even tens of thousands of years into the future. This
graph not only conveys the scientific measurements, but it also underscores
the fact that humans have a great capacity to change the climate and planet.

You can also find this graphic on our "Evidence" page.

#### Credit

Data: Luthi, D., et al.. 2008; Etheridge, D.M., et al. 2010; Vostok ice core
data/J.R. Petit et al.; NOAA Mauna Loa CO2 record. Some description adapted
from the Scripps CO2 Program website, "Keeling Curve Lessons."

ENLARGE

# Downloads

1280x800

283 KB

image/jpeg

Download

# More Like This

        
                  * Graphics
          * Shareables
          * Atmosphere
          * Carbon cycle
          * Global warming
        

## Related

Graphic: A simplified animation of the greenhouse effect.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: The Greenhouse Effect

NASA scientists are working to understand if our land and ocean can continue
to absorb carbon dioxide at the current rate â€“ and for how long.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Infographic: Earth's carbon cycle is off balance

Video: Using observations from NASA's Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO-2)
satellite, scientists developed a model of the behavior of carbon in the
atmosphere from September 1, 2014 to August 31, 2015.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Following atmospheric carbon dioxide

Video: NASA's Oceans Melting Greenland (OMG) and Operation IceBridge missions
investigate Greenland's thinning ice sheets from above and below.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Greenland's thinning ice

By comparing bee data to satellite imagery, NASA research scientist Wayne
Esaias uses honey bees as tiny data collectors to understand how climate
change is affecting pollination and plants.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Sting of Climate Change

These cloud formations were seen over the western Aleutian Islands. Their
color variations are probably due to differences in temperature and in the
size of water droplets that make up the clouds. This image was acquired by the
Landsat 7 satellite on June 16, 2000.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Aleutian clouds

NASA Earth Right Now promo

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: NASA Earth Right Now promo

NASA's new Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 space satellite will probe the carbon
cycle like never before, telling us where the carbon is going and giving us
clues as to where we will end up.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: Measuring carbon dioxide from space

The IPCC's four key findings

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: The IPCC's four key findings

Video: Southern Hemisphere ozone between July 1 and December 31 for selected
years between 1979 and 2018.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Ozonewatch 2018

A detailed look at Jupiter's and Earth's atmospheres and cores as we unlock
mysteries of the solar system.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Infographic: Jupiter and Earth: Giant discoveries ahead

Land. Water. Fire. Ice. These elements are basic ingredients that make up
planet Earth. Take a moment to admire the magnificent spectacle of our
stunning home planet from the perspective of space.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Majestic Planet

Video: NASA scientists release the first new global map of Earth at night
since 2012.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Lights of human activity shine in NASA's image of Earth at night

The past decade has been the hottest ever recorded since global temperature
records began 150 years ago. This video discusses the impacts of the sun's
energy, Earth's reflectance and greenhouse gasses on global warming.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Temperature Puzzle

Earth discovered - Climate 365 graphic

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: Earth, discovered

Video: Winter temperatures are soaring in the Arctic for the fourth winter in
a row.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

NASA studies an unusual Arctic warming event

Ice covers 10 percent of Earth's surface and helps moderate the planet's
temperature. Glaciers and ice sheets around the world are melting at an
alarming rate. By keeping an eye on Earth's ice from space, NASA satellites
help us understand the global effects of climate change.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Frozen Earth

Video: A high-resolution, three-dimensional view of global atmospheric carbon
dioxide concentrations from September 1, 2014 to August 31, 2015.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Seasonal changes in carbon dioxide

Video: Two key climate change indicators have broken numerous records through
the first half of 2016.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: Record-breaking climate trends in 2016

Quiz: The air we breathe

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Quiz: The air we breathe

Rivers of ice - Climate365 graphic

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: Rivers of ice

We know seas are rising and we know why. The urgent questions are by how much
and how quickly.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Infographic: Sea level rise

City vs. desert - Climate365 graphic

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: City vs. desert temperatures

Pliocene CO2 graphic - climate.nasa.gov

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Graphic: Carbon dioxide hits new high

Video: how different factors, both natural and industrial, contribute to
global warming.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

Video: How global warming stacks up

more resources

# Explore

## Interactives, galleries and apps

![Images of Change](/system/feature_items/images/9_images_of_change.jpg)

##

# Images of Change

Explore a stunning gallery of before-and-after images of Earth from land and
space that reveal our home planet in a state of flux.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Mobile

Apps](/system/feature_items/images/26_climate_mobile_apps.jpg)

##

# Climate Mobile Apps

Keep track of Earth's vital signs, see the planet in a state of flux and slow
the pace of global warming with NASA's free mobile apps.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Climate Time

Machine](/system/feature_items/images/27_climate_time_machine.jpg)

##

# Climate Time Machine

Travel through Earth's recent climate history and see how increasing carbon
dioxide, global temperature and sea ice have changed over time.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Eyes on the Earth](/system/feature_items/images/37_eyes_on_earth-2.jpg)

##

# Eyes on the Earth

Track Earth's vital signs from space and fly along with NASA's Earth-observing
satellites in an interactive 3D visualization.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

![Global Ice Viewer](/system/feature_items/images/28_global_ice_viewer.jpg)

##

# Global Ice Viewer

Earth's ice cover is shrinking. See how climate change has affected glaciers,
sea ice, and continental ice sheets.

![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

more multimedia

## Get the Newsletter

## Stay Connected

![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

### Facts

        
                  *         * Evidence
            * Causes
            * Effects
            * Scientific Consensus
            * Vital Signs
            * Questions (FAQ)
        

### Articles

        
                  *         * News and Features
            * Blog
            * Fun Facts
        

### Solutions

        
                  *         * Mitigation and Adaptation
            * Government Resources
        

### Explore

        
                  *         * Images of Change
            * Earth Minute Videos
            * Interactives
            * Mobile Apps
            * Beautiful Earth Gallery
            * Earth 360
        

### Resources

        
                  *         * Graphics and Multimedia
            * For Educators
            * Climate Kids
            * About Global Warming
            * About Climate Change
        

### NASA Science

        
                  *         * Science Mission Directorate
            * Earth System Science
            * Earth Science Missions
            * History
        
          * About Us
        

|

        
                  * Feedback
        

|

        
                  * Awards
        

|

        
                  * Earth Observatory
        

|

        
                  * SEA LEVEL CHANGE
        

|

        
                  * Privacy
        

|

        
                  * Climate Data Initiative
        

|

        
                  * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT
        

This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
Science Editor: Susan Callery

Site last updated: May 28, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

