

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

        
                  * Cart 0
          * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
          * |Stay Informed
        

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

        
                  * The Sciences
          * Mind
          * Health
          * Tech
          * Sustainability
          * Education
          * Video
          * Podcasts
          * Blogs
          * Publications
          * Subscribe
          * Current Issue
          * Cart0
          * Sign In
          * Stay Informed
        
          * Share
          * Latest
        
          *       *       *       * Climate
        

# Are Volcanoes or Humans Harder on the Atmosphere?

Does one major volcanic eruption generate more climate-altering gas than that
produced by humans in their entire history?

        
                  *       * Share on Facebook
        
          * Share on Twitter
        
          * Share on Reddit
        
          * Share on LinkedIn
        
          * Share via
        
          * Print
        

![Are Volcanoes or Humans Harder on the

Atmosphere?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/7350C7DB-B1C7-478C-9E73F74EFACC66B2_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&CCD34BE9-9BE2-49BF-B8AD6A52D910BD51)

Eyjafjallajokull Volcano Eruption, Iceland. Credit: Ingolfur Bjargmundsson
_Getty Images_

Advertisement

**Dear EarthTalk: Could it really be true that a single large volcanic
eruption launches more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than the amount
generated by all of humanity over history? __**  
_--_ _Steve Schlemmer, London, England_

This argument that human-caused carbon emissions are merely a drop in the
bucket compared to greenhouse gases generated by volcanoes has been making its
way around the rumor mill for years. And while it may sound plausible, the
science just doesn't back it up.

According to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the world's volcanoes, both on
land and undersea, generate about 200 million tons of carbon dioxide (CO2)
annually, while our automotive and industrial activities cause some 24 billion
tons of CO2 emissions every year worldwide. Despite the arguments to the
contrary, the facts speak for themselves: Greenhouse gas emissions from
volcanoes comprise less than one percent of those generated by today's human
endeavors.

Another indication that human emissions dwarf those of volcanoes is the fact
that atmospheric CO2 levels, as measured by sampling stations around the world
set up by the federally funded Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center,
have gone up consistently year after year regardless of whether or not there
have been major volcanic eruptions in specific years. "If it were true that
individual volcanic eruptions dominated human emissions and were causing the
rise in carbon dioxide concentrations, then these carbon dioxide records would
be full of spikes--one for each eruption," says Coby Beck, a journalist
writing for online environmental news portal Grist.org. "Instead, such records
show a smooth and regular trend."

Furthermore, some scientists believe that spectacular volcanic eruptions, like
that of Mt. St. Helens in 1980 and Mt. Pinatubo in 1991, actually lead to
short-term global cooling, not warming, as sulfur dioxide (SO2), ash and other
particles in the air and stratosphere reflect some solar energy instead of
letting it into Earth's atmosphere. SO2, which converts to sulfuric acid
aerosol when it hits the stratosphere, can linger there for as long as seven
years and can exercise a cooling effect long after a volcanic eruption has
taken place.

Scientists tracking the effects of the major 1991 eruption of the Philippines'
Mt. Pinatubo found that the overall effect of the blast was to cool the
surface of the Earth globally by some 0.5 degrees Celsius a year later, even
though rising human greenhouse gas emissions and an El Nino event (a warm
water current which periodically flows along the coast of Ecuador and Peru in
South America) caused some surface warming during the 1991-1993 study period.

In an interesting twist on the issue, British researchers last year published
an article in the peer reviewed scientific journal _Nature_ showing how
volcanic activity may be contributing to the melting of ice caps in Antarctica
--but not because of any emissions, natural or man-made, per se. Instead,
scientists Hugh Corr and David Vaughan of the British Antarctic Survey believe
that volcanoes underneath Antarctica may be melting the continent's ice sheets
from below, just as warming air temperatures from human-induced emissions
erode them from above.

**CONTACTS** : U.S. Geological Survey, www.usgs.gov; Carbon Dioxide
Information Analysis Center, cdiac.esd.ornl.gov; British Antarctic Survey,
www.antarctica.ac.uk.

**EarthTalk is produced by E/The Environmental Magazine. GOT AN ENVIRONMENTAL
QUESTION?** Send it to: **EarthTalk** , c/o **E/The Environmental Magazine** ,
P.O. Box 5098, Westport, CT 06881; submit it at:
www.emagazine.com/earthtalk/thisweek/, or e-mail: earthtalk@emagazine.com.
Read past columns at: www.emagazine.com/earthtalk/archives.php.

## Latest News

![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### My Next Chapter

8 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Computing

### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

9 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Physics

### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

9 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

9 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### Rethinking National Security

11 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Wellness

### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

12 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

        
                  * instagram
          * soundcloud
          * youtube
          * twitter
          * facebook
          * rss
        

Scientific american arabic

العربية

        
                  * Store
          * About
          * Press Room
        
          * FAQs
          * Contact Us
          * Site Map
        
          * Advertise
          * SA Custom Media
          * Terms of Use
        
          * Privacy Policy
          * Use of Cookies
          * International Editions
        

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

