

## ![Site

Error](/templateimages/redesign/modules/overlay/site_error.gif)There's a
problem with your browser or settings.

Your browser or your browser's settings are not supported. To get the best
experience possible, please download a compatible browser. If you know your
browser is up to date, you should check to ensure that javascript is enabled.

› Learn How

* * *

Follow this link to skip to the main content

# NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration

        
                  * NASA Home
          * **>** Centers
          * **>** Ames Home
          * **>** Research
          * **>** 2007
          *         * Send
            * Print
            * Follow this link to Share This Page
        

Share

## Feature

Text Size

Grow Text SizeShrink Text Size

A Gloomy Mars Warms Up

05.14.07

For the past 30 years, NASA scientists have been using high-tech satellite
equipment to study features on the face of Mars. It appears a slight change in
the planet’s surface luster has caused its temperature to rise.

To determine the extent of surface changes on Mars, scientists took images
from the Viking (launched 1975) and Mars Global Surveyor (1996) satellite
missions and mapped them into a climate model developed at NASA Ames Research
Center. They discovered that a wind-whipped, dusty surface has a measurable
effect on the amount of sunlight that is reflected by the planet. The results
of this research show that an increase in darkened surface areas may account
for a one degree Fahrenheit rise in the surface air temperature of the planet.

![Mars global warming

map](/centers/ames/images/content/176469main2_176470main_marsglobalwarming-

hires.jpg) Changes in the surface albedo (A) of Mars over a 20 year period.
Blue areas indicate regions that have darkened and yellow areas indicate
regions that have brightened. Changes are superimposed on an albedo map from
1997, derived from Mars Global Surveyor data. (Click on image for high-
resolution.)

“We know that warmer temperatures and increased wind strengths are near the
darkened areas where less sunlight is reflected by the surface, and cooler
temperatures and weakened winds generally correspond to brightened areas”
explained Lori Fenton, the experiment’s principal investigator at NASA Ames
Research Center, in California's Silicon Valley. “What we don’t understand is
how these changes in the planet’s brightness affect the martian climate.”

“Albedo” is the technical term for a planet’s ability to reflect sunlight.
According to scientists, variations in the planet’s albedo are generally
attributed to changes in distribution of dust on the surface.

Research indicates that as the dark areas on Mars expand and darken over time,
its albedo decreases, and its surface air temperature rise. Large surface
areas, some almost twice the size of the continent of Africa (over 34 million
square miles), have been observed to darken or brighten by 10 percent or more,
which speaks to the magnitude of these global surface changes.

“The coupling of these processes with albedo changes could produce a surface-
atmosphere feedback loop, in which surface albedo reductions, or darkened
areas, enhance the windiness and dust devil formation that produce surface
changes. Increased heating near the surface leads to greater atmospheric
instability,” explained Fenton.

In other words, scientists think that when surface areas darken and expand,
relatively more energy from the sun is being absorbed by the surface, which
causes temperatures to rise near the surface. This, in turn, produces a less
stable atmosphere generating more turbulent eddies and whirling dust devils.
The more dust that is redistributed to bright surfaces, the more surfaces
darken and expand, which causes more sunlight to be absorbed, increased
temperatures, and less stable the atmosphere, say scientists.

“In particular, the slight increase in surface air temperature is similar to
climate variations seen on Earth, even though the processes involved are
significantly different,” added Fenton.

Moreover, scientists suspect that a change in global surface albedo could
influence the formation of dust storms on both local and global scales. They
report that the surface brightening and atmospheric cooling following the 2001
global dust storm may affect the timing of future large dust storms. Research
demonstrates that surface areas may brighten depending on the way dust
settles, which would suppress winds and ‘dust devil’ formation, the two
mechanisms potentially responsible for dust storm initiation.

“Although the events that trigger dust storms have yet to be understood, this
work demonstrates that one contributing factor may be a decrease in surface
albedo. Martian climate indicators, such as global dust storm occurrences,
polar energy balance, and annual global-mean air temperature, are dependent on
many interrelated and poorly understood processes. By investigating solely the
effects of changes in surface albedo (from two very different Mars years), we
have shown that albedo interacts with, and could in part drive, other climate-
influencing processes on Mars,” said Fenton.

These and related studies appeared in Nature, 2007.

For further information, please visit:

http://www.nasa.gov/home

Ruth Marlaire  
NASA Ames Research Center

› Back To Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

