

# James Annan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For the photographer, see James Craig Annan.

**James D. Annan** is a scientist involved in climate prediction. He was a
member of the Global Warming Research Program at Frontier Research Centre for
Global Change which is associated with the Earth Simulator in Japan. In 2014
he left Japan, returning to the United Kingdom as a co-founder of Blue Skies
Research.[1]

## Climatology[edit]

Annan has made several bets against those who believe the scientific consensus
on climate change to be incorrect. The November 10, 2004 online version of
_Reason_ magazine reported that Lindzen is "willing to take bets that global
average temperatures in 20 years will in fact be lower than they are now."[2]
Annan contacted Lindzen to arrange a bet and they exchanged proposals for
bets, but were unable to agree on terms. The final proposal was a bet that if
the temperature change were less than 0.2 °C (0.36 °F), Lindzen would win. If
the temperature change were between 0.2 °C and 0.4 °C the bet would be off,
and if the temperature change were 0.4 °C or greater, Annan would win. Lindzen
would take 2 to 1 odds.[3]

In 2005, another bet for $10,000 dollars was arranged with a pair of Russian
solar physicists Galina Mashnich and Vladimir Bashkirtsev.[4] The bet will
conclude in 2017.

A third bet in 2007 between Annan and David Whitehouse of the Global Warming
Policy Foundation was arranged by the BBC Radio program, More or Less in 2007.
Annan and Whitehouse bet £100 on whether the Met Office temperature would set
a new annual record by the end of 2011. Annan was declared to have lost in the
program in January 2012.[5]

He considers that climate sensitivity uncertainty is less than has often been
portrayed. Papers on this include "Using multiple observationally-based
constraints to estimate climate sensitivity".[6]

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** Hargreaves, Julia; James Annan. "Blue Skies Research". Retrieved 2014-02-06.
          2. **^** Bailey, Ronald (November 10, 2005). "Two Sides to Global Warming". Reason Magazine. Archived from the original on October 27, 2006. Retrieved  2007-04-05.
          3. **^** Bailey, Ronald (June 8, 2005). "Betting on Climate Change". Reason Magazine. Archived from the original on October 24, 2006. Retrieved  2007-04-05.
          4. **^** David Adam (19 August 2005). "Climate change sceptics bet $10,000 on cooler world". Guardian Unlimited. Retrieved 2007-09-10.
          5. **^** "More or Less, High Speed 2 and Executive Pay". BBC. 2011-01-13. Retrieved  2012-01-13. "Tim Harford ... resolves a four year-old bet on climate change between climate scientist James Annan and astrophysicist David Whitehouse"
          6. **^** Annan, J. D.; Hargreaves, J. C. (March 18, 2006). "Using multiple observationally-based constraints to estimate climate sensitivity". _Geophysical Research Letters_. **33** (6): L06704. Bibcode:2006GeoRL..33.6704A. doi:10.1029/2005GL025259.
        

## External links[edit]

        
                  * Climate scientists issue dire warning
          * Climate change sceptics bet $10,000 on cooler world
          * James Annan's blog
          * James Annan's former homepage at Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC)
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Annan&oldid=878015145"

Categories:

        
                  * Living people
          * British climatologists
          * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change contributing authors
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Year of birth missing (living people)
          * Missing middle or first names
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * العربية
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 12 January 2019, at 12:16 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

