

__

        
                  * Company directory
          * E-Learning
          * White papers
          * Advertise
          * Contact
          * Sign-In
          * Subscribe
        

__

## News section

        
                  * Environmental Laboratory
        

#### Environmental Laboratory

### Environmental Laboratory

Student program offers great opportunity for young scientists

## Iconic ‘Easy-Load’® pump head updated with mode...

**Jun 04 2019** Read 113

## How to maximise your GC’s organochlorine pesticide...

**Jun 04 2019** Read 104

        
                  * Water/Wastewater
        

#### Water/Wastewater

### Water/Wastewater

A perfect tool for water and aquaculture anaysis

## Exciting time” for sensors says Ofwat director

**Jun 04 2019** Read 602

## Over 80,000 visitors expected at Aquatech China as w...

**Jun 04 2019** Read 521

        
                  * Air Monitoring
        

#### Air Monitoring

### Air Monitoring

World Environment Day 2019 - Everything You Need to Know

## A perfect solution for measuring indoor air quality

**Jun 03 2019** Read 201

## How Much Pollution Does Engine Idling Cause?

**Jun 01 2019** Read 352

        
                  * Gas Detection
        

#### Gas Detection

### Gas Detection

The next level in liquid flow sensing

## Gas analysis specialists agree that monitoring green...

**Jun 05 2019** Read 197

## Give your gas analysis requirements the 'green light'

**Jun 03 2019** Read 118

        
                  * Portable/Field Testing
        

#### Portable/Field Testing

### Portable/Field Testing

Reliable and accurate water level and temperature meter

## Accurate and compact water level datalogger

**May 13 2019** Read 292

## Reliable shallow groundwater, soil and gas measureme...

**May 10 2019** Read 282

        
                  * Health & Safety
        

#### Health & Safety

### Health & Safety

Cutting edge transmitter/receiver combination adds virtual forth wire to...

## New fixed area hydrogen gas safety monitor for fast...

**May 09 2019** Read 545

## a1-cbiss Launch 3M Fall Protection Products

**Apr 10 2019** Read 890

        
                  * Business News
        

#### Business News

### Business News

Royal sponsorship for World Soil Museum

## 5 Ways the EU Has Helped the Environment

**May 25 2019** Read 393

## CDS Analytical acquires the rights to Empore™ ...

**May 23 2019** Read 282

__

### Business News

        
                  * ![Nuclear Power Stations or Wind Farms - Which Is More Cost-Effective?](/assets/file_store/pr_files/44581/thumbnails/images/405w_wind-farm-1209784_1280.jpg)
        

__

#### Related stories

## World Environment Day 2019 - Everything You Need to Know

## How Much Pollution Does Engine Idling Cause?

## What's at the Very Bottom of the Mariana Trench?

## What Is an Acid Gas?

# Nuclear Power Stations or Wind Farms - Which Is More Cost-Effective?

__Request information

**Dec 19 2017** Read 3109 Times

Historically, wind farms have come under fire from their critics for being too
inefficient and expensive to be cost-effective. However, rapid developments in
the technology have resulted in plummeting costs, and the chief of a leading
energy company now believes that it is nuclear, and not wind, which won't be
able to compete going forward.

Hans Bunting, the chief of renewables at Innogy SE, pointed to the wind farm
his company are developing off the coast of Lincolnshire, which has secured a
government subsidy allowing it to offer energy at £74.75/MWh - that's
significantly lower than the £92.50 secured for the controversial Hinkley
Point C nuclear plant.

## Winds of change

Even when the finalised plans for Hinkley C were announced last September, the
plan was greeted with scepticism from certain quarters. Critics said the
technology behind the incentive was out-dated and unproven, as well as
involving all of the quandaries normally associated with nuclear waste.

One aspect not thought to be under threat, however, was its cost-effectiveness
in comparison to renewable technologies such as wind power. In the intervening
12 months, the government have since granted three sizable subsidies to
developments at Triton Knoll (mentioned above and set to employ the biggest
world turbines in the world), Hornsea (near Yorkshire) and Moray (up in
Scotland).

All three have secured a significantly cheaper MW/h than Hinkley, with the
latter two guaranteeing £57.50. Triton Knoll is more expensive as it is
scheduled to be completed a year sooner, though all three will become
operational before Hinkley C.

## What they say

Bunting has cited those prices as evidence that wind is already significantly
cheaper than nuclear - and added that the falling costs in the industry mean
that wind will be even more affordable by the time Hinkley C comes online.

"A few years ago everyone thought 10MW [turbines] was the maximum, now we're
talking about 15[MW]. It seems the sky is the limit," he explained. "[It]
means less turbines for the same capacity, less steel in the ground, less
cables, even bigger rotors catching more wind, so it will become cheaper."

However, not everyone is in agreement. A spokesman for EDF Energy (the company
behind Hinkley C) said that the nuclear plant could take advantage of the same
falling costs as the wind sector. "EDF Energy's follow-on nuclear projects at
Sizewell and Bradwell will remain competitive with other low-carbon options
and we are confident they can be developed at a significantly lower price than
Hinkley Point C," he said.

## Nuclear being pushed out?

Perhaps one of the biggest reasons why Hinkley C has remained an option thus
far is the Conservative Party's enduring support for the project. Moreover,
public opposition to wind farms among Tory strongholds in the south of England
has prevented the industry from spreading its wings in those areas.

However, Bunting believes that the surplus of wind in Wales and Scotland would
make such locations unattractive for the industry in any case. He also went on
to say that Innogy would expand into new solar power projects (like those
being explored at Lufft) if the government reopened subsidies in that sector.

For their part, the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
have maintained both power sources are vital to the future of the UK. "We need
a diverse energy mix to ensure that demand for energy can always be met, and
both nuclear and renewables will play an important role in this for many years
to come," said a statement.

__Request information

### Reader comments

Do you like or dislike what you have read? Why not post a comment to tell
others / the manufacturer and our Editor what you think. To leave comments
please complete the form below. Providing the content is approved, your
comment will be on screen in less than 24 hours. Leaving comments on product
information and articles can assist with future editorial and article content.
Post questions, thoughts or simply whether you like the content.

## Post a Comment

First Name

Last Name

Email

Comment

Send

### Business News

Royal Eijkelkamp will be sponsoring the World Soil Museum in Wageningen for
the next three years. Fons Eijkelkamp and Stephan Mantel signed the
sponsorship a...

__

## Royal sponsorship for World Soil Museum

**May 27 2019** Read 249 Times

### Business News

Much of the media furore surrounding the UK’s impending exit from the EU (or
perhaps just the uncertainty it has generated) has concentrated on the
potenti...

__

## 5 Ways the EU Has Helped the Environment

**May 25 2019** Read 393 Times

### Business News

CDS Analytical LLC has announced that it has acquired the rights to Empore™
products, including production line, patents and trademarks, from 3M™ Purif...

__

## CDS Analytical acquires the rights to Empore™ products

**May 23 2019** Read 282 Times

### Business News

Gasmet Technologies Oy has announced its acquisition of MonitoringSystems
GmbH, based in Austria. Acquisition further strengthens Gasmet’s global
positio...

__

## Gasmet Technologies acquires MonitoringSystems GmbH

**May 20 2019** Read 288 Times

__

#### Trending News

## What Are the Top 5 Environmental Concerns for 2...

## What are the Different Types of Floods?

## Exciting time” for sensors says Ofwat director

## Over 80,000 visitors expected at Aquatech China...

## Student program offers great opportunity for yo...

#### Digital Edition

### Asian Environmental Technology May 2019

May 2019

In This Editon Business News - Measuring the methane component of GHG
emissions - Blackline Safety reports strongest quarter ever with revenue up
64% - Restek and LECO collaborate in worldw...

##### View all digital editions

#### Trending Articles

## WWEM 2018 like a glimpse into the future

## The Importance of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BO...

## Active versus Passive Air Sampling - Eddie Salter

## Environmental Technology - Making a Difference

## How Dangerous is Blue Green Algae?

### Events

AWWA Annual Conference and Exposition

Jun 09 2019 Denver, CO, USA

ETTC 2019

Jun 11 2019 Toulouse, France

Pumps, Valves and Pipes Africa

Jun 11 2019 Johannesburg, South Africa

ExpoBiogaz 2019

Jun 12 2019 Lille, France

Recyling 2019

Jun 13 2019 Edinburgh, Scotland

##### View all events

        
                  * Home
          * Buyers Guide
          * News
          * Subscribe
          * Advertise
          * Events diary
          * Contact
          * Books
        
          * Environmental Laboratory
          * Water/Wastewater
          * Air Monitoring
          * Gas Detection
          * Portable/Field Testing
          * Health & Safety
          * Business News
        

**International Labmate Limited**  
Oak Court Business Centre  
Sandridge Park, Porters Wood  
St Albans  
Hertfordshire  
AL3 6PH  
United Kingdom

T +44 (0)1727 858 840  
F +44 (0)1727 840 310  
E info@labmate-online.com

Cookies Help Terms & Conditions Privacy

Copyright © 2019 Labmate Online. All rights reserved.

![](https://i.canddi.com/i.gif?A=370fa008a94003da924222c3125ab432)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

