

Skip to content

        
                  * Design
          * Transportation
          * Environment
          * Equity
          * Life
        

# Why Are European Cities So Dense?

        
                  1. Andrew Small
        

Oct 27, 2016

## It’s not just because they’re old.

        
                  * Share
          * Tweet
          *         * LinkedIn
            * Email
            * Print
        

Which city do you think is more dense: Paris or New York City?

That’s the question posed by the latest video from Wendover Productions, the
folks who render addictively tidy explanations for complex transportation,
geography, and legal matters. After their recent video on why American trains
are such a pain, Wendover is channeling their inner urbanist once again to
tackle density—specifically, why European cities pack so many more people into
their urban cores.

Oops, spoiler alert: The answer is Paris. The French capital has 56,000 people
per square mile while NYC, the most densely settled U.S. metropolis, has only
27,000 people per square mile. In fact, old New Amsterdam would only come in
sixth on a European density ranking—equal to Lyon, France and below Athens,
Barcelona, Monaco, and Frederiksberg.

The big reasons? Age, not surprisingly. Paris and other European cities
developed around Medieval transit technology, when walkability was at a much
greater premium and wealthiest lived in the urban core. New World urban
settlement patterns were largely shaped by faster transportation: first
trains, then streetcars, and then private cars. Thus the rise of railroad
towns for affluent commuters, streetcar suburbs, and finally the auto-centric
sprawl of 1950s America.

Even European cities that developed after these transit technologies typically
opted for Old World density, as in Germany’s post-war rebuilding. To explain
why, the video offers other factors, from high gas prices and low urban crime
rates that kept central cities attractive to residents to generous farming
subsidies that preserved nearby land for agricultural use. It’s an ten-minute
crash-course in Euro-urbanism, basically. Worth a look as you drive back to
your sprawl-riddled suburb. Same as it ever was; same as it ever was.

#### About the Author

![Andrew

Small](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/None/IMG_9317/headshot.jpg?mod=1522336362)

##### Andrew Small

        
                  * @ASmall_Word
          * Feed
        

Andrew Small is a freelance writer in Washington, D.C., and author of the
CityLab Daily newsletter (subscribe here). He was previously an editorial
fellow at CityLab _._

Expand Comments +

## Most Popular

        
                  1. ![A photo of a bike lane in Philadelphia](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2019/05/AP_100524037437/144x144.jpg?mod=1559847281)
        

Transportation

### Protected Bike Lanes Are Safer for Drivers, Too

A comprehensive study of crash and street design data from 12 cities finds
that roads with protected bike lanes make both cycling and driving safer.

        
                    1. Laura Bliss
        

Jun 3, 2019

        
                  2. ![a photo of a luxury apartment building in LA](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2019/06/RTR3N6FS/144x144.jpg?mod=1559756663)
        

Equity

### How Luxury Units Turn Into Affordable Housing

Building more high-end apartments doesn’t sound like a quick fix for the
affordable housing crisis. But maybe you just have to look harder.

        
                    1. Nolan Gray
        

Jun 5, 2019

        
                  3. ![](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2019/06/hoa_popularity_lede_fb/144x144.png?mod=1559845999)
        

Equity

### HOAs Are Popular Where Prejudice Is Strong and Government Is Weak

A new study finds that higher percentages of wealthy, Asian, and white
residents live in HOAs; and people pay a premium of about 4 percent for homes
in HOAs.

        
                    1. David Montgomery
        

Jun 4, 2019

        
                  4. ![A photo of Amsterdam streets.](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2019/06/Screen_Shot_2019_06_04_at_1.22.03_PM/144x144.png?mod=1559749461)
        

Videos

### How to Cut 10,000 Parking Spaces Without Anyone Complaining

A new short film celebrates bike-friendly Amsterdam’s no-drama strategy for
eliminating car parking: “It’s not a big deal here.”

        
                    1. Laura Bliss
        

Jun 5, 2019

        
                  5. ![A photo of an apartment building in Mexico City](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2019/06/mexico_city_2/144x144.jpg?mod=1559681635)
        

Life

### The Restaurant at the Center of a Gentrification War

Rising housing costs have triggered a wave of displacement in Mexico City’s
Centro Histórico. But residents are finding creative ways to resist.

        
                    1. Martha Pskowski
        

Jun 4, 2019

![](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2017/12/ballyhoo_artboards_maps-2/hero.png?mod=1512597427)

Maps

Click Here

![](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2017/12/ballyhoo_artboards_newsletter/hero.png?mod=1512597502)

Newsletters

Click Here

![](https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2017/12/ballyhoo_artboards_facebook/hero.png?mod=1512597427)

Facebook

Click Here

Skip to content

        
                  * Share
          * Tweet
        

Next Story in Equity »

        
                  * Special Reports
          * FAQ
          * Masthead
          * Solutions
          * Store
          * Atlantic Media
          * Jobs
          * Media Kit
          * Partner Solutions
          * Contact Us
          * Privacy
          * Terms & Conditions
        
          *       *       *       *       * Sign up for CityLab Daily: Sign Up
        

Loading...

Subscribe to our other newsletters here.

CityLab is committed to telling the story of the world’s cities: how they
work, the challenges they face, and the solutions they need.

Citylab.com (C) 2019 The Atlantic Monthly Group

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

