

  * Home
  * Get a loan
  * Investing
  * How it works
  * About us
  * Blog
    * Peer to Peer Lending
    * Money Smarts
    * Debt
    * Savings
    * Financial Tips
    * Loans
    * Personal
    * Credit
    * Score
    * P2P Lending Buzz
  * Help

* * *

![Peerform | Peer to Peer Lending Blog](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-

content/uploads/2014/10/Bigger-424x108.png)

![](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/marxism_big.jpg)

Money Smarts 303

# Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World

By Peerform * On December 6, 2012

The term socialist has been thrown around quite a bit in the past few years.
Not since the cold war has the term garnered so much attention in the press
and from politicians. But when you look at countries who actually have a
socialist economic structure, you can see some similarities to the United
States – but there are some really stark differences.

Below, you will see some of the most socialistic nations in the world today:

  * China
  * Denmark
  * Finland
  * Netherlands
  * Canada
  * Sweden
  * Norway
  * Ireland
  * New Zealand
  * Belgium

Despite popular myths, there is very little connection between economic
performance and welfare expenditure. Many of the countries on this list are
proof of that, such as Denmark and Finland. Even though both countries are
more socialistic than America, the workforce remains stronger.

## China

In China the government manages and controls the economy. Many of the domestic
companies are owned and run by the government. Recently, the Chinese economy
has become more geared towards capitalism, but is still officially socialist.
Life in China remains relatively less stressful and more relaxed than life in
capitalist countries like America.

![](http://longms.pbworks.com/w/page/18931406/f/GovernmentControl.jpg)

## Denmark

Denmark has a wide range of welfare benefits that they offer their citizens.
As a result, they also have the highest taxes in the world. Equality is
considered the most important value in Denmark. Small businesses thrive, with
over 70 percent of companies having 50 employees or less.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/66/Amagertorv,_Copenhagen.jpg)

Amagertorv in Copenhagen, Denmark (image CC BY 2.0 by Furya via Wikimedia
Commons)

## Finland

Finland has one of the world’s best education systems, with no tuition fees
and also giving free meals to their students. The literacy rate in Finland is
100 percent. Finland has one of the highest standards of living in the world.
Like Denmark and other European countries, equality is considered one of the
most important values in society. Whereas in the Netherlands, government
control over the economy remains at a minimum, but a socialist welfare system
remains. The lifestyle in the Netherlands is very egalitarian and organized,
where even bosses do not discipline or treat their subordinates rudely.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/17/Paasitorni_by_the_sea.jpg)

Paasitorni by the Sea in Helsinki, Finland (Image CC BY-SA 3.0 by Kati Kosonen
via Wikimedia Commons)

## Canada

Like the Netherlands, Canada also has mostly a free market economy, but has a
very extensive welfare system that includes free health and medical care.
Canadians remain more open-minded and liberal than Americans, and Canada is
ranked as one of the best top five countries to live in by the United Nations
and the Human Development Index (HDI) rankings.

![Image](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/12/Canada1-300x150.gif)

## Sweden

Sweden has a large welfare system, but due to a high national debt, required
much government intervention in the economy. In Norway, the government
controls certain key aspects of the national economy, and they also have one
of the best welfare systems in the world, with Norway having one of the
highest standards of living in all of Europe. Norway is not a member of the
European Union.

![Image](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/12/Sweden-300x189.gif)

## Ireland

Ireland has arguably one of the best welfare systems in the world, with
unemployment checks higher on average than Denmark or Switzerland’s average.
Around 25 percent of Ireland’s GDP goes towards paying for the welfare system,
as compared to 15 percent of America’ GDP towards America’s social support
programs.

![Image](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/12/Ireland-300x188.jpg)

## **New Zealand**

New Zealand may not be a socialist country, but the welfare system in the
country is very wide ranging, offering support for housing, unemployment,
health, child care, and education as well. Therefore, New Zealand has many of
the characteristics of a socialist country, even while remaining officially
free market.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/86/Hobbiton.jpg)

The location of Hobbiton, as used in the Lord of the Rings films. Near
Matamata in New Zealand (image CC BY 2.0 by Rob Chandler via Wikimedia
Commons)

## Belgium

Lastly, Belgium has most of the same social security benefits that New Zealand
offers, including invalid and old age pensions. The welfare system causes much
of the country’s budget deficit though, and so is considered by some to be a
burden on society.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/cf/Het_Plein_2012.jpg)

Het Plein at the Hague, Belgium (image: CC BY 2.0 by zoetnet via Wikimedia
Commons)

### What do you think?

comments

CanadaDenmarkFinlandHuman Development IndexNew ZealandNorwayUnited
StatesWelfare

#### Peerform

### You Might Also Like

  * ![save money in your 20's](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/julian-gentilezza-414681-unsplash-192x128.jpg) Financial Tips

#### Tips to Help You Save Money in Your 20's

  * ![medical loan with bad credit](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/bright-cardiac-cardiology-433267-192x128.jpg) Financial Tips

#### Medical Loan with Bad Credit

  * ![adult kids living at home](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/adult-beautiful-brownie-698166-192x128.jpg) Financial Tips

#### Adult Kids Living at Home: Protect Your Finances

### 303 Comments

  * Savannah Peden says: February 28, 2013 at 4:46 pm

New Zealnd

Reply

  * Christopher Skyi says: March 8, 2013 at 1:26 pm

New Zealand? I thought NZ's recent free-market reforms allowed far more
foreign investment, and the World Bank in 2005 said New Zealand was the most
business-friendly country in the world, just after Singapore. Or did you
really mean "New Lealnd" 🙂

Reply

    
    
    * Karl says: March 30, 2013 at 6:05 pm
    

the most open free markets are in the most extensively socialzed countries.
Graft and corruption is the true enemy of free markets, not governments doing
their jobs- ensuring conditions which foster the well being of the people they
govern- think Finland and Norway. Graft and corruption thrive in countries
with no social satiety net and poor education opportunity. This creates a
climate in which there can be no free market based on competition, and instead
we see a market based on elevation of the most corrupt- think USA and its
financial institutions.

Reply

    
    
      * Tyler says: August 11, 2013 at 8:19 pm
    

Sorry Andrew but I don't believe you understand the system of what a free
market is. The free-market is exactly what it sounds like. Sure corruption
definitely hurts the free markets system but most corruption is done through
government. While corruption in the short run might hurt, in the long run it
does not survive in a free market system. Example: the financial institutions/
Wall street in the USA like you mentioned.

Reply

    
    
        * argument says: October 12, 2013 at 9:23 am
    

Sorry Tyler, the reason that corruption is attributed to gov't institutions is
because they actually have to answer to the law set up by a social contract.
In a power vacuum, and lawless world, there would technically be no
corruption, because all ill-doings would be open to "interpretation". Hence,
99 % of "free market" business corruption is passed off as "optimization",
"derivatives", etc. Greed and corruption is institutionalized in the free
market system.

    
    
        * John says: January 28, 2014 at 8:55 pm
    

Bravo, and very well said.

It's pathetic to see how "well" a country is rated by their welfare system.

    
    
        * Mitch says: June 17, 2014 at 7:11 pm
    

Actually the medieval origins of the free market were based on extensive
regulation and protections for consumers, crafters, and sellers. It was
considered a "free market" because these protections permitted the middle
class to compete rather than letting the monied nobility and nouveau riche
game the system for their own benefit. That was the only type of government
influence it stymied; regulation and protections were integral to the free
market.

    
    
      * Marga says: December 9, 2013 at 8:16 am
    

You are crazy with this assumption!!!!!

Reply

    
    
      * William Ding says: January 9, 2014 at 4:25 am
    

Karl as in Marx. Me thought you had gone the way of the USSR amigo. Now let me
guess, your socialist super powers who support the worlds police keeping
missions and many of the truly needy from all over the world have got it going
on eh? Maybe next time we will step aside and you can try your luck speaking
German or Japanese or, perhaps Chinese or Russian.  
No, y'all got it all over us and you are a typical libtard in that you have
your lofty theoretical nonsense and too inept to understand reality. good luck
with that.

Reply

    
    
        * Derrick Still says: May 4, 2014 at 11:16 pm
    

You do realize that the more liberal countries are usually the best places to
live right? Seriously look up some top ten lists

    
    
        * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 3:43 am
    

Did you know, the Americans got lost sailing to the pacific to fight the
Japanese. Thought it was a relevent point to make.

    
    
      * corey says: May 13, 2014 at 11:17 pm
    

doesn't the US have the largest gdp and is extensively one of the largest
contributors of innovation to the global market.

Reply

    
    
        * Ramon says: June 23, 2014 at 5:29 pm
    

yes but how come the quality of life in Denmark is so much better than the US?
Where do you spend all your money? Company bail outs and war? Your country is
drowning in dept.

    
    
        * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 7:16 am
    

Yeah but they owe the PRC a cool $14,000,000,000,000 greenbacks. Thought that
might be relevant too.

    
    
        * Iam says: September 22, 2015 at 10:29 am
    

Debt: $18 trillion and counting.

    
    
        * Brenda says: March 14, 2016 at 1:26 pm
    

There is no comparing the US to these small tiny countries. Our country is
much to large to go this route. Can you imagine if your country were this
size? The government trying to run it? Fortunately our founders realized this
and allowed for the States to govern themselves.

    
    
        * Dan says: May 18, 2016 at 12:42 am
    

I agree with Corey. Without the US, all of these smaller counties would be
speaking Chinese or Russian right now. It's easy for people to sit back and
criticize the USA when they are in complete oblivion or denial as to the
safety net that it provides all of the small countries of the world. Aside
from China, none of the countries mentioned in this article even need a
military force because of the built-in safety provided and funded largely by
the US. If the US was to change from a capitalist economy to a socialist
economy the balance of world military power would shift dramatically. Most of
the countries in this article would have to fend for themselves and their
perceived higher quality of living would have to be completely reevaluated.

    
    
    * michelle says: May 16, 2014 at 3:36 pm
    

New Zealand is included because they have one of the best systems in the world
when caring for their people. Compared to the USA it can be considered
socialized in many ways. It is not about free market it's about how they are
taking care of their people.

Reply

    
    
      * David says: June 27, 2014 at 11:23 am
    

Perhaps someone can tell me why with the supposedly extensive social welfare
systems in places such as Denmark and Sweden the people do not take advantage?
Or do they and we just don't hear about it. Is there not an entitlement
attitude in these places?  
How do you contrast this with the out of control entitlements in the US. Why
isn't the government in Sweden and Denmark buying votes with entitlements.  
Can you even compare these places to the US. they have no real economy.

Reply

    
    
        * john says: April 20, 2015 at 4:08 pm
    

If they have "no economy", but people are living sustainably & happily then
what difference does it make? People have the idea that good economy = good
life for everybody; in practice that is not the case. Although there is
probably some correlation, and funny as it may sound, happiness goes beyond
GDP.

    
    
        * Anonymous says: April 27, 2015 at 5:31 pm
    

greed

    
    
        * J Steinmetz says: May 19, 2015 at 5:34 am
    

How our society will develop by the end of this century, the 21st century, is
knowable. Not because my concept indicates it, but because logic dictates that
it is the only way it will mature. The American society may well become a
‘third-world’ nation, in the meantime, but eventually, it will become what I
visualize, as that is the only solution.

I use deductive reasoning, analytical thinking and the Socratic method as the
way to find an answer to a question or to a problem.

Several problems, prevalent today in the American society, will be solved.

“Marriage” as an ‘institution’, will be obsolete. People will no longer use
superstitious dogma to dictate their relationships. Nor will they permit
governmental laws to authorize their social affairs.  
People will simply live together. Should they want to codify their
association, they may use an attorney to contract an Agreement.

Procreation will be medical. Egg and sperm banks will be utilized by the
parties to select DNA genetic preferences in Petri dishes. Governmental
departments will regulate and oversee procedures. Therefore, gestation and
‘birth’ regulations or superstitious dogmas will be unnecessary.

“Same-sex marriages”, “abortions”, “incest” will not be problematic, as they
will not exist. Medically, mentally and sociologically, the society will be
healthier and happier.

Most societies will be Socialistic. The American Republican Political party
will obsolete. Most political debates will be scientific and sociological.

(Actually, there are a few places where it exists, today)

    
    
        * Dan says: May 18, 2016 at 12:50 am
    

Many people reading this don't fully appreciate that the small socialist
economies of the world totally collapse if they also have to face the
financial burden of defending themselves.

    
    
      * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 7:19 am
    

Ooooh hang on there a minute cuz. This current government keeps swing the axe
and trims even further we'll be 3rd world in no time…

Reply

    
    
    * Anonymous says: May 12, 2016 at 1:38 pm
    

you sucjeha

Reply

  * 2 >dlb. G says: May 2, 2013 at 11:37 am

noooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo

Reply

  * Jake says: July 15, 2014 at 8:28 pm

You do know those countries do not have really any type of military, very
small. Socialism would never work in the United States . With almost no
defense spending they can afford a large social service program

Reply

    
    
    * phantom says: December 20, 2014 at 3:06 am
    

China has the largest standing army in the world

Reply

    
    
      * George Cherian says: March 16, 2015 at 3:09 pm
    

China is not killing people like US. They do not take part in any foolish wars
either. It is better to spend tax payers' money for the welfare of the people
& education, medical care etc rather than wasting funds in wars & killing
people in other countries.

Reply

    
    
        * Tom says: June 25, 2015 at 12:51 am
    

China doesn't kill people? They execute more people than the whole world
combine, actively persecute and arrest buddhist monks and Uighurs. China is an
oppressive state that is the reason that North Korea (the most oppressive
country on earth) still exists today. At least the US is supporting protecting
Europe such as the small Baltic States and is standing with the countries
being bullied by China in the South China Sea (Philippines, Japan, and etc).

Get a clue.

    
    
        * Ellen Dahlgren says: February 5, 2016 at 11:02 pm
    

China is not just socialist, but communist. If you think China is not out
killing people in other countries, then you are delusional, because they soon
will be. Why do you think they have the largest standing army. Or why they are
now copying our stealth technology, or building up their nuclear weapons
program?  
And they have in the past gone into other countries, think Vietnam and Korea.  
In answer to your sledgehammer insult about the U.S. entering other countries,
I will remind you that they attacked us in OUR country first. Think 9-11-01.
Are you saying those people deserved the death handed to them? Did you watch
the people falling to their deaths trying to get away from the nightmare
inferno inside?  
The U.S. may not be perfect, but neither is any other country in the World.  
I will also remind you that if the United States hadn't gone into other
countries to fight, Europe would now be nothing more than an extention of Nazi
Germany.  
How soon they forget.

    
    
        * Joel says: March 7, 2016 at 8:56 am
    

agree

    
    
      * Andy says: May 10, 2015 at 12:58 am
    

Interesting to read people's comments from around the world, especially our
Danish friends.

I feel Socialist Democracies can certainly work, but a lot of it depends on
the nation's psyche and size of population.

In Britain, a culture of laziness has been allowed to develop where people
take 'advantage' of a welfare system set up to protect those 'less fortunate'
than others. Couple this with free movement within the EU so now persons of a
'lazy' nature from around Europe can come and take advantage too. And some
sure do, but please note I am well aware that many hard working EU members
have also paid into the system.

Denmark's population is under 6million, whereas England's is over 60 million.
The level of tax for Welfare would remain the same, but the problem of 'free
loaders' becomes magnified and much clearer for the hard working people to see
in a larger country. This creates a class divide which again is magnified due
to the sheer size of each class.

Reply

    
    
        * Omar says: June 25, 2015 at 2:51 am
    

Just wanted to tackle some of the misconceptions you're perpetuating about
Britain. Firstly, your claim that "…a culture of laziness has been allowed to
develop where [free loaders] take ‘advantage’ of a welfare system…" That is
simply untrue. 4 out 5 recipients come off Job Seeker's Allowance (JSA) within
sixth-months. Of the long-term JSA claimants (which accounts for just 16% of
JSA claimants), the overwhelming majority have been judged by the DWP's own
standards to be unfit for work. While we might constantly see headlines and TV
shows suggesting benefit fraud and dependency is rife, the statistics simply
do not fit that narrative.

Secondly, "free movement within the EU so now persons of a ‘lazy’ nature from
around Europe can come and take advantage too." Again, this is factually
wrong. On the whole, immigration net contributes to the British economy. You
can then break this down between immigrants from within the EU (taking
advantage of free movement) and non-EU immigration (that Britain can and does
regulate). Going by the figures in Dustmann& Frattini's Fiscal Effects of
Immigration study (2013), EU immigration actually provides a greater net
contribution in comparison to non-EU, selective immigration. Therefore,
evidence would suggest the nature of persons from around Europe is anything
but 'lazy'.

Now, I agree that there are fundamental differences between the psyche and
population size and shapes of Britain and countries like Denmark. However,
that absolutely does not mean Socialist Democracies characterised by high
welfare costs offset by high taxation cannot work. At best, it simply means
the model we adopt would have to be adapted and tweaked- the principles,
however, are sound.

    
    
        * Nedu says: August 9, 2015 at 4:30 pm
    

Yeah regional confederacy is a burden to large economies, when ECOWAS was
formed, Nigeria suffered from massive influx of immigrants seeking greener
pastures, the Brits are becoming complacent but EU isn't just the cause of it.

    
    
        * Ellen Dahlgren says: February 5, 2016 at 11:07 pm
    

Good for you! Someone who actually has the guts to tell the truth about what
happens when you have a true Welfare state, which is what Socialism really is.

    
    
        * Duy nguyen says: February 29, 2016 at 11:08 pm
    

100% agreed Andy. USA population currently stands at 325 mil. How many of
those people need/want welfare and how many can actually pay? All good when u
have 1 mil to pay for but a whole lot different when u have 50 mil.

    
    
      * SandyH says: February 7, 2016 at 4:35 pm
    

Sorry, the U.S. has the largest and most well "Armed" standing army in the
world. China has the largest population, but sticks and stones, knives and
crones can't compete with a population that is well armed to protect
themselves. Do you understand why the current disrespected government worries
about it's people and tries so hard to break the 2nd amendment of our
Constitution? That will never happen. Everyone can purchase and own a gun,
that is still a fundamental right for law abiding citizens. Most homes own
several guns and or rifles. Many Americans are licensed to carry guns hidden
on their person. It takes a few hours of training and a comprehensive skill
test to gain legal photographic documentation to carry a handgun almost
anywhere. Most states offer reciprocal carry laws. We will not fear
occupation, citizens will strongly support our military in the Homeland if
need arises. We practice the art of shooting and can be discretionary with our
aim. That is what freedom provides. Americans can pursue happiness and protect
our homes as long as we abide laws that protect community values. Laws of
local and state legislation (statutes), and federal laws that protect life and
well-being. We have law breakers, like anywhere else in the world, there
always have been and always will be criminals.

Reply

    
    
        * Harris says: July 5, 2016 at 5:12 am
    

SandyH,  
You're either 'taking the piss', evil, or just plain delusional - where were
all the good people with guns when the mass shooting happened in that Florida
nightclub recently? Or that picture theatre where so many were killed? Or the
hundreds of other mass shootings that have occurred in the recent past? I'll
tell you where, they were the ones doing the shooting. The 'homeland' is
already under attack, you just need to open your eyes.

    
    
      * wonkiponki says: May 3, 2016 at 3:31 am
    

which country has got the largest sitting army in the world?

Reply

    
    
    * Matt says: March 5, 2015 at 10:31 am
    

So spending billions on aggressive and useless wars in the Middle East is
somehow more rational than spending money on health care and education? Many
of those countries have mandatory military service… Others do spend lots on
their armies they just don't have the size of the US. I find it's usually
Americans that throw this argument around in order to justify things and make
themselves feel better.

Reply

    
    
      * RNO19 says: August 21, 2015 at 1:50 pm
    

So what do you suggest? Let ISIS rule everywhere because Denmark's army is too
small to save Christians? I mean- sure Europe feels save with NATO- just don't
forget that NATO is heavily supported by USA.

Reply

    
    
        * CK says: September 17, 2015 at 2:16 pm
    

ISIS only exists because the US destabilized the region with attacks on
tyranical regimes. If the US just let the tyrant in Iraq rule, then there
would be no ISIS. The US should have just isolated the Middle East and Arab
nations so that terrorists couldn't make their way to the US. It would save us
from terrorists and spending on the military.

    
    
    * john says: April 20, 2015 at 4:11 pm
    

Ignoring the inaccuracies of this comment, it's worth saying that despite most
of these countries not having the same standard of military as America - they
are probably comparable safe (safer?) - what does that say?

Reply

    
    
      * Mitty says: September 30, 2015 at 9:47 pm
    

The reason that Denmark and the other socialist countries on this list are
safe is because they belong to NATO. Guess who contributes the overwhelming
resources to NATO? That's right, the USA. Now that being said, I would be
happy to have 1/3 of my tax dollars returned to me so that I don't have to
protect Europe from authoritarian dictatorships. Say thank you for protecting
you and enjoy the guvment cheese.

Reply

    
    
      * Ellen Dahlgren says: February 5, 2016 at 11:13 pm
    

What is says is that European nations have tighter immigration laws

Reply

  * lol says: July 15, 2014 at 9:04 pm

wow china is amazing

Reply

  * lol says: July 15, 2014 at 9:04 pm

wow china is amazing

Reply

  * Joost says: January 14, 2015 at 10:17 am

I wonder how reliable an author is who doesn't even seem to know that The
Hague is in the Netherlands, rather than Belgium.

Reply

    
    
    * Martha says: April 8, 2015 at 11:47 pm
    

I was going to write a similar comment!

Reply

    
    
    * Kristian says: May 9, 2015 at 8:05 am
    

I'm glad somebody else noticed

Reply

    
    
    * Hank says: May 15, 2015 at 12:21 am
    

How about free health and medical care in Canada? 15% sales tax pays for that
s how free is it???

Reply

    
    
      * Debby Devlin says: June 25, 2015 at 3:06 pm
    

Canadians, like other socialist leaning countries know that their social
programs, such as health care, are not free. We pay for it with higher taxes.
We have found it is well worth the extra taxation because we don't end up
losing our homes and everything we worked for if we do get sick and need
medical care. We live longer, less stressed lives than our American neighbors
and many of us often talk about their sinking debt ridden system with
disbelief and horror.

Reply

    
    
        * Dwaine says: June 29, 2015 at 7:16 pm
    

Why do the left always propose to speak for all Canadians? If you must, at
least mention the long wait for surgery (years for some surgeries) and the
escalating costs that will become unsupportable over the next few years. You
might also mention the insane wait for MRI's and shortage of high tech
equipment. Also mention how many people cannot find a doctor a family doctor.

    
    
        * Ellen Dahlgren says: February 5, 2016 at 11:20 pm
    

Well Debbie, you can thank Obama for the stinking debt that we are under. You
know. .. the man so many people around the world thought was going to be the
Salvation of the U.S.? Guess those of us who really saw him for the inept liar
that he is were right after all.

    
    
      * mradams says: July 5, 2015 at 11:22 am
    

Nothing is free, of course. And most people understand that the term "free"
means free from paying specific fees for specific services. Free healthcare
means free from paying monthly premiums to a specific entity; free from the
costs of healthcare services. I'd rather pay a predetermined tax re:
healthcare than having to count on an insurance company to cover all aspects
of a major, unexpected surgery and potentially dealing battle with them to
cover what they promised would be covered, only to see my premiums skyrocket.

Free means paid-for-through-taxes. Those who worry more about their tax rate
than the many benefits that they offer are simply focused on the wrong thing.

Reply

    
    
      * Anonymous says: August 7, 2015 at 1:50 am
    

Many places are well within the.15% tax range and no healthcare hear so..,

Reply

    
    
    * Marc says: June 25, 2015 at 3:32 am
    

It's official, it's ours now 🙂 Marc uit Vlaanderen.

Reply

    
    
    * warren says: June 26, 2015 at 7:13 pm
    

perception is reality. forgive them father for they know not that they have
sinned.

Reply

  * Laercio Oliveira says: February 28, 2015 at 4:59 pm

You forgot Brazil. This country is going to complete a full "cultural
revolution" towards communization, after twelve years of "workers party" (PT)
government.  
Venezuela and Bolivia also are now communist (or nearly) countries.

Reply

  * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 6:59 am

NZ is a country despite claiming to follow free market capitalist ideology,
has certain strong ideals situated squarely in Social Democracy. A large
portion of the population still believe the state should provide for the
people. As do I. That same portion of the populace believe that the current
right wing government's policies of privatization favour an elitist portion of
the income generating cohorts while disadvantaging others. Thus, creating an
ever widening gap between those who really need assistance, and those who by
and large avoid paying their fair share of tax through loop holes created for
them.

Reply

  * Ron says: May 3, 2015 at 2:01 pm

If the standard of what makes a good Socialist country is the quality of their
welfare system, the US should be at the top of the list, considering that more
than 46 milion are on food stamps! I find ithe idea of people being dependent
on Government is a good thing to be counter intuitive. ! It seems to me the
fewer people dependent on Government the better off they, and everyone else,
are!

Reply

    
    
    * liltear says: March 26, 2016 at 3:45 am
    

One might consider when monetary spending is quoted to take into consideration
the differences in population size between the country. It might be best in
such cases to limit such calculations to a percentage representation. As that
might give a clearer picture of cost and expenditures.

Reply

  * Sean says: May 3, 2015 at 6:50 pm

Just a thought, but all of these "socialist" countries, with the exception of
China and Canada, have populations less than 6 million. Canada about 35 mill,
and China we know. For the people bashing the US, I wonder if the near 320
million population makes things any more difficult when it comes to
entitlement and social unrest.

Reply

  * Anonymous says: August 24, 2015 at 9:51 am

Please go move to one of these countries. I have been to many and none hold a
torch to America. America has more opportunity, less poverty, more freedom,
higher average salaries, lower cost of living. I have known many Canadians and
75% of them travel to the united states for healthcare. Keep dreaming you
socialist scum! I will buy you and your families one way tickets to any
country on the list. You just can't come back.

Reply

    
    
    * Anonymous says: September 23, 2015 at 6:34 am
    

Im from america and see things a bit different. While you probably have alot
of cash, a good job, and live in a nicer part of town, this doesnt mean
everybody is on the same yacht as you. You seem to think America is a giant
suburban neighborhood with jobs for everyone. I have a degree along with many
of my friends. We all owe somewhere over 50k for these degrees. Yet about 1 or
2 out of 10 found jobs in their fields out of college. All of us are smart
capable young men who graduated with good gpa's. I personally had to settle
for a near minimum wage job where they convieniently keep you a half hour
under full time as to not have to give benefits. Many of my degree holding
friends are working jobs they could of held as high school drop outs. I went
to the hospital earlier this year with stomach pains and stayed 1 night. I
have healthcare but I still owe 2500 out of pocket to the hospital and 1000 to
a gastroenterologist who spent 5 minutes with me telling me what I can and
cant eat. I take care of my elderly grandmother which makes it near impossible
to find a second job. Worked her whole life for the police department and
retired with pension but after working the numbers five years of help from a
stay at home nurse would force her out of her house and into 1 of those
dreadful homes. My situation is that of most young adults in America.
Something is very wrong with the things work here. I love this country and
would fight to protect it if the need ever arose but our system is failing.
Our wars have made the world a more unstable place and obamacare is a mess.
Our institutions are robbing people of huge sums of money for the slim chance
to get a career that pays enough to pay off their education. Im not saying
socialism is the answer but we need somebody in power willing to tackle these
issues and level the playing field.

Reply

    
    
      * Butch says: October 9, 2015 at 7:20 am
    

"I spent $50K, 100K or what ever to earned a degree, yet I can't find a job in
that field." We've heard that story a 1000 times. Then why did you choose that
field? Did you not do your DD before you chose your major, to make sure there
is a need for people in that field?

Reply

    
    
        * jessica says: February 17, 2016 at 5:59 pm
    

hey guy, you are missing the point. these aren't daft drunkards who just don't
have the "feels" for working. these are intelligent people with degrees having
to just about ask people whether or not they want cheese on that simply to
make ends meet. banks borrow at 0.75% and yet students pay back at a rate of
over 6% - then these mega corps find loopholes by cutting hours just enough to
not allow for benefits. what it is, is slave labor disguised as a free market.

    
    
    * Anonymous says: September 23, 2015 at 6:46 am
    

And for the record I am not on any type of welfare program Im living paycheck
to paycheck. Im just making the point that parts of America have little
oppurtunity. Its no longer about what you can do its who do you know. My place
of employment (a small sporting goods store) recieved 70 applications this
past month. Half young people looking for spending money, half older people
who obviously cant find work. Even a few you could call elderly looking to get
back into the work force to survive. Im sure many of these people hold
degrees. This to me does not say oppurtunity.

Reply

    
    
    * davide pilato says: May 31, 2016 at 5:47 pm
    

USA is the best country in the world in many cases

Reply

  * Ludwig von Mises says: March 12, 2016 at 1:45 am

What a funny post.

So, all the "top socialist countries" have a free market? Common. The only
true socialist country on this list is China, which sux hard; the "stress
free" lifestyle where people live in slums while there are over 60 million
apartments empty? Their groth was an artificial keynesian growth and it's
crumbling now, as it always do.

Basically all the countries on this list, besides China, have, or had, very
free economies (aka capitalism) and this is what made it possible for them to
accumulate the wealth they used (sometimes wasted) on these socialist
programs. Sweden was the 4th richest country in the world before the social
democrats took over in the 50's. Then they had no growth, untill they started
leaning towards capitalism again back in the 90's.

Notice countries like Sweden and Finland already have problems keeping their
welfare, Sweden to the point of people calling ambulances and being told to
take an aspirin, like a 11 yo girl who took a horse coil in her chest and
died.  
Norway fares better because they're just 5 million people with a huge oil
reserve. Sweden and Finland aren't so lucky.

Reply

  * Did you go to public school? - Page 8 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: March 11, 2013 at 12:24 pm

[…] country Best Education In The World: Finland, South Korea Top Country
Rankings, U.S. Rated Average Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World -
Peerform Blog List the 5 most capitalist nations - Yahoo! […]

Reply

  * Andrew says: March 12, 2013 at 2:16 pm

Don't know why they call universal healthcare a socialism. Then why do we have
universal primary & secondary education? That's socialism too. So is Social
Security. These are just a good system that Government implements to keep
minimum level of living. How it is fair that our tax money is going toward
criminial's healthcare where as small business owner cannot afford to go to a
hospital.  
I read that this guy could not get on an organ transplant list because he did
not have enough deposit to be on the list when a prisoner got his organ just
because he commited a crime and was in jail.

Then there was a smarter guy who "robbed" a jewelry store just so that he can
get arrested since he didn't have money for his transplant.

Eventually anyone who needs something will have to commit a crime just to see
a doctor. When I was visiting Korea, which has universal healthcare, my son
got sick so we went to a doctor who had much higher technological equipments
than in the States only chaged around 7 bucks for examination & cleaned his
earwax since we had no Korean insurance. People who had insurance were paying
around 2-3 bucks per visit. Reason…administrative overhead. Meaning high and
mighty people up there needs 100 thousands and millions of dollars in their
pocket to buy their mercedes and porsches. Most doctors will not get affected
universal or privatized insurance except for those who're on the board or
admin somewhere.

So people may say socialism or communism, but having universal healthcare run
by government just make sense…if not, I'd say we take it away from the
convicts and all the politician. Let politicians buy their own medical
insurance out of their pocket, we know they can afford to.

Reply

  * Dan says: April 12, 2013 at 5:38 am

It's still socialism. Pure capitalism provides no support. If you're poor you
get sick and die.

Reply

    
    
    * corey says: May 13, 2014 at 11:27 pm
    

false, the idea is socialist but most if not all of these country's are
defined as mixed economies, not socialist.

Reply

    
    
    * MaxPrime says: January 2, 2015 at 12:33 pm
    

Dan tell me again which countries aren't "Capitalist Countries"?

Reply

    
    
      * Ludwig von Mises says: March 12, 2016 at 1:56 am
    

By definition, socialism means political AND economical power in the hands of
the State, which can be measured in government interventions in the economy,
to whatever degree. The more interventions, the more socialist a country is.
Taxes are just one kind of intervention, and despite being bad, it's still not
as bad as regulations that protect those with better political conections.
Taxes affect competition, but not as hard as other more direct regulations.

NZ, Australia, Canada, Switzerland, Singapore, Hong Kong, Ireland all have
very low government intervention, way less than in US. Sweden, Finland and
Norway are just a little worse than US in these terms:

http://www.heritage.org/index/

Cuba, Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, North Korea, China, Russia, Bolivia, these
are the socialist countries. Here we have welfare, we have "job laws" (but no
jobs), everything the socialists love.

So yeah, an article that put countries with very free economies as
"socialists" is pure nonsense.

Reply

    
    
    * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 7:23 am
    

Dead right Brother.

Reply

  * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 7:08 am

Hi there Andrew. I agree with much of what you say my friend. You know if one
were to have a look at that great document "the 1948 U N Bill of Human Rights"
you would see some prominent capitalist countries like the US, Britain, and
Belgium, to name a few, believe that universal healthcare is a paramount
indication of a healthy functioning society. Pity the current NZ government
fails to see it that way.

Reply

    
    
    * Ludwig von Mises says: March 12, 2016 at 2:01 am
    

So, people don't get sick often, but they need to eat everyday. So why not
"universal foodcare" before the healthcare?

I don't understand how you people think that paying for hospital, doctors and
medicine is harder than paying for hospitals, doctors, medicine and a bunch of
useless paperstampers bureaucrats to run it all.

Reply

  * David J Gill says: August 25, 2015 at 1:01 am

In America, it seems, government giving anything to anyone is considered
"socialism," unless it's a tax break for the rich or subsidies to business and
agriculture conglomerates. The simpletons of conservative politics here don't
care about what works, really, they just don't want "socialism."

The truth is that the social and economic benefits of a policy that some may
label "socialist" are of less interest than ideology and the disdain for
anything some decide is socialist. When you realize this you begin to see how
simplistic biases on government policy are becoming a threat to American well
being and prosperity. It was the same attitude, more or less, that caused
Herbert Hoover to reject more robust relief programs as the Great Depression
unfolded.

Reply

  * Jerri Markstone says: March 20, 2016 at 7:22 pm

How can you say that Social Security is a Social- based program? All of our
lives we worked and paid into Social Security so that money was "earned" and
supposed to be saved for our old age. S.S.I. is very different. People can get
S.S.I. with out ever having paid into Social Security. It is still the
working, tax payers who have made the money to make this possible.  
Many die before collecting any of the money they paid into Social Security. It
is a great program and it has been abused by our government.

Reply

  * To Anyone who thinks the Soviet Union was Socialist.... - Page 3 says: March 17, 2013 at 8:03 pm

[…] we are one of the most socialist countries in the world. Who knew? Top 10
Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog Sign in or Register Now
to […]

Reply

  * dennis says: March 29, 2013 at 5:39 pm

how can anyone compare these top 10 socialist countries,or any countries to
the united states. the u.s.a is a melting pot of EVERYONE.! you can come here
legally or illegally. and you get treated with the same rights as a natural
born citizen. if socialism really works,then let's bring back the great
thinkers of the past,for they lay the foundations of true socialism, i.e
stalin, lenin,trotski,marks,engles.there are more people in some of the
states, alone, in the u.s.a then in some of the countries mentioned here.
also,let's not forget how many people were killed and tortured
under,SOCIALISM. free health care is not free! somebody has to pay.!

Reply

  * meh says: April 4, 2013 at 9:47 am

I think you're confusing socialism with communism. And yes "somebody has to
pay" WE pay. They are called taxes and healthcare/education are the kind of
things taxes are SUPPOSED to pay for. Instead it goes to paying off the
federal reserve. Oh, and politicians salaries (who have free healthcare for
life, btw.)

Reply

    
    
    * Michael says: July 24, 2013 at 1:51 pm
    

"Life in China remains relatively less stressful and more relaxed than life in
capitalist countries like America." Go to China and speak out about human
rights and freedom of the press then tell me how less stressful and relaxed
life is.

Reply

    
    
      * Dee says: May 18, 2014 at 11:43 am
    

Agree!!

Reply

    
    
      * carmen says: June 2, 2014 at 3:20 am
    

life in China…  
you'll need to worry the food you buy having terrible ingredient

Human right? no one own

Reply

    
    
      * Lynn says: July 16, 2014 at 11:07 am
    

You know, the whole article is flawed in so many ways, it is amazing that the
writer did not do much homework and use better examples to support his/her
idea.

Reply

    
    
      * Sigurd says: July 20, 2014 at 8:34 am
    

Visited China last year. Assuming you don't talk about human rights and such,
it really is a sedentary place and not what people make it out as.

Reply

    
    
        * Steve Urkel says: February 2, 2015 at 8:29 am
    

Did you go to Tibet? Did you go to Xinjiang?  
If you stay in Shanghai you might miss some important things about China..

    
    
      * MaxPrime says: January 2, 2015 at 12:22 pm
    

I was less stressed too when I was broke and Dad and Mom were paying for
everything. So the key to living like a Chinese is to never leave home and let
my parents take care of me for the rest of my life. Won't have much stress but
won't have much of anything else either!!!

Reply

    
    
    * Juvia says: February 12, 2014 at 11:52 pm
    

The problem is when some works hard to make money and has to pay a lot of it
to the government compared to people who don't work because they don't have
too and abuse the welfare system. I'm not saying they do in a socialist
countrys, just it happens a lot where I'm from in the us. (Ex. Refusing to get
married) also in the us taxes are used on less helpful things

Reply

    
    
    * david says: June 27, 2014 at 11:29 am
    

Socialism is a step toward communism. Statism, Collectivism, Socialism is all
destructive as it takes away the normal inclination for people to succeed and
improve their lives. Dependence does not work. Look at the dependent class we
have created in this country. We will not learn. The goal of our present
administration is to increase the numbers of the dependent. Thus the open
borders and lack of any monitoring of entitlement fraud. Look at the increase
in numbers of those on welfare, food stamps and disability during the Obama
administration. It is telling and an example of what happens when the
government promotes entitlements.

Reply

    
    
      * Sigurd says: July 20, 2014 at 8:39 am
    

You're partially right. Dependence does not work; those in a society must
uphold themselves, but you cannot use the U.S.A. as an example for decay of
all governments that give out entitlement; Nordic countries, Canada, New
Zealand. These countries have the most extensive welfare systems in the world,
and as such have been voted happiest nations to live in, but the members of
the respective nations carry their load. In the case of the U.S.A., dependence
on the welfare system is an issue.

Reply

    
    
        * MaxPrime says: January 2, 2015 at 12:29 pm
    

Yeah and these countries that have these great healthcare systems also ride
the coat tales of other countries like the U.S. to protect them thereby not
having to spend any money on defense. Parasite countries that hide the rich
peoples money.

    
    
      * mike says: February 13, 2015 at 2:23 pm
    

Obama is as bad as the Republican idiot, Corporation blowing, idiots that
ruined this country. Take a look at how well more socialist countries are
doing…

Reply

    
    
        * mike says: February 13, 2015 at 2:30 pm
    

Oops, meant corporation blowing Republican idiots. Guess that's what happens
when people get their information from Fox News and bumper stickers

  * Dan says: April 12, 2013 at 5:37 am

Should we forget how many people were tortured and killed by capitalist
countries?

Reply

    
    
    * John Mosko says: December 13, 2013 at 2:59 pm
    

Dan could you possibly enlighten us and tell us how many?

Reply

    
    
    * Niles says: April 3, 2014 at 5:28 am
    

Dan…

First, I'd like you to name ONE capitalist country.

Then, I'd like for you to explain (in detail) to me how the **economic
principles** of free markets are responsible for human beings being "tortured
and killed" by the "capitalist" (quasi socialist) US government…

Reply

    
    
      * Dave says: March 11, 2015 at 5:58 am
    

The number of tortured and killed by free market countries is proportionate to
the greed behind it - look at oil producing counties, as an example. The
number of tortured and killed in the name of the free market is very high.
Then look to our involvement in placing dictators all over the world - Iraq,
Iran, and Nicaragua, to barely scratch the surface. In these places, by our
hand and encouragement, death and violence reigned. History and an open mind
are a doorway to truth beyond ideology. I officially invite you…

Reply

  * Dram says: May 15, 2013 at 2:33 am

You are really really really dumb

Reply

  * Kira says: August 15, 2013 at 6:42 pm

Do you even know what socialism means? First thing first capitalism, socialism
an communism are economic theories that were not fully incorporated in real
life. They called Soviet Union 'Communist" when in fact it wasn't.. the idea
was there but it led to corruption due to the fact that the full power was
given to idiotic Stalin and not to the people as a whole. Now, dictatorship
and communism are completely different terms. Soviet Union was under
DICTATORSHIP and not under communism since this theory couldn't be introduced
to a society as a WHOLE. DO some readings on economic theories…

Reply

    
    
    * matt says: January 8, 2014 at 2:16 am
    

Thank you!!! God I hate these ignorant Americans. You're the first person I've
met who grasped this concept.

Reply

    
    
      * Trudy says: August 17, 2015 at 11:06 pm
    

Lol!!! I am American and even I totally agree. 🙂 Thank you, that made me laugh
so hard. This concept is so lost on the majority of Americans.

Reply

    
    
      * Jean says: April 6, 2016 at 3:21 pm
    

That's better than being an "informed" yet willfully generalizing European
idiot who can't even tell the difference between the US and an all the
continents in the entire Western Hemisphere. Good for you.

Reply

  * MAYBE says: November 13, 2013 at 9:33 am

Socialism is a "mixed economy". The government doesnt necessaryly control
everything; the people make decisions as well. I think the U.S. may lean more
towards Capitalism but it does have many factors of socialism. SO you cant
just say that Socialism is "death". No matter how you look at it, The U.S. is
completely a mixed kind of economy even with another lable.

Reply

    
    
    * Juvia says: February 13, 2014 at 12:08 am
    

Idk if this person that wrote this has ever been to the USA because their is a
lot of false statement. Socialist is a political viewpoint on economics that
is the opposite of capitalism. IT IS NOT THE SAME AS COMMUNISM. china is
communist AND NOT A MORE RELAXED PLACE THEN THE US. Communism is a whole
separate topic. Their is no right or wrong between capitalism and socialism it
is just left and right. Lastly this articles is biased…

Reply

    
    
    * corey says: May 13, 2014 at 11:42 pm
    

false the definition of socialism is "a political and economic theory of
social organization that advocates that the means of production, distribution,
and exchange should be owned or regulated by the community as a whole." for
example if you want to say get a 1080p computer monitor the decision would
need to be approved.

Reply

    
    
    * tehimana says: April 22, 2015 at 7:33 am
    

Hey guys I wonder though, and at the risk of getting accosted here, if much of
what we perceive to be Capitalism, Communism of Socialism isn't just centre
oriented governance. You know where politicians by votes through favourable
policy making and "damn the torpedoes" I certainly believe NZ politics has
leaned that way for sometime.

Reply

    
    
    * Butch says: October 9, 2015 at 8:48 am
    

That's not what the liberals in the US are striving for. What our progressive
lefty loon politicians want is total control over the people, therefor they
are more than happy to give, give, give, because human nature wants, want,
wants what they can get, as much as they can get, with as little effort as
possible. And the more they get, the more they want, until they become totally
dependent on government for all their needs, giving the liberal nut jobs
exactly what they want. Then when you have that kind of control, people become
nothing more than sheeple who'll do just about anything the government
demands. What choice would they have?

The more entitlements handed out, the less productive people will become. The
less incentive there is to pursue one's dreams. The leftist lunatics in the US
hate dreamers, they hate entrepreneurs, they hate ambition, except for their
own of course. They hate anyone who can think for themselves. That's why they
hate we Christians so much. Socialism has grown more in the last ten years
than all the previous years since we gained our independence, and it's
destroying America and the American dream. So much for socialism being a good
thingfor America!!

It is capitalism with very little government overreach that made this country
the greatest, most powerful country the world has ever known. And in just 7
short years our spineless leader has set us back 100 years. We are the
laughing stock of the world with a clown as our commander in chief. We no
longer enjoy the admiration and respect the world showed us for so many years.

I would much rather have a much smaller government with far less taxes so I
could afford to buy my own Health insurance from any insurance company of my
choice that will give me the best bang for my buck. Competition keeps prices
down, not to mention it will weed out the fly by night companies that are more
for screwing the customer rather than providing superior customer service and
value. Leave the free market alone, especially small businesses that provide
66% of our jobs, and maintain more control over big corporations that do
everything they can to rape the economy and the American people.

The governments job in my opinion should be #1 build a powerful military and
Secure our borders. No one gets in illegally #2 police the people. #3 Keep all
businesses honest, but do not over regulate or over tax them to where they can
not grow. #4 Stay the hell out of the health care field, and let private
insurance companies and hospitals compete. It's a win, win for everyone. #5
And yes I believe we should give temporary help to those who fall on hard
times through no fault of their own, but don't make it easy. Any welfare
should require so many hours of work every week, whether it's some kind of
community service or picking up trash on the side of the roads. No one gets a
free ride. Look what happened in Maine when they required drug tests and 6
lousy hours of community service a week to remain eligible. More than half the
people dropped off. #6 Maintain the infrastructure. Some of that could be
taken care of by the welfare recipients. #7 Maintain a flat tax to pay for our
government and nothing more. Stop giving our money away to other countries
when we're up to our eyeballs in dept. All low income families should be
exempt form paying any taxes.

OK it's 5:30 am and I haven't even been to bed yet. So if I left anything out,
that's my excuse.

God Bless America, cause we really need it!!

Reply

  * Isaac says: May 5, 2014 at 11:35 am

These people you listed were communist, not socialist. There is difference,
even if that difference is minor. In addition, the people killed under Stalin
were not killed due to socialism, but rather because of the fact that Stalin
was an evil man. You misspelled "Marx" by the way.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 3:51 am

Think of the thousands killed, tortured and executed in the name of democracy,
during the french revolution. Just because the USSR's was opposed to America
doesn't mean they weren't on the right track.

Reply

    
    
    * BigDumbWhiteGuy says: August 16, 2015 at 11:46 pm
    

Soviets might have been on the right track? Read a history book (even the
russian ones). Stalin and Lenin killed MILLIONS of their own people, destroyed
the economy, built a war machine and then bankrupt the country to the point
where many of the people were starving. The people learned that the rest of
the free world was prospering and they were stuck back 40 years in time… This
is why the wall was taken down and democracy accepted in Russia -- not because
of war.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 3:53 am

Dont forget the thousands killed in the name of freedom in revolutioary
France. Maybe the USSR was on the right track

Reply

  * henrik sparre says: April 3, 2013 at 8:13 am

first off, the taxes in denmark are not 70%  
as some of my family members lives there.  
I live in norway with my mother and father, we have high taxes and are a
socialist nation, socialism and communism are TWO entirely different things.
for example norway is socialist but we are far from communist's and we don't
have crime at high rate, it is actually the lowest in the WORLD!  
secondly  
China is a communist state not a socialist nation.

Reply

  * Chuck Barry says: July 28, 2013 at 4:41 am

No offense, but I think that you might have misread the Denmark listing. It
says that Denmark has some of the highest taxes in the world. And that 70% of
BUSINESSES have 50 employees or less.

Reply

  * Zach Wilson says: August 8, 2013 at 4:36 am

Henrik is correct. China is not a socialist nation, it is politically
communist and economically capitalist. Most people in the US who desire
socialism don't necessarily want America to become a socialist nation
politically. We want to maintain democracy, but to use socialism in order to
create a welfare state - like in Canada, Finland, and Denmark - while still
embracing a free market economy.

Reply

  * susanbowl says: October 5, 2013 at 11:38 am

This is so typical. "Oh, our taxes are not 70%". Nope. They ARE 60%. Who wants
to give a government more than half of their pay??? This is your argument for
capitalism?? Your country is known for drugs and giving the government more
than half of their money. You are mindless sheep and this is why the
government allows you to be high all the time.

Reply

    
    
    * Kim Dabelstein Petersen says: November 3, 2013 at 4:51 am
    

Our (Danish) taxes are 48.9% (and that includes moms (VAT)) … not 60/70.

We are not "known for drugs" (are you confusing us with the Dutch?)

If our system makes you think that we are sheep - well then i will happily
Baah all day long, if it staves off most other systems in the world 🙂

Do look us up (Denmark), we are at the top of most lists of great things:
Welfare, Economic freedom, Ease of doing business, Happiness etc etc.

Have a nice day 🙂

Reply

    
    
      * adamic says: December 11, 2013 at 11:54 pm
    

Yep I've been there. I will never visit again. Sorry you don't even have 1/10
the opportunity as an American has. Yes we live for the most part without a
net but ANYONE can become anything they are capable of. I sure as hell
wouldn't want to run a company in Denmark. BTW, what is stopping any country
from coming in and killing all of you. Here's your sign

Reply

    
    
        * Anthony says: December 25, 2013 at 12:25 am
    

Well, the fact that Denmark doesn't go into other lands. Trying to force upon
them, there economic theory's. Should be a safety net against other country's
trying to o the same. Or how you phrased it my friend "Trying to kill you."

The sad fact is that the all conquering, all powerful, all righteous America
does what I have just stated. Including, killing innocent people in the in the
name of freedom. I ask you, what is so free about that?

As an American I am ashamed to be associated with such cruel and unjustified
actions. For we fund the true terror. Our politicians and media feed into our
brains propaganda that only uneducated people would believe.

Unfortunately for America . Half the country is uneducated. We cut funds for a
future to finance wars. Are Americans that naive or are they just stupid to
believe that we have a self sustaining society to move forward?

So please stop opening your mouth and speaking as if you know what you are
talking about. You live in a country where people feel entitled to what they
have. Nobody is entitled or deserves anything.

    
    
        * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:00 am
    

What? Opportunities in the oil industry?

    
    
        * David says: June 27, 2014 at 11:40 am
    

The issue is that these small countries that experiment with their socialist
economy, have no defense against the rest of the world actually have nothing
to defend.  
Yes the US spends on military to defend ourselves. Perhaps we have something
to defend. There was a time when we we would help others defend. Perhaps we
should stop

    
    
      * alry says: February 2, 2014 at 8:26 pm
    

Yes, we're quite aware of your bahhh-ing considering your fantastic country
could not even defend itself and capitulated and COOPERATED with the Nazis in
WW2. INCLUDING fighting in the German army.

Or were you totally unaware of Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen who said
that Denmark's cooperation with Nazis was "morally unjustifiable".

Reply

    
    
        * Danny says: February 7, 2014 at 3:49 pm
    

Alry, To you this is obviously personal, you can't disprove any of his claims,
instead you would talk about a 70 year old war no one else is talking about.
Can't handle the true of what our country has become? I see many Americans
being the true sheep here

    
    
      * David says: June 27, 2014 at 11:35 am
    

Yes and exactly what business is done in your country. How about you refuse to
accept all imports from those awful capitalist countries where people are
actually rewarded for "working" . See if you can survive in you little bubble

Reply

    
    
    * Debby Devlin says: June 25, 2015 at 3:16 pm
    

Wow, Susan, you are the epitome (bet you don't know what that means) of the
perception most of world has of an American.

Reply

  * j says: April 23, 2013 at 4:12 pm

This resembles some bulls#&% I have heard from biased media in the past. When
the blind in America finally wake up it will probably be too late.

Reply

  * Viktor says: January 10, 2014 at 3:33 pm

Russia isn't actually that socialist anymore, they are autocratic, the Soviet
Union fell in 1989 THEY were socialist, the russian federation is just
autocratic, mean

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:03 am

European countries are SO much nicer to live in than America. Though ill agree
the article on China is 'bulls#&%', I would have to say it is YOU who is blind

Reply

  * kris says: April 30, 2013 at 9:47 pm

Hey,Where is the big boss Russia?

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:04 am

Not socialist. Though neither is China, really

Reply

    
    
    * Jersey says: May 12, 2014 at 6:50 pm
    

Ben, if you're an American living "ex-pat"', please stay wherever you are. If
the US made the decision to stay out of all foreign affairs, the world would
be begging us to help with every war, injustice, natural disaster, or
international crime that occurred. If you are an American citizen, have the
courage to renounce your. Itizenship so we can be rid of you.

Reply

  * cars says: May 16, 2013 at 10:39 pm

Car shopping is stressful. Now that there are hundreds of  
makes and models to choose from, not to mention promotions  
and payment options, it's easy to become frustrated and stressed out. The
information here will help make buying a car as easy and stress-free as
possible.

Reply

  * cars says: May 20, 2013 at 3:10 pm

It is hard to dispute the fact that car shopping is a stressful,  
anxiety-ridden task for many individuals. The sheer size of the expenditure
involved and the myriad of choices on the  
market make the need for education and information quite critical.

Fortunately, the tips below can make the process far simpler than you may have
believed.

Reply

  * Mary says: July 1, 2013 at 8:22 pm

Guess we can add United States on there now. Since apparently we are almost
there and our constitution means pretty much nothinganymore

Reply

  * Eric says: October 23, 2013 at 1:24 am

Hahahahaha. Stupid people make me laugh.

Reply

    
    
    * Jean says: April 6, 2016 at 3:31 pm
    

That's a very witty and insightful statement you made there. Nice to know that
you're the smart one.

Reply

  * Nathan says: October 31, 2013 at 9:18 pm

wow dude….. you obviously have no idea AT ALL what your talking about….

Reply

  * Gary Gelow says: December 25, 2013 at 8:46 pm

What in our constitution is not being followed?

Reply

    
    
    * Mason says: February 23, 2014 at 7:13 pm
    

Freedom of the press, Right to free speech, Right to assemble, Right of
privacy, Privilege against self-incrimination. That's just a few I can think
of that are relevant at the moment.

Reply

    
    
      * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:06 am
    

Though, you know, most of these incriminations against your constitution were
put in place by the conservative President Bush.

Reply

    
    
        * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:06 am
    

Just saying

    
    
        * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 1:39 am
    

What? As if Obama's doing anything better or different?

    
    
        * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 1:43 am
    

Did you know that Obama went on a vacation to Africa, that cost 2 MILLION
dollars for accommodations alone? That's 2 MILLION dollars, taken straight
from the taxpayer's money. Why should we pay for our President's furlough?
That money should be where it belongs, in each person's paycheck, or in the
actually USEFUL government programs.

    
    
        * Kevin says: July 23, 2014 at 12:23 pm
    

George Bush is no conservative. Who told you he was conservative? Perhaps
socially he could be considered right of center. Fiscally he and his dad are
big government spending powerbrokers. So is Jeb. The Republican party is in
the process of getting folks like this out.

  * The Rich Are Getting Richer! - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: July 22, 2013 at 6:24 pm

[…] Quote: Because it has happened over and over again, everywhere people have
attempted to install Socialistic government. It is a guaranteed recipe for
failure. "Below, you will see some of the most socialistic nations in the
world today: China Denmark Finland Netherlands Canada Sweden Norway Ireland
New Zealand Belgium Despite popular myths, there is very little connection
between economic performance and welfare expenditure. Many of the countries on
this list are proof of that, such as Denmark and Finland. Even though both
countries are more socialistic than America, the workforce remains stronger."
Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog […]

Reply

  * Dave says: August 9, 2013 at 7:08 am

China is communist, not socialist am life is more relaxed? Really? Have you
ever even been to china? The government control everything, no one owns
property and most live in poverty making just enought to survive. The
government pimps out people to greedy companies and pollution is horrible.
Also last time I checked didn't the USA save most of these countries listed
from nazi germany? We may not be perfect but who do they cry to when someone
is picking in them? The USA. And good or bad we are often more willing to
help. One last thing, how is Greece and its socialist economy working out?

Reply

  * Anonymous says: November 27, 2013 at 8:40 am

So is that why America is starting to bully Syberia, your latest failed
attempt and also i get this weird feeling in my gut that America have been
making excuses for war since 2000 to help out their debt issue. As war is the
most profitable factor in the world still.

So yet here I am every day waiting for some news saying OMGWTF America
declared war. As you guys are still the biggest economic bullies in the world,
trying to dictate the movement of newly reformed countries left right and
center. The first real failure your country faced was Iran in this regard when
you realized they have plenty juicy oil that your government just had to
capitalize for their own gain instead of a global gain.

My key is globalization of freedom of movement on a global level is what will
actually make changes in how humanity as a whole run ourselves. All these
walls and divides are just a dead end road to create hatred and complex
corruptible ideas easily masked from society. I believe in transparency and
also the ability for YOU to admit to your mistakes and then figure out a
solution that more then one country can work on at a time without any hidden
agenda's to profiteer one country above another. America has the highest debt
ceiling in the world and it is only growing, this makes for a desperate and
volatile environment. As a country i am not surprised America is seeking ever
more sly or direct ways to save themselves at the expense of many. It is the
nature of it all. It is not right or wrong, but i'll be damned hoping that
your country chooses a social way to change the current problems, because both
Dictatorship or Capitalist strategies will point at war. This includes leaving
decisions to the reserve or federation, who only want to line their on pockets
no matter which country we are talking about

Reply

    
    
    * adamic says: December 12, 2013 at 12:01 am
    

Real smart utopian pipe dream. I think the last time I had one of those I was
12. Wake the hell up. How many countries in the history of the world have
fought wars and not stolen the land and it's valuables? HMMM……. The United
States is the only one. What country actually made it possible for these
countries to live so care free? wait wait well you know the answer. Eventually
all socialist and communist countries fail because they run out of other
peoples money and the incentive to strive to be more is lost.

Reply

    
    
      * Gary Gelow says: December 25, 2013 at 9:06 pm
    

Have you ever heard of the Philippines? Run by America from 1898 to just after
WWII.

Reply

    
    
      * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:08 am
    

One word. Mexico. Dont be a hipocrite

Reply

    
    
      * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:51 am
    

Socialism, when done right, doesn't 'run on other people's money'. Enough is
taken so everyone can have the basics- food, shelter, sanitatio, clothing,
education and healthcare. Then the harder you work to bring benefit to others,
the more 'luxuries' you recieve.

Reply

    
    
        * Jersey says: May 12, 2014 at 6:56 pm
    

"Enough is taken…" Really, from whom? And who decides from whom and how much?

    
    
        * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 1:54 am
    

But that's the point! Everyone deserves the money they make! The government
shouldn't take a large percentage of your paycheck! I can understand if it
goes to repairs and fixing debts, but for our hard-earned money to be sent to
someone who sits on their ass all day, and collects welfare checks, is just
wrong. Instead of welfare, there should be a JOB program to help people get
JOBS instead of sitting around collecting checks with taxpayer's money in
them. If you need money, GO GET A JOB. I'm sure any place would hire you if
they are desperate enough. And don't even say a thing about disabled people,
because I've seen PLENTY of disabled people with jobs, doing just fine.  
Another thing, each person should get their own healthcare! Not some
healthcare concocted from -yet again- taxpayer's money. If you have a job,
which aren't really that hard to find, most jobs include basic healthcare. If
not, then go buy some with the money you get with your job! Sheesh, some
people just can't grasp the simple concept of self-reliance.

    
    
        * Steve says: July 1, 2014 at 10:50 pm
    

No, the more benefits that are shelled-out to free-loaders, the less the hard-
working citizens have in their pockets.

    
    
        * Sigurd says: July 20, 2014 at 8:47 am
    

Right. And to those questioning "free-loaders" in a seemingly socialist
nation, those that don't work don't deserve those welfare benefits, and they
won't have it.

    
    
    * KDB says: March 15, 2014 at 4:38 pm
    

War is very costly, as you can tell by the debt from the Iraq/Afghanistan war.
The US is not bullying Syria, to take over land, they do not want them to kill
their own people.  
The world use to rely on the US to take care of the problems. We were called
into WW II we did not just start the war. The same is true about every
conflict since then. UN approval was received.

The problem with one world government is that ere are many countries that do
believe in dictators and no rights of the people. People are not allowed to
own property, and they determine education.

And how open is your country to having masses of people coming into your
country illegally and staying. Yes you may travel but if someone comes to you
country illegally to work and live. do they receive free education and
healthcare?  
The US HS millions coming each year illegally plus many legally.

If your country is so great, why do you not have all these people coming to
your country?

Reply

    
    
      * Kevin says: July 23, 2014 at 12:29 pm
    

Yes, I do not see the lines forming outside of any of the awesome countries
listed.

Reply

  * Jenkins says: August 9, 2013 at 9:51 am

This was written by some nutjob who was trying to make socialism seem
wonderful. Who deems what is less stressful living? China less stressful than
the USA? Is that a result of culture or government? The workers at Foxconn
aren't living stress free lives and the majority of China live in poverty by
US standards. Heck, most of the world lives in poverty when compared to the
USA.

Reply

  * J. T Mpesi says: October 5, 2013 at 3:01 pm

Yes, according to USA standards not China's standards!!!

Reply

  * Masixole Ntunguntwana says: October 24, 2013 at 6:32 am

Inequality and salary gaps is like a culture in most countries where there is
an open economy. The monied people do not care about others.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:10 am

Um…no. Not any more. Even back in they 'Golden days' of modern America there
were Ghetoes

Reply

  * Why hate socialism so much??????????? - Democrats, Republicans, Libertarians, Conservatives, Liberals, Third Parties, Left-Wing, Right-Wing, Congress, President - Page 44 - City-Data Forum says: August 9, 2013 at 12:26 pm

[…] Well; firstly, it would serve to define what constitutes a socialist
country and then maybe you should have travelled to some of these, incorrectly
being labelled as such, and asked them instead? Happiest Nations Are Mostly
Northern Socialist Nations | Culture of Life News Top 10 Most Socialist
Countries in the World - Peerform Blog […]

Reply

  * Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - ... says: August 12, 2013 at 9:30 am

[…] The term socialist has been thrown around in the past few years. Since the
cold war the term has garnered attention in the press and from politicians.
[…]

Reply

  * Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog | WealthShare Society says: August 12, 2013 at 9:31 am

[…] See on blog.peerform.com […]

Reply

  * Broz says: August 19, 2013 at 3:52 am

This list is wrong, the writer obviously is confused between socialism and
social-democracy.

Reply

  * John says: February 17, 2014 at 12:42 am

agreed. Half of the stuff he said is not true.

Reply

  * Eduardo says: August 31, 2013 at 1:30 pm

Socialism is a self-government workers. Self-management!  
The means of production are reguled by workers .  
These are basic principles of Socialism.  
So, there is no socialism in any country of the world. Even China, North Korea
and Cuba aren't real Socialists, cause workers dont control anything.

Reply

  * Can ANYONE name a SUCCESSFUL country with a LIBERTARIAN ECONOMY?? - Page 2 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: September 2, 2013 at 10:46 pm

[…] the world today: China Denmark Finland Netherlands Canada Sweden Norway
Ireland New Zealand Belgium Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World -
Peerform Blog There are no perfectly socialist nations. But there are many
that are far to the left of the US […]

Reply

  * Michael Ryan says: September 8, 2013 at 2:34 pm

Thanks for writing on this subject. It would be more helpful and illuminating,
however, if you made a distinction between socialism and communism. That would
explain a great deal of the difference, aside from language and culture,
between China and the European socialist countries. Socialist countries do not
need centralized control. The advantages of socialism for everyday working
people are maintained by cultural mores and the laws created by people with
such mores, not centralized control of commercial activities. China is a
communist country.. and will become either capitalist or socialist, depending
on how well the population understands and promotes such universal values.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:12 am

or autocratic…

Reply

  * Jay See says: September 12, 2013 at 12:31 pm

Doesn't China also have a flag?

Reply

  * Bob Wall says: September 17, 2013 at 2:54 pm

I'd have to ask what these nations' defense expenditures are as part of their
overall budget. While China has a large defense budget, their R&D relies
mostly on stealing technology, not original R&D. Most of the others rely on US
treaty involvements, such as NATO

Reply

  * Jaap says: June 25, 2015 at 2:09 pm

Totally irrelevant to the story! do you want to hear the US is so good and the
rest is so bad? You may pat yourself on your back if you want to.

Reply

  * US Government starts shutdown of non-essential services - Page 14 says: October 8, 2013 at 1:55 pm

[…] 20 times more per person than finland for their health care and the health
care system sucks ass. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform
Blog Also looking at this, its funny that this top ten most socialist
countries is pretty much the top […]

Reply

  * Steve says: October 8, 2013 at 7:26 pm

You must be kidding about Ireland. They have a far more conservative
government very little in the way of universal healthcare. The UK, In
particular Scotland is a far more socialist country that offers free
healthcare, transportation for the elderly and free higher education.

Reply

  * Dave says: March 8, 2015 at 2:10 pm

I couldn't believe it myself Steve…theres absolutely no way Ireland should be
on this list at all ,and yes your comparison with the UK is spot on ,the UK is
far more socialist than Ireland and that's a fact.

Reply

  * CULTURES OF CHINA | Bo Zhang Digital English says: October 13, 2013 at 11:37 am

[…] said, “China owns highly collectivist culture”. I agree with this opinion.
China is one of socialist countries and many Chinese think that the group is
more important than individual. In my family, my parents […]

Reply

  * Masixole Ntunguntwana says: October 24, 2013 at 6:24 am

I think South Africa and other countries that are currently using the "Free
Market" economy can learn a lot from these mentiont top 10 Socialistic
countries in therms of education, healthy and other ways of promoting or
strenghteening the economy.

Reply

  * J. Alejandro says: October 27, 2013 at 12:45 am

This article contradicts itself.. The title is misleading.. It says "…10 Most
Socialist Countries in the World", and then it says, "the most socialistic."

"Socialist" and "socialistic" are not the same things.

Reply

  * Hamlet Thompson says: October 27, 2013 at 2:58 pm

what abou the netherlands? i couldnt find any information about it on this
website…

Reply

  * Barrack Hussein says: October 30, 2013 at 10:53 am

Idiot propaganda.

Reply

  * Bill Lionheart says: November 3, 2013 at 3:42 am

Its strange that in the US they confuse socialism (collective ownership of
means of production) with the normal obligation of a civilized developed
country to provide education, healthcare and welfare.

Reply

  * Jonathan says: November 24, 2013 at 1:53 am

And yet, millions of Europeans immigrated here in the 20th century and made
this the greatest economy in the history of the world within 50 years,
operating under those very rules you find strange.

The reason Americans "confuse" socialism with the "normal obligations" you
describe is because those two things go hand in hand. That's why Left Wingers
constantly harp on the injustices of their favorite villain in the world: free
market capitalism.

Reply

  * Klaas Velija says: November 3, 2013 at 3:32 pm

This article only holds if your definition of socialism is "welfare state",
which is a ridiculous definition.

http://www.marxists.org/subject/china/peking-review/1975/PR1975-15a.htm

Reply

  * Jonathan says: November 24, 2013 at 1:27 am

Thank you for the injection of sanity.

Reply

  * The results of Democrat policy... - Page 8 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: November 19, 2013 at 3:36 pm

[…] both countries are more socialistic than America, the workforce remains
stronger.""" Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog I
would live in any of the above countries except China, of course. I worked for
a Dutch company […]

Reply

  * Jonathan says: November 24, 2013 at 1:30 am

Not a one of these countries, with the exception of China, is socialist.

Otherwise, how do you explain the alignment of the world during the Cold War?
Hello?

Why would NATO align itself against Marxism if it were comprised of a majority
of Marxist countries?

A welfare state isn't socialism. Read some books for crying out loud. How much
welfare do you think there was in Soviet Russia? In Maoist China?

Reply

  * Jonathan says: November 24, 2013 at 1:48 am

The newly inaugurated King of the Netherlands in September 2013 heralded the
decline of the welfare state in his country, referencing changing demographics
and an aging population that will necessitate civil solutions to issues like
retiree welfare.

This is an opening salvo in the decline of the welfare state in Europe. A
system propped up largely by international Bernie Madoff style ponzi schemes
and state oil revenues used to BUY POPULIST LOYALTY for ideologies that
couldn't possibly make such redistribution work under ordinary circumstances.

Socialism works great as long as you have the huge pot of money or credit
available to finance it. But when the credit card runs out, you're in trouble.

Reply

  * Amb says: May 7, 2014 at 4:39 am

Exactly what happened with your super capitalist housing bubble wasn't it? The
credit cards ran out?

Reply

    
    
    * Rob says: May 10, 2014 at 7:47 pm
    

That's not at all what happened…in fact, that's not even what happens in any
bubble. The housing bubble in America had its' roots in social programs (state
welfare programs) of the 90's designed to make housing more affordable for
poor people. It created a system where finance companies were giving loans to
people who otherwise would not be considered loan-worthy. Naturally, over the
next decade, the demand for housing skyrocketed, artificially inflating
prices. Eventually, the market corrected itself, as any healthy and relatively
free market would. House values plummeted back to normal, leaving tons of
people owing way more than their house is worth…leading to inability to
refinance, foreclosures, etc., aggravated by all those people who never really
could afford the houses they bought under government programs anyway.

This is not at all similar to the figurative "credit card" (meaning government
debt) that Jonathan was talking about. All governments need a positive cash
flow to be sustainable in the long run, and pure socialism by nature squelches
the drive for innovation and profits needed to make it happen. This is why
social democracies are becoming so prevalent in the world.

Reply

    
    
      * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 2:03 am
    

Ugh, God, the Community Reinvestment act. I still to this very day cannot see
why that idiot Jimmy Carter even signed that bill. It made it so that loan
companies were forced to pay people loans for houses, even when they knew that
those people would have no chance in Hell of paying them back. Something about
"Everyone is entitles to a house" Well guess what? If you can't pay for it,
how are you entitled to have it? The world is built upon money. People don't
have to like it, but it's true.

Reply

  * L says: November 27, 2013 at 8:55 am

Hello world

I'm from South Africa

Now after apartheid ended and our future was looking bright we had the great
injustice of being tempted by a loan from America during 1995, after accepting
this great injustice America now had a hold on decisions we made on our
economy. So the blueprint for our economic infrastructure bends viciously
towards Americanism. Yes, Americanism, i said it and the way our country was
inducted into the "free" world mirrors itself closely to an economic
enslavement using the bottleneck strategy of injecting funds into an economy
and then saying that the trickle-down effect will sustain great future growth,
but yet any money that may potentially trickle down is absorbed into repaying
the country in question (America) and also allowed for adverse corruptible
methods to be implemented with this trickle-down "solution" we were forcefully
given by the holiest of corruptible methods. Fiat Currency

Also, America has never been the greatest of fastest growing country in the
history of the world. Those titles go the Egyptian Dynasties and the Mongols
respectively

Reply

  * Wallace says: November 27, 2013 at 11:54 pm

You are the most ignorant person i have ever met

Reply

  * adam says: December 12, 2013 at 12:10 am

Really? Have a look at what South Africa has paid back to America. Next to
nothing. So I guess your great leader was an idiot. I'll say this he was
smarter than our currant President since you have a much better GDP. You have
WAY to many labor laws to ever really succeed like America did. There is way
to much redistribution of money instead of free market capitalism. This causes
people to give up like my friend and come to America or somewhere else where
all that hard work and education pays off.

Reply

    
    
    * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:19 am
    

The 'Trickle down effect' is a myth. You need socialistic policies, or else
you end up with a state resembling Victorian London. Which was hell.

Reply

    
    
      * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 2:12 am
    

It's not a myth. If you actually take a close look at the economy in the 80's,
(nicknamed the "era of conspicuous consumption") Jobs were plentiful, and
therefore wages were high. It was a booming economy that actually raised all
wages, including those of the inner city.  
There is a reason so many people revere Reagan. Times were good, credit was
easy, morals were loose, optimism was high.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:16 am

He's right, you know

Reply

  * Jersey says: May 12, 2014 at 7:01 pm

And how's that new government working out for you?

Reply

  * Terrorist Threats Greater Than Before 911 - Page 4 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: December 3, 2013 at 6:53 pm

[…] on lists of most personnel freedom. The Netherlands and Denmark also score
high on both lists. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform
Blog State of World Liberty Index - Wikipedia, the free […]

Reply

  * If oil's running out... - Page 3 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: December 19, 2013 at 5:28 pm

[…] happiness. China Denmark Finland Netherlands Canada Sweden Norway Ireland
New Zealand Belgium Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform
Blog USATODAY.com - Psychologists now know what makes people […]

Reply

  * dushan says: January 9, 2014 at 6:38 pm

Please someone to tell me how many states they are and they were socialist and
comunist 🙂

Reply

  * dubovski says: January 9, 2014 at 6:51 pm

Hey I think i got the answer they are 36 😛

Reply

  * M.Hashim sociologist and feminist says: January 18, 2014 at 7:56 pm

I am very thankful to you its most important and informative for me .
Hashimsocial@yahoo.com

Reply

  * Thomas Sowell Comment on Obama - Political Wrinkles says: January 22, 2014 at 6:11 pm

[…] Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog Or how about:
Quote: […]

Reply

  * Thomas Sowell Comment on Obama - Page 2 - Political Wrinkles says: January 22, 2014 at 10:27 pm

[…] Originally Posted by foundit66 The question is not CAN socialism have
examples of problems. I freely admit the answer is Yes to that question. The
question is whether socialism is inherently unstable. And the answer to that
is no. You've picked some examples which are convenient for you. How about we
instead look at which countries are the MOST socialist and go from there… Top
10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog […]

Reply

  * John B says: January 30, 2014 at 8:17 am

What a load of uneducated pathetic dribble..

Reply

  * Darrin says: January 31, 2014 at 11:38 am

How many socialist states are there exactly???

Reply

  * Bpoiyt says: February 1, 2014 at 7:22 am

Kar

Reply

  * iakovos says: February 3, 2014 at 1:05 pm

The Swedish Economic Model. Why Sweden’s success has nothing to do with
socialism.

http://www.scribd.com/doc/204219375/The-Swedish-Economic-Model-A-Socialist-or-
a-Free-Market-Success

Reply

  * Pol says: February 6, 2014 at 4:12 am

The picture of the Chinese Army is actually a picture of the military police
of Bolivia. How do I know? I lived in Bolivia.

Just to point out the level of quality and effort put in this article

Reply

  * John says: February 17, 2014 at 12:39 am

Yeah, this idiot says life is more relaxing in China, he obviously did not put
a lot of effort into this article.

Reply

  * John says: February 17, 2014 at 12:39 am

Yes, it is obvious that this idiot did not put enough effort into the article.
Half of the stuff he said is not true. Especially about China being more
relaxing to live in.

Reply

  * John says: February 17, 2014 at 12:38 am

More relaxed than in the USA? Have you looked at censorship in China? The
Buddhists in Tibet being killed, imprisoned, and censored? And you say it is
more relaxed than in the USA? You know, China, the country that imprisons
people for speaking out against the government on blogs? The country that is
rated as an enemy of the internet? The country where people make less than
$12, 000 per year? You're an ignorant liar who pulls things out of his butt.

Reply

  * John says: February 17, 2014 at 12:40 am

Here's proof that it China is not more relaxing to live in -
http://www.bloomberg.com/visual-data/best-and-worst/most-stressed-out-
countries

This article/post has no credibility.

Reply

  * Nagy says: February 18, 2014 at 8:14 pm

You must be kidding me. The country with the most developed economy in Europe
is Hungary. We have the greatest geography in the area, the most brilliant
politicians, we are connected to the strongest masonry lodge via George Soros
and even prince Charles loves us. We are supreme in the way we behave and due
to our historical connection with our neighbouring country Romania, we have
the best girls in the world. You might say that you didn't know that but
stupidity is a very common disease nowadays. Like phenomenons, there are
places you never understand because you lack information on them. Now you've
got it, from the source. Be all blessed.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:21 am

Brazilian girls are better :p

Reply

  * BH2 says: February 21, 2014 at 5:14 pm

China must have changed their flag I dont remember it having men with smg on
it

Reply

  * been to China says: February 23, 2014 at 10:19 pm

I'm sorry, you lost me at "Life in China remains relatively less stressful and
more relaxed than life in capitalist countries like America." I've lived there
for four months. You have no idea what you're talking about, and I wish you
wouldn't post blatant lies.

Reply

  * Kernighan says: March 31, 2014 at 2:52 pm

I agree with "been to China", especially since this poster has spent time
there and appear to have paid attention. Also, you erred in showing a row of
armed soldiers in your picture depicting China. That's not the impression one
would want to give to show that it's "less stressful".

The BIG ERROR: Socialism. What it really is. Socialism IS NOT a set of state
run or provided services, no matter how extensive. Socialism is a system
whereby NO OWNERSHIP of private property exists. The state owns all property.
Period. Don't trust me. Look it up. This is the economic definition of the
system. This crap was all "made" up by intellectuals such as the author of
this tripe. "Nature" provides a system of economics, too. . . .it's called
free market economics. It EVOLVED, and was not created by Ivy League idiots.
This system was first adequately described by Adam Smith. You probably have
not read his "The Wealth of Nations". You should. It describes how the well-
being of all is served by a series of remarkable, and NATURAL systems.

Reply

    
    
    * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:36 am
    

Capitalism isn't the perfect system you make it out to be. Also, 'socialistic'
(communist!) systems often allow 'personal property', ie toothbrushes, hobby
collections, photographs, and things of sentimental value. What it's supposed
to stop is people hoarding things they dont need, and not letting others use
them.

Reply

    
    
      * Damon says: June 2, 2014 at 2:17 am
    

But it IS nearly perfect. Those who actually work and do their job, prosper.
The lazy filth, who like to feed upon other's success, are eliminated. "The
strong survive" as the saying goes. It's basically just like natural
selection. But you aren't criticizing THAT now are you?

Reply

    
    
    * bobdobbs says: July 17, 2015 at 10:36 am
    

Free market ideals did come from intellectuals, including Adam Smith.

It only exists within a set of laws that we decide, hence it is not actually
free. Since the system is artificial (like any we come up with), we are free
to tweak it as we like.

Things like consumer protection are not free market, but we regulate so that
we have recourse if products poison us etc.

It's no more natural than any other system we come up with.

Reply

  * Bob K. says: April 15, 2014 at 5:09 pm

Um, yeah, I think you missed a few countries - how about North Korea, Vietnam,
Venezuela, Cuba, etc. You picked the nations that told the pro-socialist story
that you wanted people to hear, but the reality is that most of those nations
have vast natural resources with small populations that allow the higher
standards of living, not the socialism.

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:45 am

Most of those are more autocratic than anyone else though. And some socialism
is needed for decent conditions for the masses. Finally, many socialist
European countries don't have plenty of natural recources, but still have good
living conditions. Capitalism IS necceseary for development, because nothing
motivates people more than greed. But this needs to be in balance with
'leftist' policies

Reply

  * Rebbeca says: April 17, 2014 at 2:25 am

I seldom leave a response, however I browsed a few responses  
on Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog.  
I do have a few questions for you if it's okay.  
Could it be only me or does it seem like a few of the remarks come across like
they  
are coming from brain dead folks? 😛 And, if you are writing on other online
sites, I'd like to follow anything new you have to post.  
Would you list of all of your social community sites like your linkedin
profile, Facebook page or twitter feed?

Reply

  * neo classical economics- looked good on paper - Page 11 - US Message Board - Political Discussion Forum says: May 2, 2014 at 10:28 am

[…] Even though both countries are more socialistic than America, the
workforce remains stronger. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World -
Peerform Blog Quote: Somehow I dont think I'll hold my breath. Jesus, me boy,
if you were not such a con […]

Reply

  * Neurochemical effect of cigarettes says: May 3, 2014 at 11:02 am

Hoԝԁy! Someone in my Myspace grօup shared this ԝebsite աith  
us so I camе to give it a look. I'm definitely loving thee information.  
I'm boߋk-marking and will be tweeting this to mmy fߋllowers!  
Great bloց and excellent design.

Reply

  * What's your health insurance situation? - Page 143 says: May 5, 2014 at 5:01 pm

[…] country regarded as "socialist" but I couldn't give a definition of the
word if I tried. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform Blog
Nordic model - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia […]

Reply

  * Ben says: May 9, 2014 at 4:53 am

Belgium's beurocracy is rediculous- they have 7 different parliaments!

Reply

  * Bradly says: May 21, 2014 at 11:08 am

Hello, just wanted to tell you, I liked this blog post.

It was funny. Keep on posting!

Also visit my web-site; telecharger livres; Bradly,

Reply

  * Quora says: July 27, 2014 at 12:47 pm

**Socialism: If socialists want to help the poor, why don 't they teach them
capitalism?**

Okay, Let me rephrase as you're partially correct. Most countries now have a
blend of various systems. So how about countries than lean towards, and
primarily have, socialism/socialist structure. Here you go.
http://blog.peerform.com/top-ten-most-soci…

Reply

  * The Hobbit 3 Release date says: October 27, 2014 at 6:19 am

I've been browsing online more than three hours today,  
yet I never found any interesting article like yours.  
It is pretty worth enough for me. Personally, if all web owners and bloggers
made good content as you did, the net will be much more useful than ever
before.

Reply

  * read review says: December 3, 2014 at 5:13 pm

I just want to say I am just newbie to blogging and really enjoyed your web
page. Very likely I’m likely to bookmark your blog . You really come with
really good writings. Thank you for sharing your website page.

Reply

  * Socialism and Social Democracy | Netstorms says: December 10, 2014 at 8:20 am

[…] linked article on the world's ten most 'socialist' countries is […]

Reply

  * The “living Wage” will not help California — California Political Review says: December 16, 2014 at 12:50 am

[…] place California beyond the average level of European socialist economies
and closest to the most socialist economies in the entire world,the northern
European nations or closer to the level of minimum wage in […]

Reply

  * President Obama re-sets Cuba relations | Atlanta Metropolitan Black Chamber of Commerce says: December 21, 2014 at 12:08 pm

[…] Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World. When you look at countries
who actually have a socialist economic structure, you can see some
similarities to the United States – but there are some really stark
differences. […]

Reply

  * "Socialism O Muerte" | randomthoughts says: December 22, 2014 at 10:01 am

[…] http://blog.peerform.com/top-ten-most-socialist-countries-in-the-world/
[…]

Reply

  * Billy Jean says: January 4, 2015 at 7:54 pm

Canada is a democratic country with social policies/services versus a country
with a socialist government. Health is not free, neither is welfare nor
unemployment. The cost is very high taxes to pay for social programs such as
health, welfare, and unemployment.

Reply

  * Nat says: January 10, 2015 at 5:34 pm

Canada is not a socialist, country. Like Sweden etc, it is a democracy, with
democratic-socialist programs. It's a free market economy just like the U.S.
but rates HIGHER in economic freedom than the U.S.

This article has many faults, starting with China. Someone is confusing
communism and socialism, AND democratic-socialism.

Reply

  * mgoodin08 says: March 4, 2015 at 2:24 pm

Thank you, Nat. Glad I'm not the only soul who knows the difference between
Socialism and Social Democracy.

Reply

  * [GPGT] Migrating to Denmark nao !! - Page 4 - www.hardwarezone.com.sg says: February 3, 2015 at 7:26 pm

[…] of government as compared to sinkie's sell everyone and profit for thy
self capitalism method Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform
BlogPeerform | Peer to Peer Lending Blog nice read. 9 out of 10 of those
governments really put 'the highest paid PM' in the world to […]

Reply

  * Socialism among Jesus' disciples - Page 3 - Christian Chat Rooms & Forums says: March 2, 2015 at 12:14 am

[…] is a list of the top countries and a quick breakdown of some of their
benefits to it's citizens. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World -
Peerform BlogPeerform | Peer to Peer Lending Blog Reply With […]

Reply

  * mgoodin08 says: March 4, 2015 at 2:23 pm

China and North Korea are good examples of what most Americans define
Socialism as- purely Marxist. All the other examples in this blog are SOCIAL-
DEMOCRACIES which are VERY DIFFERENT and I really wish people would stop mis-
categorizing Social Deocracy as Socialism. It is WRONG!

Reply

  * Lukas says: March 20, 2015 at 5:10 pm

It is entertaining to see how many retards talk shit about socialist
countries, because they have been brainwashed by Nazi America. And before you
hate on me for saying that, you should look up what National Socialism is. You
will find it that Hitler's ideology was based off of america's "Freedom". I am
danish. You say we do not have an army? Fair enough, considering how we have
2. You hate on us for our taxes? Well, at least they pay for our hospital
bills, while your free america let people die on the street because cash means
more than human lives to america. You hate on us for being better than you,
just face it you sad idiots. Socialism allows us to have a good life, and not
have 80% chance of ending up as a lowlife, with education bills that will pull
you down for years and years, while socialism gives us FREE education. In
fact, we get paid to study. I get that you are sad and jealous, but that does
not give you the right to talk shit about countries for being better than you.
Stop being obama's bitch, and open your eyes, instead of listening to your
patriotic teachers that will make you look like complete idiots to everyone
who has the least bit of real education. Barbarians..

Reply

  * SHON says: August 9, 2015 at 2:29 pm

Honestly, only the idiots here in America have anything bad to say about any
of the countries on this list. Most of us dream of at least visiting all of
the countries on this list. So while any disagreement about government has
good points and bad, please understand it has nothing to do with how Americans
feel about the people in these countries. Then again I am from California and
the rest of the U.S.A hates us. The other thing I would like to say is that
America is pretty open to anyone becoming a citizen and opening businesses.
There are soooooo many businesses owned by migrants. This is a rambling reply,
but it makes me sad to see how the world views us. My grandfather fought in
world War 2 and loved the people of Germany, France, England etc. Just wish
that everyone could get along. Honestly, as history has always shown, the
world is run by the wealthy. Class warfare is the real issue. Greed trumps
all. 🙁

Reply

  * Nancy Hey says: April 20, 2015 at 2:52 pm

I'm wondering why Cuba is not even on this list, which is in most ways much
more socialist than China? There is actually a whole lot of capitalism in
China.

Reply

  * Tristam Sculthorpe says: May 4, 2015 at 11:03 am

OMG, what a shock!!! You actually think that China is a socialist country!!!!
China is a dictatorship run by sociopaths. This is also true of North Korea.
Did not ANYTHING ring a bell when you drew up the list and put this despotic
regime at the top of a list of truly democratic socialist countries??? Or are
you in the pay of some perfidious right wing political group in the states who
deliberately spread misinformation???

Reply

  * Motivation says: May 8, 2015 at 12:52 pm

There is no 'silver bullet' but, if one person has motivated themselves to
acton at a time whern they didn't feewl like it ' then anyone can do it.

So define your goals now, and dive into the vast sea  
of your subconscious mind through hypnotherapy. Each individual  
has his own set of likes and dislikes, interests, aspirations and desires.

Reply

  * daniel raimondo says: May 13, 2015 at 12:50 pm

Although these countries are considered to be socialist because of the
redistribution of economic  
benefits ,But their economies producing these economic benefits are
substantially free markets .  
Total Government control results in a monopoly with no incentives to do better
and grow the economy and improve the quality of life .Free markets are
economic democracy and must  
innovate and meet consumer needs or go out of business .

Reply

  * Spod alternative (Asian knockoff) - Page 3 says: May 14, 2015 at 2:14 am

[…] your manufacturing sector in the crapper. That's your own damn fault for
allowing that to happen. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World -
Peerform BlogPeerform | Peer to Peer Lending Blog Why the rebirth of
manufacturing is bypassing Canada - The Globe and Mail Sure the USofA may […]

Reply

  * The American Dream, Harder in America | The Mind of a Mindless Man Trying to Make Sense of a Mindless World says: May 28, 2015 at 10:53 am

[…] things, a strong welfare system, healthcare, and education. In Denmark
small businesses thrive, with over 70 percent of companies having 50 employees
or less. Finland has one of the world’s best education systems, with no
tuition fees and also giving […]

Reply

  * Denmark taking first steps towards cashless society - Page 6 says: June 3, 2015 at 2:26 pm

[…] is a pretty laughable example: Top 10 Most Socialist Coutries in the
World. Note that China, Sweden and Canada are all included in theip top-10
list. It's a sad read for […]

Reply

  * James Hoffer says: June 16, 2015 at 10:51 pm

Life in China remains relatively less stressful and more relaxed than life in
capitalist countries like America.

Sure.

That's why there are 1 million or more Chinese in America, and 10 Americans in
China.

Reply

  * jojo says: June 21, 2015 at 11:52 am

Socialism always transitions to communism in large countries and will always
fail due to the corruption that takes place when things don't go as planed
(Russia, China, Germany). China is transitioning back to capitalism may have
no choice but to return to socialism as things get loud in that country in the
coming years. Socialism works in little crap countries but they do not have
the large social issues we have in this country, race issues, immigration,
high wages, etc. You cannot compare Sweden or New Zealand to the U S., use the
history of large countries. Our politicians compare more like those in the
large countries that have failed, dishonest, cronyism, and never achieve what
they promise.

Reply

  * mradams says: July 5, 2015 at 11:35 am

When you consider that the US already has a number of socialist-based programs
in place, your argument loses it's punch. Social Security is the best example.
It's one of the most successful responses to the Great Depression. Without
this, most people would have nothing to fall back on when they need it most.
Without it, retirement would not be possible for a great number of Americans.
It is, as a matter of fact, a stop-gap measure to protect Americans against
the ravages of American capitalism.

Reply

  * Paul says: June 25, 2015 at 9:56 am

The Hague is in Holland, not Belgium. Is the rest of the article as rigorously
researched?

Reply

  * Jaap says: June 25, 2015 at 2:06 pm

Something goes horrible wrong in the article, the Netherlands is mentioned but
in the Denmark section, and than to make things worse you show a photo of The
Hague, THE NETHERLANDS as a Belgium city? common, this is just sloppy……

Reply

  * Jaap says: June 25, 2015 at 2:19 pm

The Netherlands is not a socialist country but a parlementary democracy in
which different parties fight for the favour of the voter. Some parties are
liberal democrat, some are socialist, some are even communist in origin, some
are christian, some are muslim, some green. but all are democratic parties and
therefore suggesting that we are socialist as a whole is wrong.

Reply

  * Anonymous says: August 3, 2015 at 5:13 am

China remains relatively less stressful and more relaxed than life in
capitalist countries like America.

Fuckin' ridiculous.

Reply

  * Anonymous says: August 7, 2015 at 10:37 am

Indeed. Especially if you're NOT a newborn female! Proof this article is just
more uninformed, knee jerk, leftist garbage.

Reply

    
    
    * Anonymous says: February 3, 2016 at 3:25 pm
    

Exactly!

Reply

  * Bill says: August 5, 2015 at 8:46 pm

I stopped reading as well after the China leads a more relaxed life. Lol, the
author of this is low information, probably low educated, and never been to a
socialist country.

Reply

  * Rudy says: March 11, 2016 at 4:29 pm

Life is China is less stressful? Forced abortions, pollution, long work hours,
poverty level 'wage'….those are all low stressful experiences aren't they?

Reply

  * SHON says: August 9, 2015 at 2:08 pm

Can't really compare economies when most countries have gotten used to us
"ignorant Americans" providing their National security. Not to say that the
citizens of those countries asked for the world police BS, however they
benefit none the less. All of us in America are not stupid, awful people.
Unfortunately capitalism is a system for the wealthy. Most of us hate the
system. We love our country, but hate the government. So many problems and
issues involved in this discussion.

Reply

  * Special Report: TMSC International®'s Longitudinal Research Study: From Capitalism to Socialism to Communism A Socialization Process 1984 - 2015 A.D. (31 years) | TMSC International® Management & Leadership says: August 18, 2015 at 9:21 pm

[…] Countries That Power is not the Goal, but has an Identified Social
Structure […]

Reply

  * Brian says: August 19, 2015 at 3:14 pm

Eye opening article in that you will definitely be looking up all the real
facts about life and how things work in these countries.

Reply

  * David J Gill says: August 25, 2015 at 1:16 am

These countries, with the exception of China, aren't really socialist, they
are market economies with robust social spending and a generous and effective
"social safety net."

The social democratic aspects of government policy in these countries is not
necessarily a drag on business and prosperity; a healthy workforce that
doesn't need to fear the financial burden of illness, loss of housing or the
threat of unemployment is actually a more reliable work force that can afford
to pursue higher education or the challenge and risks of starting a business.

These countries (not China) also are highly ranked on economic freedom.
Denmark, notably, ranks above the USA in this regard. These kinds of facts
blow the minds of Republican types with an overexercised disdain for
"socialism," consequently, good public policy is often off the table for
consideration in the US.

Reply

  * James says: August 31, 2015 at 2:51 pm

There is o socialist nations now and there was no socialist nations during the
cold war including the USSR.

Reply

  * CK says: September 17, 2015 at 2:19 pm

As soon as the author said the people in China live less stressful and more
relaxed lives, I should have stopped reading. Take away the people's freedoms
is not living a less stressful or relaxed life. Pathetic.

Reply

  * Habu1771 says: February 12, 2016 at 3:36 pm

Amen!

As soon as I read that, I knew the author was living in a fantasy land where
commonsense and rational thinking couldn't possibly exist.

Reply

  * Gray Area says: January 6, 2016 at 1:27 pm

[…] Socialism is a political ideology and movement which has proposed a set of
social and economic measures, policies and systems characterised by social
ownership and democratic control of the means of production. Top 10 Most
Socialist Countries in the World By Peerform · On December 6, 2012 […]

Reply

  * Jaxson says: January 26, 2016 at 4:59 pm

Why are you guys getting mad over information that you got from school lol

Reply

  * "Bernie Can't Drive : Logical Reasons You Shouldn't Vote for Bernie Sanders" - by Chris Moore - Moore Logical Thinking says: February 9, 2016 at 5:10 am

[…] and communism can theoretically work. They have in the past. In some
countries, they are working right now. So, yeah. I can't deny that socialism
works. It most certainly does. For a while anyway. […]

Reply

  * Rudy says: March 11, 2016 at 4:30 pm

Freedom of speech does not exist in China.

Reply

  * cheap nike nfl jerseys,cheap nfl jerseys,cheap nfl jerseys,cheap football jerseys,cheap nike nfl jerseys,cheap nfl jerseys,pro bowl jerseys,cheap nike nfl jerseys,cheap nfl jerseys,cheap nfl jerseys china,jerseys from china,wholesale china jerseys,nfl jer says: March 17, 2016 at 4:28 pm

We are a group of volunteers and opening a new scheme in our community. Your
web site provided us with valuable info to work on. You have done a formidable
job and our whole community will be thankful to you.

Reply

  * Scandinavia: A Mythical Socialist Paradise - mhseconomics says: April 11, 2016 at 5:32 pm

[…] Another example is another one of the "Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in
the World", Finland. Albeit the painstakingly ridiculous title, this article
by "Peerform" does […]

Reply

  * Dylan says: April 12, 2016 at 2:06 pm

How do liberals never actually know what Socialism is? Socialism is, and only
is, worker control of the means of production, either by State representation
of the workers in Marxism-Leninism (or a subset of it, such as Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism), as in the USSR, Maoist China, or Cuba, or through direct
ownership, such as in Revolutionary Ukraine or Revolutionary Catalonia.

A country with private means of production, such as the USA, modern China,
Sweden, India, Denmark, or New Zealand is Capitalist. If one of these
countries spends a significant amount of it's budget on social programs, such
as free healthcare, education, or a basic income, it's still not socialist.
Those are also not socialist countries, nor are those socialist programs.
Those are social programs, within a Social Democracy. The reason people think
free healthcare is socialist is government propaganda, as terms like Social
Democracy have existed for over a hundred years, and the terms didn't start
getting confused until the Second Red Scare.

Also, "Democratic Socialism", as used by Bernie Sanders, is also Social
Democracy. Real Democratic Socialism is a completely different ideology,
longstanding with many actual socialist adherents who want worker ownership of
the means of production. If you don't believe me, google any of the terms, and
all credible sources will support me.

Reply

  * H says: April 22, 2016 at 1:35 pm

Why are most of the commenting American's conservative? Eugh, now that's just
giving all of us a bad reputation. :/

Reply

  * Quora says: April 22, 2016 at 9:32 pm

**Why is socialism so disliked in America?**

Capitalism is where 90% of the wealth is owned and controlled by less than 10%
of the population. Capitalism is where one man flies about in a private jet
whilst others starve to death. That is not just unfair it is immoral. I call
it evil. McCarthy an…

Reply

  * Socialism and Federalism - Eric G says: May 1, 2016 at 9:40 pm

[…] source: http://blog.peerform.com/top-ten-most-socialist-countries-in-the-
world/ […]

Reply

  * Top 10 Countries With The Most Poverty | Love 10 says: May 6, 2016 at 4:12 pm

[…] Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - … – the most open free
markets are in the most extensively socialzed countries. Graft and corruption
is the true enemy of free markets, not governments doing their jobs … […]

Reply

  * Someone Who's Actually Read a History Book says: May 6, 2016 at 11:57 pm

This might be one of the stupidest and most research-lacking articles that
I've ever read. Like seriously, whoever wrote this needs to do some serious
research, unless this article is actually a joke; if that is the case, then
good one! You certainly got me! Otherwise, please actually investigate what
you're saying before spewing a bunch of uneducated (and for the most part,
completely untrue) propaganda on the Internet. So for starters:

China has a less stressful and more comfortable life than America? Okay, I
didn't realize that living in a country where over 1/6th of the entire world's
population lives in massive cities that have the worst air quality on earth
causing people to have to wear breathing masks for their own safety is
considered comfortable? And by the way, the picture that you listed of China
certainly looks "less stressful" than the ordinary life of an American
(sarcasm). Not to mention population limits imposed on families and, as you
even mentioned, non-existent income due to the government controlling
everyone's assets. I really do not know where in the hell you came up with
that garbage, but that statement ranks right up there with "the earth is flat"
and "the sun orbits the earth."

Finland has a 100 percent literacy rate? Okay, well at least this statement is
much more realistic than your statement about China. But stop and think for a
second… perfect 100 percent? Do you realize that that means literally every
single person in their country would have to be able to read and write? I
didn't realize that newborn babies can read and write, or if you want to
exclude them from the study, then consider people who were born with or
acquired a handicap that has prevented them from being able to read/write… Are
you telling me that Finland has absolutely no people with that? Look man, I'm
not denying that Finland is one of the best countries in the world for their
literacy rate (in fact I think that they may even be the number one country),
but to say that literally everyone in their country can read and write is
completely unrealistic, and again, lacking actual research.

Lastly, your article contradicts itself at different points. You mention New
Zealand as being "one of the most socialistic nations in the world" but then
later say that they are actually a capitalist nation - so which are we to
believe? Well, New Zealand happens to be a very capitalistic country, and as a
result it has one of the best economies in the world (yes, that's a CAPITALIST
nation that's thriving!). I'm sorry but the United States has social security,
welfare, education, etc. as well, and as you were so quick to mention, the
United States is NOT socialist. The mere existence of these things does not
make a country socialist, or else you wouldn't have any reason to have posted
this garbage.

Yes socialism has its benefits; however, they are very minor when compared to
the benefits of a free market economy. Capitalism has driven this country and
several others to become a powerful and highly productive nation. Socialism
can't boast a record like that - because it destroys economies and therefore
nations. Don't believe me? Pick up a history book. Don't like reading? Then
just ask some of the nations that have virtually no capitalism in their
society how well they're doing, such as Venezuela and Zimbabwe and North
Korea.

Don't take capitalism for granted; whether you like it or not, it really is
the backbone of our freedom and well being.

Reply

  * Gerrit Coetzee says: May 9, 2016 at 12:18 pm

What a bunch of nonsense by people trying to promote socialism. Over and above
that Socialism is created by the Jews to benefit the Jews in the person of
Karel Marx, look at the examples given of socialistic countries. China is
growing more and more capitalistic. Why? because no socialistic structure can
survive. The fact that government owns the business are not the criteria.
Socialism subscribes that al wealth is owned commonly and equally. No such
state exist. Even in Russia some people received more tokens then other for
work performed, which makes it capitalistic. Yes there is disparities in
Capitalism, but fruits om my toil are not equal to yours. That is life. The
note above that capitalism is immoral for one flies in a private jet whilst
others starve to death is irrelevant. Even if that jet is sold and the money
spend on food for the starvers, in a short while they will be back on the
starvation list. People die, and there is no obligation on me or any other
capitalist to maintain the health or life of another person starving for
whatever reason. That is the facts, and socialism cannot provide that support.
Countries with big welfare institutions does not make them socialistic. They
are capitalistic with big welfare. There is no thriving socialistic country
which is pure socialistic. None! They all rely on capitalism. There is no pure
socialistic state where everybody earns the same and possesses everything
equally - because socialism is a lie . Socialism is evil, as it goes against
the biblical instruction to work and to labour in sweat for ones own fruit.

Reply

  * Porcupine Musings » The Rise or Fall of Socialism says: May 17, 2016 at 7:32 am

[…] President, Cuba and North Korea’s decades of abject poverty)? To be fair,
one could likewise cite the relative success of China, Denmark, Norway, or
Canada as proof of socialism’s success. Why […]

Reply

  * The Rise or Fall of Socialism - Greg Morin - Liberty.me says: May 17, 2016 at 8:31 am

[…] President, Cuba and North Korea’s decades of abject poverty)? To be fair,
one could likewise cite the relative success of China, Denmark, Norway, or
Canada as proof of socialism’s success. Why […]

Reply

  * Dan says: May 18, 2016 at 12:56 am

It literally took my a couple of minutes to stop laughing when I read that
"Life in China remains relatively less stressful and more relaxed than life in
capitalist countries like America." Chinese people are the most over-worked,
over-stressed, suicidal people in the world. I don't understand why anyone
would even consider living in an authoritarian state over a free society if
they have the choice.

Reply

  * Phineas J. Fogg, Esq. says: June 1, 2016 at 11:54 am

Be what it may, all systems of government are subject to corruption. The
American system is supposed to have checks and balances to keep the power in
the people's hands. The cost of true freedom is extremly high ..and never
completly paid in full. The Marxists have been running the educational system
for many decades as evidenced of our childrens willingness to follow Bernie
Sanders like they do. HOW SAD. WE HAVE FAILED OUR CHILDREN.  
They don't understand that this is exactly what America ran away from. People
think Capitalism is unfair. The corruption exists when our laws - that already
exist, are not being enforced properly. Hence, our Government has fallen into
an Oligarchy…both parties have the appearance of being seperate, but they are
not. And they rely on the ignorance of the population, which they try to
perpetuate in order to gain full control.  
Well, I am here to tell you: You can all banter about the semantics all day
long. BUT their is no replacement for good Ol' American Freedom…If you think
it is unfair; you are free to leave. Just because you were born here, does not
exclude your ignorance from turning you into a domestic threat. You need to
get smart real fast, or prepare to fight. For you see, their is no place left
in the entire universe for freedom to go. maybe you all can make a go of it in
Antartica. We should have it thawed enough soon. But woe to those who wake the
silent majority and take us from our daily lives to deal with your attempt to
take what we have away from us. Try improving Norway's government if you feel
you need to tinker. To Me; Socialism is just half-assed Communism. and they
might as well be the same, cause it ain't happening here brother. You will
need to fight. Are you really ready for that? There is not 1 right I will give
up to your ignorant comprehension of fairness. Their is a difference between
being just a citizen and a True American. One understands the obligaton, and
the other wants to turn the clock back 300 years. Yes, we are trained baby
killers, with only our conscious as our guide. So be careful where you tread.
And if you find this offense; take it as an internal que to brush up on your
Dutch.

Reply

  * Phineas J. Fogg, Esq. says: June 1, 2016 at 12:53 pm

Opps, should add: Dutch, or in my case Flemmish…the language that my
Grandmother refused to teach me when I asked. She said;"We are Americans
now…we speak American."

Reply

  * This is for you Trump voters. by antifreeze - Page 230 - TribalWar Forums says: June 9, 2016 at 1:30 pm

[…] is tossing around random lies. sure just lump it in there, it ends with
'ism' so must be bad. Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World - Peerform
BlogPeerform | Peer to Peer Lending Blog World's happiest countries named -
CNN.com 7 of 10 (including Denmark as 1st place) on CNN's list […]

Reply

  * http://www.mlestimate.com/?mbn says: January 19, 2017 at 10:27 pm

That is very attention-grabbing, You're an overly skilled blogger.  
I have joined your rss feed and look forward to in search of  
more of your great post. Also, I've shared your site in my social networks

Reply

  * http://www.mlestimate.com/?mbn says: January 19, 2017 at 11:50 pm

Thanks for finally talking about >Top 10 Most Socialist Countries in the World
- Peerform BlogPeerform | Peer  
to Peer Lending Blog <Loved it!

Reply

  * roblox hack says: January 24, 2017 at 11:24 pm

For newest news you have to go to see world wide web and on the web I found
this site as a  
finest web site for most up-to-date updates.

Reply

  * Minda says: January 24, 2017 at 11:33 pm

When I originally commented I clicked the "Notify me when new comments are
added" checkbox and now each time a comment  
is added I get four emails with the same comment.  
Is there any way you can remove people from that service?  
Appreciate it!

Reply

  * fifa 17 serial key says: January 25, 2017 at 1:53 am

You should take part in a contest for one of the greatest websites  
on the internet. I most certainly will recommend this website!

Reply

  * Kaci says: December 28, 2017 at 1:16 am

Great site. Just had a quick read.

Reply

  * clegenaturmethods.blogspot.com says: January 3, 2018 at 8:04 am

I am really impressed with your writing skills and also with  
the layout on your weblog. Is this a paid theme or did you modify it yourself?

Either way keep up the nice quality writing, it is rare to see a  
great blog like this one nowadays.

Reply

  * a says: February 25, 2018 at 4:53 am

Useful info. Fortunate me I found your site by  
accident, and I'm shocked why this coincidence did not came about in advance!  
I bookmarked it.

Reply

  * niger nelajobs says: July 12, 2018 at 11:12 am

Some really excellent articles on this internet site , thankyou for
contribution.

Reply

  * Katlyn Soukup says: February 5, 2019 at 4:26 pm

blog is nice, thank you

Reply

### Leave a reply Cancel reply

Name

Email

Website

### Sign Up for the Latest News

Join the Peerform community and stay abreast of career tips, workplace trends,
fintech, money advice and more

Name

Email*

![](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-content/plugins/email-

subscribers/public/images/spinner.gif)

### @peerform on Twitter

  * ![Tweet Avatar](//pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/514683530115174400/dUMPmlTj_normal.png)

I'm ready for this one! Friday is National Donut Day. Be sure to check out
where you can get your free donuts! https://t.co/menEi8Skhb

_ 5h ago _

    
    
    *     *     *   * ![Tweet Avatar](//pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/514683530115174400/dUMPmlTj_normal.png)
    

Can taking out a #personal #loan boost your #creditscore? It might. Here's
how. https://t.co/yHJD6vHNHU https://t.co/Yeek1siZbj

_ 7h ago _

    
    
    *     *     *   * ![Tweet Avatar](//pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/514683530115174400/dUMPmlTj_normal.png)
    

# WednesdayWisdom https://t.co/sg3oB38SoG

_ 1d ago _

    
    
    *     *     *
    

### Find us on Facebook

### ![RSS](http://blog.peerform.com/wp-includes/images/rss.png) Peerform

Online Lending

  * Can You Build Your Credit Score With a Personal Loan? June 6, 2019

Guest Post by Andrew Rombach Your credit score might be one of the most
important pieces of data about you. It’s used to determine not just your
creditworthiness, but in some cases your dependability and likelihood of
keeping to certain obligations. Many jobs now include a credit report as part
of their pre-employment background checks, […]

  * Summer is a Great Time for Teaching Kids About Money May 30, 2019

Take advantage of summer vacation to instill some important financial literacy
skills in your children. Teaching kids about money from the earliest age
possible will help them build a bright financial future for themselves and
their children. Get Comfortable with Talking About Money Talking about money
can be difficult for many people. You might rather […]

  * Tips to Help You Save Money in Your 20’s May 23, 2019

When you’re a young adult and just beginning to establish your path in life,
saving money is probably not on the front burner. You have life goals, but you
haven’t connected them to a financial plan. Thinking about how to save money
in your 20’s might seem like daydreaming. But this is the best time […]

  * Medical Loan with Bad Credit May 16, 2019

Can You Get a Medical Loan With Bad Credit? Healthcare costs are plunging more
and more Americans into debt. This reality has been created by a number of
converging factors, all of which work against you: skyrocketing costs of
medical care, higher costs of health insurance premiums, and more out-of-
pocket and uncovered medical procedures. If […]

  * Adult Kids Living at Home: Protect Your Finances May 9, 2019

The number of adult kids living at home is on the rise. Aside from the
challenges of living peacefully with adult children who have some autonomy,
this trend is putting parents at financial risk. According to recent
statistics reported in Yahoo Finance, more than 14 million young adults
between the ages of 23 to 27 […]

© 2014 Peerform. All rights reserved.

Privacy Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

