
        
                  * Skip to content The Atlantic
          * Popular
          * Latest
          * Sections
        

**Sections**

        
                    * Politics
            * Culture
            * Technology
            * Ideas
            * Science
            * Books
            * Family
            * Business
            * Global
            * Health
            * Education
            * Letters
            * The Masthead
            * Our Towns
            * Photo
            * Podcasts
            * The Atlantic Crossword
            * Video
            * Events
            * Writers
            * Projects
        
          * Magazine
        

**Magazine**

        
                    * Current issue 
            * All issues 
            * Manage subscription 
            * Give a Gift 
            * Subscribe
        
          * More Categories
        

**More**

        
                    * Create account Your account
            * Sign in Sign out
            * Newsletters
            * The Atlantic Crossword
            * iOS App
            * Life Timeline
            * Events
            * Books
            * Shop
            * Help Center
        

View all

        
                  * Subscribe
          * Search
        

**Search** **Quick Links**

        
                    * Dear Therapist 
            * Crossword Puzzle 
            * Manage Subscription
        

Search The Atlantic

**Quick Links**

        
                    * Dear Therapist 
            * Crossword Puzzle 
            * Manage Subscription
        

Science

# Scientists Have Uncovered a Disturbing Climate Change Precedent

During the rise of mammals, Earth's temperatures spiked in a scary way that
the planet may experience again soon.

Peter Brannen Aug 6, 2018

![Sunset over desert

rocks](https://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2018/08/RTX14VBF/lead_720_405.jpg?mod=1533691451)Mike
Hutchings / Reuters

They were strange days at the beginning of the age of mammals. The planet was
still hungover from the astonishing disappearance of its marquee superstars,
the dinosaurs. Earth’s newest crater was still a smoldering system of
hydrothermal vents, roiling under the Gulf of Mexico. In the wake of
Armageddon our shell-shocked ancestors meekly negotiated new roles on a planet
they inherited quite by accident. Before long, life settled into new rhythms:
Earth hosted 50-foot-long boas sliding through steam-bath jungles, birds grew
gigantic in imitation of their dearly departed cousins, and mildly modern
mammals we might squint to recognize appeared. Within a few million years,
loosed from under the iron heel of the vanished giants, they began to
experiment. Early whales pranced across a Pakistani archipelago on all fours,
testing out life in the water. The first lemur-like primates leapt from the
treetops, and hoofed things of all varieties dashed through the forest.

But the most striking feature of this early age of mammals is that it was
almost _unbelievably_ hot, so hot that around 50 million years ago there were
crocodiles, palm trees, and sand tiger sharks in the Arctic Circle. On the
other side of the blue-green orb, in waters that today would surround
Antarctica, sea-surface temperatures might have topped an unthinkable 86 **_*
degrees_** * Fahrenheit, with near-tropical forests on Antarctica itself.
There were perhaps even sprawling, febrile dead zones spanning the tropics,
too hot even for animal or plant life of any sort.

This is what you get in an ancient atmosphere with around 1,000 parts per
million (ppm) of carbon dioxide. If this number sounds familiar, 1,000 ppm of
CO2 is around what humanity is on pace to reach by the end of this century.
That should be mildly concerning.

“You put more CO2 in the atmosphere and you get more warming, that’s just
super-simple physics that we figured out in the 19th century,” says David
Naafs, an organic geochemist at the University of Bristol. “But exactly how
much it will warm by the end of the century, we don’t know. Based on our
research of these ancient climates, though, it’s probably more than we
thought.”

Last week, Naafs and colleagues released a study in _Nature Geoscience_ that
reconstructs temperatures on land during this ancient high-CO 2 hothouse of
the late Paleocene and early Eocene epochs—the sweltering launch to the age of
mammals. And the temperatures they unearthed are unsurprisingly scorching.

To study Earth’s past, scientists need good rocks to study, and fortunately
for geologists and fossil-fuel companies alike, the jungles and swamps of this
early age of mammals left behind lots of coal. The Powder River Basin in the
United States, for instance, is filled with fossil Paleocene swamplands that,
when burned today, contribute about 10 percent of U.S. carbon emissions.
Naafs’ team studied examples of lower-quality coals called lignites, or
fossilized peat. They had been collected around the world (everywhere from
open-pit coal mines in Germany to outcrops in New Zealand), and spanned the
late-Paleocene and early-Eocene epochs, from around 56 to 48 million years
ago. They were able to reverse engineer the ancient climate by analyzing
temperature-sensitive structures of lipids produced by fossil bacteria and
archaea living in these bygone wetlands, and preserved for all time in the
coal. The team found that, under this past regime of high CO2, in the ancient
U.K., Germany, and New Zealand, life endured mean annual temperatures of 23
**–** 29 degrees Celsius (73–84 degrees Fahrenheit) or 10–15 degrees Celsius
(18–27 degrees Fahrenheit) warmer than modern times.

“These wetlands looked exactly how only tropical wetlands look at present,
like the Everglades or the Amazon,” Naafs says. “So Europe would look like the
Everglades and a heat wave like we’re currently experiencing in Europe would
be completely normal. That is, it would be the everyday climate.”

That modern European heat wave has, in recent weeks, sent sunbathing
Scandinavians and reindeer to the beach in temperatures topping 90 degrees
Fahrenheit in the Arctic Circle. It has also ignited devastating wildfires
across Greece and triggered an excruciating weekend for Spain and Portugal.
But over 50 million years ago this would have been the baseline from about 45
to 60 degrees latitude. Under this broiling regime, with unprecedented heat as
the norm, actual heat waves might have begun to take on an unearthly quality.

“Perhaps a heat wave in Europe would be something like 40 degrees Celsius (104
degrees Fahrenheit) for three weeks. We don’t know.” So that was life in the
late Paleocene and early Eocene in the high mid-latitudes. But closer to the
equator in this global sweat lodge, the heat might have been even more
outrageous, shattering the limits of complex life. To see exactly how hot,
Naafs’ team also analyzed ancient lignite samples from India, which would have
been in the tropics at the time—that subcontinent still drifting across the
Indian Ocean toward its eventual mountain-raising rendezvous with Asia. But
unfortunately, the temperatures from these samples were maxed out. That is,
they were too hot for his team to measure by the new methods they had
developed. So it remains an open question just how infernal the tropics became
in these early days of our ancestors, but some computers tasked with
recreating this planet spit out the stuff of science fiction.

“Some climate models suggest that the tropics just became a dead zone with
temperatures over 50 degrees Celsius (122 degrees Fahrenheit) like in Africa
and South America,” says Naafs. “But we have no data so we don’t know.”

Naafs’ work fits into a larger developing picture of Earth as an almost
unrecognizable greenhouse planet of the distant past. University of Colorado
paleontologist Jaelyn Eberle recently returned to her office in Boulder from
Ellesmere Island, in the Canadian High Arctic, where she’s been doing research
since the 1990s. Ellesmere is as far north as you can get before you fall off
North America and run into Père Noël drifting over pack ice. Here, featureless
highlands overlook ice-choked fjords and a lone Peary’s caribou might mingle
with a dozen musk oxen under a vast Nunavut sky. There are also polar bears,
but Eberle luckily hasn’t had any run-ins so far—though perspective can play
tricks on you at the top of the world, and a snow-white artic hare on its hind
legs at the appropriate distance can appear threatening enough.

“You pick up your gun and get all nervous and worried and then look through
your binoculars ... It’s just a rabbit,” says Eberle.

But Eberle isn’t venturing this far north just for the occasional hair-raising
encounter with polar wildlife. Her target is warmer-weather fauna. Though
there are no trees here at the top of the world, there are tree stumps. And
they are around 50 million years old.

“The fossil forests on Ellesmere are spectacular,” Eberle says about the
ecosystem entombed in the arctic soils. “You start really looking into them
and you go, ‘Wow. We are dealing with a rainforest.’”

Eberle is a vertebrate paleontologist and though there’s the aforementioned
odd musk ox passing by her camp to consider, in the rocks below she has her
pick of animals to study.

“You’ve got alligators, giant tortoises, primates, things like that. We have
these big hippo-like animals called _Coryphodon_. You have tapirs—so you’ve
got tapirs living pretty close to the North Pole in the early Eocene, which
today—clearly tapirs are not at the North Pole,” she says, laughing.

The presence of these animals suggests a very warm world indeed. And yet,
there is a seeming disconnect, between traditional projections for future
warming—like those made by the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
which predicts around 4 degrees Celsius (7 degrees Fahrenheit) of warming by
the end of the century under a business-as-usual emissions scenario (still
frightening) and sea-level rise measured in mere inches (still
frightening)—and the scarcely recognizable Earths buried in the rocks and
created under similar CO2 regimes, like those that Eberle unearths.

One obvious way to reconcile this disparity is by noticing that the changes to
the ancient earth took place over hundreds-of-thousands to millions of years
and (IPCC graphs notwithstanding) that time won’t stop at the end of the 21st
century. The changes that we’ve already set in motion, unless we act rapidly
to countervail them, will similarly take millennia to fully unfold. The last
time CO2 was at 400 ppm (as it is today) was 3 million years ago during the
Pliocene epoch, when sea levels were perhaps 80 feet higher than today.
Clearly the climate is not yet at equilibrium for a 400-ppm world.

And it won’t be for quite some time. And anyway, we’re clearly not content to
stop at just 400 ppm. If we do, in fact, push CO2 up to around 1,000 ppm by
the end of the century, the warming will persist and the earth will continue
to change for what, to humans, is a practical eternity. And when the earth
system finally does arrive at its equilibrium, it will most likely be in a
climate state with no analog in the short evolutionary history of _Homo
sapiens_. Most worryingly, the climate models that we depend on as a species
to predict our future have largely failed to predict our sultry ancient past.
And though the gulf is narrowing, and models are catching up, even those that
come close to reproducing the hothouse of the early Eocene require injecting
16 times the modern level of CO 2 into the air to achieve it—far beyond the
rather meager doubling or tripling of CO2 indicated by the rock record.

Clearly we are missing something, and Naafs thinks that one of the missing
ingredients in the models is methane, a powerful greenhouse gas which might
help close the divide between model worlds and fossil worlds.

“We know nothing about the methane cycle during these greenhouse periods,” he
says. “We know the hotter it gets the more methane comes out of these
wetlands, but we know nothing about the methane cycle beyond the reach of ice
cores which only goes back 800,000 years ... We know tropical wetlands pump
much more methane into the atmosphere compared to [cooler] wetlands. And we
know methane can actually amplify high-latitude warming, so maybe that’s some
of the missing feedback.”

In many ways these ancient worlds are not analogs to our own. We have to be
careful when making comparisons between the two. The early age of mammals was
a different world. The continents were in slightly different positions,
leading to a vastly different ocean circulation and boundary conditions quite
unlike our own world, 50 million years on—with all the tectonic,
oceanographic, and biological changes that come with such a yawning expanse of
time. But artificially jam enough greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and
Naafs thinks that many of the wildest features of the early age of mammals
could be recreated.

“If we were to burn all the fossil fuels and wait a few centuries we might
return to this,” he says. “Basically every type of paleoclimate research
that’s being done shows that high CO2 means that it’s very warm. And when it
gets very warm, it can be really, really, _really_ warm.”

We want to hear what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the
editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com.

Peter Brannen is a science writer based in Boston. His work has appeared in
_The New York Times, The Washington Post,_ and _Wired._ He is the author of
_The Ends of the World: Volcanic Apocalypses, Lethal Oceans, and Our Quest to
Understand Earth's Past Mass Extinctions_.

Twitter

        
                  * About
        
            * Our History
            * Staff
            * Careers
            * Shop
        
          * Contact
        
            * Help Center
            * Contact Us
            * Send a News Tip
            * Advertise
            * Press
        
          * Podcasts
        
            * Radio Atlantic
            * Crazy/Genius
            * The Atlantic Interview
            * Audio Articles
        
          * Subscription
        
            * Purchase
            * Give a Gift
            * Manage Subscription
            * Download iOS App
            * Newsletters
        
          * Follow
        
            *         *         *         *         *         *         *       * Privacy Policy
          * Advertising Guidelines
          * Terms Conditions
          * Responsible Disclosure
          * U.S. Edition
          * World Edition
          * Site Map
        

TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2019 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights
Reserved.

The Atlantic

![](https://atlanticmedia.122.2o7.net/b/ss/atlanticprod/1/H.22--NS/0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

