

Browse

Close menu

        
                  * Home
          * Products
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                    * Fixed/Wall Mount
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Indoor Safety
        
              * Indoor Air Quality-IAQ
        
              * Indoor Agriculture
        
              * Scientific & Industrial
        
            * Handheld
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Diffusion
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * Diffused CO2
                * Diffused Oxygen
                * Diffused CH2O
                * Diffused CO
              * Sampling
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * Sampling CO2
                * Sampling Oxygen
            * Data Loggers
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Handheld Loggers
        
              * Desktop Loggers
        
              * Data Logging Sensors
        
            * Desktop
        
            * Sensors
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * CO2 Sensors
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * 0-1% CO2
                * 5% CO2
                * 10% CO2
                * 20% CO2
                * 30% CO2
                * 60% CO2
                * 100% CO2
              * CO Sensors
        
              * Oxygen Sensors
        
              * VOC Sensors
        
              * Suppliers
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * AlphaSense
                * Figaro
                * GSS
                * SenseAir
                * SST
                * TecSense
                * TelAire
            * Gas Type
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Carbon Dioxide
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * CO2 Handheld
                * CO2 Wall Mount
                * Carbon Dioxide Sensors
                * CO2 Data Loggers
                * CO2 Desktop
              * Oxygen
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * O2 Handheld
                * O2 Wall Mount
                * O2 Sensors
                * O2 Data Loggers
              * Carbon Monoxide
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                        * CO Handheld
                * CO Sensors
                * CO Wall Mount
              * Ammonia
        
              * Formaldehyde
        
              * VOCs
        
            * Accessories
        
          * Applications
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                    * Restaurants & Food
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Bulk CO2 Safety
        
              * Modified Atmospheric Packaging (MAP)
        
              * Food Storage
        
            * Breweries & Wineries
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Breweries
        
              * Personal Safety
        
              * Wineries
        
            * Agriculture
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Algae & Biofuel
        
              * Composting
        
              * Indoor Greenhouse
        
              * Hydroponics
        
              * Marijuana Growers
        
              * Mushroom Farming
        
              * Poultry & Livestock
        
              * Controlled Atmospheric Storage
        
            * Scientific & Medical
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Incubators
        
              * Capnography
        
              * Cryogenics
        
              * SCUBA
        
            * Indoor Air Quality
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * HVAC Testing
        
              * Demand Controlled Ventilation
        
              * LEED Certification
        
            * Safety
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Personal Safety Alarm
        
              * Fire Code Compliance
        
              * OSHA-Compliance
        
              * Confined Spaces
        
              * Gas Leak Detection
        
            * Fire Suppression
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Data Centers
        
              * Venues
        
            * Sensors & OEM
        

See More "Close Cart"

        
                      * Car & Truck Cabin Air
        
              * Portable Heaters
        
              * CO2 Sensor Module
        
              * CO Sensor Module
        
              * Oxygen Sensor Module
        
          * Software
          * Application Notes
          * Request a Quote
          * News
          * About Us
          * FAQ
        

![CO2 Meter](//cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0019/5952/t/2/assets/logo.png?532)

Select LanguageAfrikaansShqipአማርኛالعربيةՀայերենAzərbaycan
diliEuskaraБеларуская
моваবাংলাBosanskiБългарскиCatalàCebuanoChichewa简体中文繁體中文CorsuHrvatskiČeština‎DanskNederlandsEnglishEsperantoEestiFilipinoSuomiFrançaisFryskGalegoქართულიDeutschGreekગુજરાતીKreyol
ayisyenHarshen HausaŌlelo Hawaiʻiעִבְרִיתहिन्दीHmongMagyarÍslenskaIgboBahasa
IndonesiaGaeligeItaliano日本語Basa Jawaಕನ್ನಡҚазақ
тіліភាសាខ្មែរ한국어كوردی‎КыргызчаພາສາລາວLatinLatviešu valodaLietuvių
kalbaLëtzebuergeschМакедонски јазикMalagasyBahasa MelayuമലയാളംMalteseTe Reo
MāoriमराठीМонголဗမာစာनेपालीNorsk
bokmålپښتوفارسیPolskiPortuguêsਪੰਜਾਬੀRomânăРусскийSamoanGàidhligСрпски
језикSesothoShonaسنڌيසිංහලSlovenčinaSlovenščinaAfsoomaaliEspañolBasa
SundaKiswahiliSvenskaТоҷикӣதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوO‘zbekchaTiếng
ViệtCymraegisiXhosaיידישYorùbáZulu

Talk to an expert: **877.678.4259** or __

__MENU

Search

**877.678.4259**

Login Cart __

        
                  * Home
          * Products 
            * Fixed/Wall Mount
            * Handheld
            * Data Loggers
            * Desktop
            * Sensors
            * Gas Type
            * Accessories
          * Applications 
            * Restaurants & Food
            * Breweries & Wineries
            * Agriculture
            * Scientific & Medical
            * Indoor Air Quality
            * Safety
            * Fire Suppression
            * Sensors & OEM
          * Software
          * Application Notes
          * Request a Quote
          * News
          * About Us
          * FAQ
        

Menu

Cart

Home › News › CO and CO2 – What’s the difference?

# CO and CO2 – What’s the difference?

August 28, 2009

![co co2 difference](//cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0019/5952/files/co2-vs-co-

molecules.jpg?15127622653261617611)

CO - carbon monoxide and CO2 - carbon dioxide are often confused. The names
sound the same, they both are colorless and odorless gases, and at high
concentrations, both can be deadly. The difference is that CO2 is a common,
naturally occurring gas required for all plant and animal life. CO is not
common. It is most often a byproduct of the oxygen-starved combustion of fuel.

The media often adds to the confusion. In the past, we heard stories of
suicide by sticking a garden hose in a car's tailpipe and window, then gunning
the motor till the CO (carbon monoxide) put the car's occupant to sleep. Today
we are told our car’s tailpipe is a major source of the "deadly" greenhouse
gas CO2. It's easy to see why they are confused.

It is helpful to understand the similarities and differences between CO and
CO2:

## About Carbon Monoxide

        
                  * CO is produced naturally in trace amounts by the partial oxidation of methane in the atmosphere, volcanoes and forest fires
          * CO is produced at dangerous levels by oxygen-starved combustion in improperly ventilated fuel-burning appliances such as oil and gas furnaces, gas water heaters, gas ovens, gas or kerosene space heaters, fire places and wood stoves 
          * CO is produced at dangerous levels by internal combustion engines that DO NOT use a catalytic converter
          * It is the most common type of fatal poisoning in the world
        

## CO Recommended Levels

        
                  * 0.1 ppm is the current average CO level on the planet
          * OSHA limits long-term workplace exposure levels to 50 ppm (parts per million)
          * Symptoms of mild CO poisoning include headaches and dizziness at concentrations less than 100 ppm
          * Concentrations as low as 700 ppm can be life-threatening
        

## About Carbon Dioxide

        
                  * CO2 is a common gas in the atmosphere, and is required for plant life
          * CO2 is a natural byproduct of human and animal respiration, fermentation, chemical reactions, and combustion of fossil fuels and wood
          * CO2 is non-flammable
          * CO2 is generated by internal combustion engines that DO use a catalytic converter
          * CO2 poisoning is rare; however scuba divers have to watch out for it (the bends)
          * Leaking pressurized CO2 tanks in enclosed areas can be dangerous for occupants - both from high levels of CO2 and from relatively lower levels of oxygen (displacement)
        

## CO2 Recommended Levels

        
                  * 400 ppm is the current average CO2 level on the planet
          * ASHRAE recommends a 1,000 ppm limit for office buildings and classrooms
          * OSHA limits long-term workplace exposure levels to 5,000 ppm
          * Drowsiness can occur at 10,000 ppm – common in closed cars or auditoriums
          * Symptoms of mild CO2 poisoning include headaches and dizziness at concentrations less than 30,000 ppm (3%)
          * At 80,000 ppm (8%) CO2 can be life-threatening
        

## What are the similarities between CO and CO2?

        
                  * Carbon and oxygen combine to form both gases
          * Both are colorless, tasteless and odorless
          * Both are in the air worldwide (albeit in different concentrations)
          * Both are released during combustion or fire
        

## Understanding PPM - parts per million

Parts-per-million (ppm or ppmv) is the way small numbers of molecules of gas
in the air are measured by scientists since there is much less than 1% of the
gas molecules by volume. Instead of saying "1% gas by volume," scientists will
say "10,000 ppmv" (10,000 / 1,000,000 = 1%) or shorten it to "10,000 ppm."

For example, It is easier write that the CO2 level in a room has risen from
400 ppm to 859 ppm than to write the CO2 level has risen from 0.04% to
0.0859%. However, both are correct.

Read more about parts-per-million here.

## How Monoxide and Dioxide Got their Names

You can thank the ancient Greeks for giving us their names for numerals:

• mono = 1  
• di = 2  
• tri = 3  
• tetra = 4  
• penta = 5  
• hexa = 6  
• hepta = 7  
• octa = 8  
• ennea = 9  
• deca = 10

This is how we get English words like **tri** angle (3 sides), the US
**Penta** gon (a 5 sided-building) or **deca** thlon (10 contests). So the
first half of **mono** xide means 1 oxygen atom, and the first half of **di**
oxide means 2 oxygen atoms.

For the second half of the word, we have **oxide**. Oxide is the name for a
simple compound of oxygen with another element or group. For example, add
oxygen to the element hydrogen and you get hydrogen di **oxide** (H20), or
water. Other oxides you may have heard of are nitrous oxide (NO2 - laughing
gas), or zinc oxide (ZnO - the active ingredient in sunscreen).

Source: Wikipedia

* * *

<- Older Post Newer Post ->

* * *

**Past Newsletters** ![Newsletter

Archive](//cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0019/5952/t/2/assets/icon-

newsletter.png?532)

* * *

### Categories

        
                  * agriculture
          * alarm
          * algae
          * altitude
          * ammonia
          * Arduino
          * ASHRAE
          * Atmospheric CO2
          * barometer
          * Beverage
          * Bioreactor
          * Calibration
          * capnography
          * Car Exhaust
          * carbon dioxide
          * carbon dioxide leak detection
          * carbon monoxide
          * CH4
          * CO2
          * co2 controller
          * CO2 leak detector
          * CO2 meter
          * co2 sensor
          * composting
          * COZIR
          * craft breweries
          * cryogenics
          * Data Logger
          * Diffusion
          * EPA
          * ETCO2
          * Fire Supression
          * Fumigation
          * GasLab
          * greenhouse
          * Greenhouse Gas
          * grow room
          * GSS
          * hibernation
          * IAQ
          * Ice Rink
          * incubation
          * Indoor Air Quality
          * IP65
          * K30
          * K33
          * LabVIEW
          * LEED
          * MAP
          * Medical
          * methane
          * Mushrooms
          * NBIC
          * NDIR
          * NEMA4
          * NFPA
          * NH3
          * NOAA
          * OEM
          * OSHA
          * Outdoor
          * Oxygen
          * Oxygen Sensor
          * personal safety
          * poultry
          * pressure
          * Produce
          * Python
          * Raspberry Pi
          * restaurant
          * Safety
          * Safety Signs
          * Sampling
          * schools
          * science fair
          * Scientific
          * Senseair
          * Sensor
          * sodasorb
          * soil gas testing
          * SprintIR
          * SST
          * Tongdy
          * Watt Meter
          * zirconia
        

Still need Help? Talk to an Expert.

**Call us at 877.678.4259.**  
We'll be happy to help you find the right product!

* * *

#### Shop

        
                  * Products
          * Applications
          * Software Downloads
        

#### Support

        
                  * App Notes
          * Warranty
          * Returns
          * FAQ
          * Track Order
        

#### Company Info

        
                  * About Us
          * Contact Us
          * Terms & Conditions
          * Privacy Policy
          * Reviews
        

#### Contact

**CO2Meter.com**

131 Business Center Drive

Ormond Beach, FL

32174 USA (877) 678-4259

Hours: M-F 8:30am-5pm EST

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

(C) CO2Meter.com 2019. All Rights Reserved. All prices USD.

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1064573444/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//bat.bing.com/action/0?ti=5319840&Ver=2)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

