

[an error occurred while processing this directive]

![Indiana Department of Child Services](/dcs/images/template/dcs_logo.jpg)

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Child Welfare Programs and Services
    * Prevention
    * Preservation
    * Placement
    * Permanency
    * Providers
    * Partners
  * Child Protective Services
  * Child Support
  * Policies
  * Regional Service Councils
  * Training
  * Forms, Publications & Statistics
  * Legislation
  * How Can I Help?
  * Job Opportunities

|

Home | Press | Calendar | En Espaol

# Protecting our Children, Families, and Future

---|--- 

![ ](/ai/aboutai/images/height.gif) About Us | FAQ | Inquiry Form | Legal
Issues | Terminology Indiana Adoption Program  
View Children (details) | Unidentifiable Children | Contact Us | Picture Book
![Indiana's Adoption Program](http://www.in.gov/dcs/adoption/images/logo.jpg)

# Legal Issues In Adoption

The Legal Aspects of Adoption

Selecting an Attorney

Attorney Fees

Approval

Agency Supervision

Required Consents

Adoption Petition Filing

Adoption Filing Fees

Adoption Assistance

County Adoption Subsidy

Prospective adoptive parents should consult an attorney for legal advice and
as they prepare to adopt a child. You can read about some of the legal aspects
of adoption here. **_Please note that this is not legal advice for your
particular situation._**

# The Legal Aspects of Adoption

# Selecting an Attorney

Federal and state laws that apply to foster care and adoption require certain
steps to be followed prior to the finalization of an adoption. It is important
to have an attorney to represent you in the adoption process. Your family,
friends or individuals you know who have adopted may be able to recommend an
attorney for legal advice and you can find out more information on attorneys
from your local county Bar Association. Sometimes it is helpful for an
attorney to have knowledge of the foster care system.

# Attorney Fees

Attorney fees vary around the state. You will need to ask the attorney what
fees they charge and how they bill their services. Since some children are
eligible for an adoption subsidy (a one-time reimbursement of legal fees or
non-recurring adoption expenses with a maximum expenditure of $1500 per child)
your attorney may be able to assist you in applying the subsidy to their fees.

# Approval

Prospective adoptive parents need an approved Family Preparation Assessment
(Home Study) to be recommended for a child who is a ward. Your local county
Office of Family and Children (OFC) and/or the private agency (LCPA) that
contracts with the county must determine if you have been approved. You are
required to have written approval before a child can be placed with you for
adoption and through your local court jurisdiction.

# Agency Supervision

Indiana law requires that adoptions be granted only after a period of
supervision has been met. A local County Office of Family and Children (OFC)
or private child placing agency (LCPA) that contracts with them must supervise
the child and adoptive family relationship. The length of the supervision
period is at the discretion of the court, however most courts require a
standard time period of six months.

# Required Consents

The consent of the child's mother, if she is living, is required by law to
complete an adoption. The consent of a child's father who has established
paternity or signed a paternity affidavit is also required. The county Office
of Family and Children (OFC) may have completed a court action to terminate
the parent-child relationship so that a child who is a ward can be legally
free for adoption, whether the child's parents have consented or not
determines the type of court action that is necessary. Your attorney should
check with the OFC to see whether all consents have been obtained or determine
if the child is legally free for adoption. You will need the consent of the
OFC that has the responsibility of care and supervision of the child you wish
to adopt for the court proceedings, unless the court finds that their consent
is not necessary to serve the best interests of the child.

# Adoption Petition Filing

If you are an Indiana resident, you may file your adoption petition in the
county where you reside, in the county where the child resides, or in the
county where the private agency (LCPA) or Office of Family and Children (OFC)
has custody of the child. If you are not an Indiana resident, you may petition
to adopt a child who is a ward of Indiana in the county where the LCPA or OFC
has custody or the county where the child resides.

If you are married, both you and your spouse must sign the adoption petition.
Partners of an unmarried couple may not petition to adopt together and in such
cases, only one partner may be the petitioner.

# Adoption Filing Fees

The adoption filing fee consists of the following: The adoption history fee,
which is $20 and the putative father registry fee, which is $50, both of these
fees are sent to the State Department of Health for records maintenance; and
the county clerk's office fee, which is $100. The court may not require
payment of the clerk's fee if you are unable to pay it based on an affidavit
regarding your income and expenses.

# Adoption Assistance

Some of the children in the Indiana Adoption Program are eligible for the
Federal Adoption Assistance Program. This can provide a monthly payment and
Medicaid for the child after adoption. The child's social worker or your
attorney can help you apply for the adoption assistance program. If adoption
assistance is denied, you may request an administrative appeal and at the
hearing, you may choose to represent yourself or have your attorney represent
you. If adoption assistance is granted, you may choose to enter into a
contractual agreement with the Office of Family and Children to receive the
assistance, which requires periodic certification. The assistance may continue
until the adopted child reaches the age of 18 and may be extended to age 21 if
the OFC determines that your child's physical, mental or emotional
disabilities warrant an extension. The assistance must be requested in your
adoption petition and is ordered by the court.

# County Adoption Subsidy

Adoption assistance may be available through the county OFC for families
adopting some children with special needs. County subsidy may include a
monetary payment and reimbursement for medical and related expenses due to a
pre-existing physical, mental or emotional condition of the child. County
subsidy cannot be denied on the basis of your income. The subsidy must be
requested in your adoption petition and is ordered by the court. A child may
be eligible to receive both adoption assistance and county subsidy.

About Us | FAQ | Inquiry Form | Legal Issues | Terminology Indiana Adoption
Program  
View Children (details) | Unidentifiable Children | Contact Us | Picture Book

Top of Page

**Updated as of Tuesday, April 4, 2006**  
Copyright 2004-2005 Indiana's Adoption Program. All Rights Reserved.  
Call us at: 1(888)25-ADOPT **[1-888-252-3678]**  
or email us at:

![DCSIMG](http://wt-

sdc-01.ai.org/dcsc11w1f000000spafo59hrd_4w9q/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=8.6.2)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

