

![Home](https://www.usgs.gov/sites/all/themes/usgs_palladium/logo.png)
![Home](/sites/all/themes/usgs_palladium/assets/css/img/USGS_black.png)

**Science**

Topics, centers, missions

__

**Products**

Maps, data, publications

__

**News**

Releases,  
I'm a reporter

__

**Connect**

Contact, chat, social media

__

**About**

Organization, jobs, budget

__

Search Search

* * *

* * *

* * *

__

        
                  * __Facebook
          * __Twitter
        
          * __LinkedIn
          * __Digg
          * __Reddit
          * __StumbleUpon
          * __Pinterest
        
        * About Us
          * Who We Are
          * History
          * Past Directors
        * Organization
          * Mission Areas
          * Regions
          * Science Centers
          * Science Support
        * Key Officials
        
        * Congressional
          * Briefing Series
          * Statements
          * Contacts
        * Budget
        * Opportunities
        
        * Doing Business
          * Contracts
          * Grants and Cooperative Agreements
          * Partners and Cooperators
          * Building Partnerships
        * Emergency Management
        
        * Data and Tools
          * Data and Tools Topics
          * Real-time Data
          * APIs
          * Science Data Catalog
          * Science Datasets
          * Data Management
          * Data Management Tools
          * GIS Data
        
        * Maps
          * Map Topics
          * Topographic Maps
          * Geologic Maps
          * GIS Data
          * The National Map
          * USGS Store
          * Geographic Names Information System (GNIS)
        
        * Publications
          * USGS Publications
        * USGS Library
        
        * Software
        * Multimedia Gallery
          * Images
          * Videos
          * Audio
          * Webcams
        * Park Passes
        
        * Featured Stories
        * News Releases
          * National News
          * State News
        * Science Snippets
        * Technical Announcements
        
        * Employees in the News
        * Get Our News
        * Media Contacts
        
        * I'm a Reporter
          * Request Footage
          * Earthquake Questions
          * Multimedia Gallery
          * Key Officials
          * Congressional
        
        * Headquarters
          * 12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
          * Reston, VA 20192, USA
          * 703-648-5953
        * Locations
        
        * Contact Us
          * 1-888-ASK-USGS
          * Email
          * Web Chat
        * Staff Profiles
        
        * Social Media
        
        * Science Explorer
        
          * Biology and Ecosystems
          * Land Resources
          * Coasts
          * Data, Tools, and Technology
          * Energy
          * Environmental Health
          * Geology
          * Mapping, Remote Sensing, and Geospatial Data
          * Minerals
          * Natural Hazards
          * Oceans
          * Planetary Science
          * Water
        
        * Mission Areas
          * Core Science Systems
          * Ecosystems
          * Energy and Minerals
          * Environmental Health
          * Land Resources
          * Natural Hazards
          * Water Resources
        
        * Regions
          * Alaska Region
          * Midwest Region
          * Northeast Region
          * Northwest Region
          * Pacific Region
          * Southeast Region
          * Southwest Region
        * Frequently Asked Questions
        * Education
        
          * __Facebook
          * __Twitter
          * __LinkedIn
          * __Delicious
          * __Digg
          * __Reddit
          * __StumbleUpon
          * __Pinterest
        

Search Search

Science+

Science Explorer

Mission Areas

Regions

Frequently Asked Questions

Education

Products+

Data and Tools

Maps

Publications

Software

Multimedia Gallery

Park Passes

USGS Library

News+

Featured Stories

News Releases

Science Snippets

Technical Announcements

Employees in the News

Get Our News

Media Contacts

I'm a Reporter

Connect+

Headquarters

Locations

Contact Us

Staff Profiles

Social Media

About+

About Us

Organization

Key Officials

Congressional

Budget

Opportunities

Doing Business

Emergency Management

Survey Manual

Climate and Land Use Change

# How would sea level change if glaciers melted?

If all of the glacier ice on Earth were to melt, sea level would rise ~ 80 m
(~ 265 ft), flooding every coastal city on the planet.

        
                  * If all of Earth’s temperate glaciers melted, sea level would rise ~ 0.3–0.6 m (~ 1-2 ft).
          * If all of Greenland’s glaciers melted, sea level would rise ~ 6 m (~ 20 ft).
          * If all of Antarctica’s glaciers melted, sea level would rise ~ 73 m (~ 240 ft).
          * If all of Alaska’s glaciers melted, sea level would rise ~ 0.12 m (~ 4.7 in).
        

## Related Content

        
                  * FAQ
          * Publications
          * News
          * Multimedia
        

Filter Total Items: 9

Topics (field_topics)

Select TopicBiology and EcosystemsCitizen ScienceCoastsData, Tools, and
TechnologyEnergyEnvironmental HealthGeologyLand ResourcesMapping, Remote
Sensing, and Geospatial DataMineralsNatural HazardsOceansOtherPlanetary
ScienceWater

Select Location

Select LocationAlabamaAlaskaAmerican
SamoaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareDistrict of
ColumbiaFloridaGeorgiaGuamHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew
HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaNorthern
Mariana IslandsOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaPuerto RicoRhode IslandSouth
CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasU.S. Virgin
IslandsUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyoming

Year

Select Year20192018201720162015201420132012201120102009

Sort by Original SortRelease Date DescTitle AscTitle Desc

Apply Filter

Reset

![Lyell and Maclure glaciers, as they were mapped in 1883 by Willard D.

Johnson of the U.S. Geological Survey](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/51dc8efee4b097e4d3839bff.jpg)

### Are today's glaciers leftovers from the Pleistocene ice age?

Yes and no. It depends on which glaciers you are considering. Parts of the
Antarctic Continent have had continuous glacier cover for perhaps as long as
20 million years. Other areas, such as valley glaciers of the Antarctic
Peninsula and glaciers of the Transantarctic Mountains may date from the early
Pleistocene. For Greenland, ice cores and...

![Alaska Interior mountain range shot with snow capped mountains.

](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/Alaska%20Interior_Shawn%20Carter%20usgs.jpg?c=fe28819eaec1394b23583ee0d12ecd89)

### How many glaciers currently exist in Alaska?

Based on the most recent comprehensive survey in 2011, there were about 27,000
glaciers in Alaska. However, the number of glaciers is a misleading statistic.
Scientists are more interested in total glacial land coverage as a measure.
The number of glaciers is less important since large ones can split up into
several as they retreat. The amount of...

![Image: Layers of Ice, Hayden Glacier](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/100_2497--Damon_Runberg.JPG)

### How old is glacier ice?

The age of the oldest glacier ice in Antarctica may approach 1,000,000 years
old The age of the oldest glacier ice in Greenland is more than 100,000 years
old The age of the oldest Alaskan glacier ice ever recovered (from a basin
between Mt. Bona and Mt. Churchill) is about 30,000 years old. Glacier flow
moves newly formed ice through the entire...

![Juneau Icefield](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/trec3.jpg)

### Is glacier ice a type of rock?

Yes – glacier ice, like granite, is a type of rock. Glacier ice is actually a
mono-mineralic rock (a rock made of only one mineral, like limestone which is
composed of the mineral calcite). The mineral ice is the crystalline form of
water (H 2 O). It forms through the metamorphism of tens of thousands of
individual snowflakes into crystals of...

![Bear Glacier](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/bear_2005.jpg?c=ff24f06a8ccb39bbb362466e20da7798)

### How much of the Earth's water is stored in glaciers?

About 2.1% of all of Earth's water is frozen in glaciers. 97.2% is in the
oceans and inland seas 2.1% is in glaciers 0.6% is in groundwater and soil
moisture less than 1% is in the atmosphere less than 1% is in lakes and rivers
less than 1% is in all living plants and animals. About three-quarters of
Earth's freshwater is stored in glaciers...

![Erosion and climate change along Alaska's Arctic Coast](https://prd-

wret.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/Arctic%20SDI%2C%20Ersosion%20and%20climate%20change%20along%20Alaska%27s%20Arctic%20Coast.jpg?c=3885d22ca797331c1e334f40882e24c1)

### What are the impacts of glacier loss, other than losing an aesthetic

landscape feature?

Glaciers act as reservoirs of water that persist through summer. Continual
melt from glaciers contributes water to the ecosystem throughout dry months,
creating perennial stream habitat and a water source for plants and animals.
The cold runoff from glaciers also affects downstream water temperatures. Many
aquatic species in mountainous...

![Glacier off Sargent Icefield](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/IMGP3083.jpg?c=6e74a4d94211f1e87317d5f750148264)

### How does present glacier extent and sea level compare to the extent of

glaciers and global sea level during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)?

The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) occurred about 20,000 years ago, during the
last phase of the Pleistocene epoch. At that time, global sea level was more
than 400 feet lower than it is today, and glaciers covered approximately: 8%
of Earth’s surface 25% of Earth’s land area 33% of Alaska Beginning about
15,000 years ago, continental glaciers...

![This image shows the perimeter of Sperry Glacier in Glacier National Park in

1966,1998, 2005, and 2015. ](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/Graphic_series_Sperry20150925_7x9.jpg)

### How do we know glaciers are shrinking?

In addition to qualitative methods like Repeat Photography , USGS scientists
collect quantitative measurements of glacier area and mass balance to track
how some glaciers are retreating ( Glacier Monitoring Studies ). For example,
ablation stakes show the seasonal gain and loss of snow, snow-pit analyses
measure density of snow, and precision GPS...

![Image: Getting the Shot, Grinnell Glacier, Glacier National

Park.](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/NOROCK_7_USGSEmployee_082009.JPG?c=925cdf94e4f441115a7d2050738cee1c)

### Is there a size criterion for a glacier?

While there is no global standard for what size a body of ice must be to be
considered a glacier, USGS scientists in Glacier National Park use the
commonly accepted guideline of 0.1 square kilometers (about 25 acres) as the
minimum size of a glacier. Below this size, ice is generally stagnant and does
not have enough mass to move.

Filter Total Items: 11

logstash-usgs-pw:palladium_root_publication_year_date

Select Year2013 (3)2012 (2)2011 (1)2009 (2)1997 (1)1995 (2)

logstash-usgs-pw:palladium_root_publication_type

Select TypeReport (11)

Label Select OrderRelease Date AscOriginal SortTitle AscTitle Desc

Apply Filter

Reset

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/cir1392.jpg)

Year Published: 2013

### Land subsidence and relative sea-level rise in the southern Chesapeake Bay

region

The southern Chesapeake Bay region is experiencing land subsidence and rising
water levels due to global sea-level rise; land subsidence and rising water
levels combine to cause relative sea-level rise. Land subsidence has been
observed since the 1940s in the southern Chesapeake Bay region at rates of 1.1
to 4.8 millimeters per year (mm/yr), and...

Eggleston, Jack; Pope, Jason

_Attribution:_ Chesapeake Bay Activities, Virginia and West Virginia Water
Science Center, Water Resources, Virginia, United States of America, Water
Science School

View Citation __

Land subsidence and relative sea-level rise in the southern Chesapeake Bay
region; 2013; CIR; 1392; Eggleston, Jack; Pope, Jason

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/fs20133077.gif)

Year Published: 2013

### Assessing hazards along our Nation's coasts

Coastal areas are essential to the economic, cultural, and environmental
health of the Nation, yet by nature coastal areas are constantly changing due
to a variety of events and processes. Extreme storms can cause dramatic
changes to our shorelines in a matter of hours, while sea-level rise can
profoundly alter coastal environments over decades....

Hapke, Cheryl J.; Brenner, Owen; Henderson, Rachel E. ; Reynolds, B.J.

_Attribution:_ St. Petersburg Coastal and Marine Science Center

View Citation __

Assessing hazards along our Nation's coasts; 2013; FS; 2013-3077; Hapke,
Cheryl J.; Brenner, Owen ; Hehre, Rachel ; Reynolds, B. J.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/cir1383a.gif)

Year Published: 2013

### U.S. Geological Survey climate and land use change science strategy: a

framework for understanding and responding to global change

The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), a nonregulatory Federal science agency with
national scope and responsibilities, is uniquely positioned to serve the
Nation's needs in understanding and responding to global change, including
changes in climate, water availability, sea level, land use and land cover,
ecosystems, and global biogeochemical...

Burkett, Virginia R.; Kirtland, David A.; Taylor, Ione L.; Belnap, Jayne;
Cronin, Thomas M.; Dettinger, Michael D.; Frazier, Eldrich L.; Haines, John
W.; Loveland, Thomas R.; Milly, Paul C.D.; Robert, S.; Maule, Alec G.;
McMahon, Gerard; Striegl, Robert G.

_Attribution:_ Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS) Center, Earth
Resources Observation and Science Center

View Citation __

U.S. Geological Survey climate and land use change science strategy: a
framework for understanding and responding to global change; 2013; CIR;
1383-A; Burkett, Virginia R.; Kirtland, David A.; Taylor, Ione L.; Belnap,
Jayne; Cronin, Thomas M.; Dettinger, Michael D.; Frazier, Eldrich L.; Haines,
John W.; Loveland, Thomas R.; Milly, Paul C.D.; O’Malley; Robin; Thompson;
Robert S.; Maule, Alec G.; McMahon, Gerard; Striegl, Robert G.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/pp1386a.gif)

Year Published: 2012

### State of the Earth’s cryosphere at the beginning of the 21st century :

glaciers, global snow cover, floating ice, and permafrost and periglacial
environments: Chapter A in Satellite image atlas of glaciers of the world

This chapter is the tenth in a series of 11 book-length chapters, collectively
referred to as "this volume," in the series U.S. Geological Survey
Professional Paper 1386, Satellite Image Atlas of Glaciers of the World. In
the other 10 chapters, each of which concerns a specific glacierized region of
Earth, the authors used remotely...

Williams, Richard S.; Ferrigno, Jane G.; Williams, Richard S.; Ferrigno, Jane
G.

_Attribution:_ Woods Hole Coastal and Marine Science Center

View Citation __

State of the Earth’s cryosphere at the beginning of the 21st century --
Glaciers, global snow cover, floating ice, and permafrost and periglacial
environments: Chapter A in Satellite image atlas of glaciers of the world;
2012; PP; 1386-A; Satellite image atlas of glaciers of the world (PP 1386);
Edited by Williams, Richard S., Jr.; Ferrigno, Jane G.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/cir_1379.jpg)

Year Published: 2012

### The United States National Climate Assessment - Alaska Technical Regional

Report

The Alaskan landscape is changing, both in terms of effects of human
activities as a consequence of increased population, social and economic
development and their effects on the local and broad landscape; and those
effects that accompany naturally occurring hazards such as volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, and tsunamis. Some of the most prevalent...

Markon, Carl J.; Trainor, Sarah F.; Chapin, F. Stuart; Markon, Carl J.;
Trainor, Sarah F.; Chapin, F. Stuart

_Attribution:_ Alaska Science Center, Ecosystems

View Citation __

The United States National Climate Assessment - Alaska Technical Regional
Report; 2012; CIR; 1379; Edited by Markon, Carl J.; Trainor, Sarah F.; Chapin,
F. Stuart, III

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/fs_2011_3074.gif)

Year Published: 2011

### USGS science for the Nation's changing coasts; shoreline change assessment

The coastline of the United States features some of the most popular tourist
and recreational destinations in the world and is the site of intense
residential, commercial, and industrial development. The coastal zone also has
extensive and pristine natural areas, with diverse ecosystems providing
essential habitat and resources that support...

Thieler, E. Robert; Hapke, Cheryl J.

_Attribution:_ Woods Hole Coastal and Marine Science Center

View Citation __

USGS science for the Nation's changing coasts; shoreline change assessment;
2011; FS; 2011-3074; Thieler, E. Robert; Hapke, Cheryl J.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/cir_1339.jpg)

Year Published: 2009

### Coastal Change Along the Shore of Northeastern South Carolina - The South

Carolina Coastal Erosion Study

The U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the South Carolina Sea Grant
Consortium, conducted a 7-year, multidisciplinary study of coastal erosion in
northeastern South Carolina. Shoreline behavior along the coast of Long Bay is
dictated by waves, tidal currents, and sediment supply that act within the
overall constraints of the regional...

Barnhardt, Walter A.; Schwab, W.C.; Gayes, P.T.; Morton, R.A.; Driscoll, N.W.;
Baldwin, W.E.; Barnhardt, W.A.; Denny, J.F.; Harris, M.S.; Katuna, M.P.;
Putney, T.R.; Voulgaris, G.; Warner, J.C.; Wright, E.E.

_Attribution:_ Woods Hole Coastal and Marine Science Center, South Atlantic
Water Science Center, Water Resources

View Citation __

Coastal Change Along the Shore of Northeastern South Carolina - The South
Carolina Coastal Erosion Study; 2009; CIR; 1339; Edited by Barnhardt, Walter
A.; Contributing authors: Schwab, W. C.; Gayes, P. T.; Morton, R. A.;
Driscoll, N. W.; Baldwin, W. E.; Barnhardt, W. A.; Denny, J. F.; Harris, M.
S.; Katuna, M. P.; Putney, T. R.; Voulgaris, G.; Warner, J. C.; Wright, E. E.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/fs_2009_3046.jpg)

Year Published: 2009

### Fifty-Year Record of Glacier Change Reveals Shifting Climate in the

Pacific Northwest and Alaska, USA

Fifty years of U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) research on glacier change shows
recent dramatic shrinkage of glaciers in three climatic regions of the United
States. These long periods of record provide clues to the climate shifts that
may be driving glacier change. The USGS Benchmark Glacier Program began in
1957 as a result of research efforts...

View Citation __

Fifty-Year Record of Glacier Change Reveals Shifting Climate in the Pacific
Northwest and Alaska, USA; 2009; FS; 2009-3046; U.S. Geological Survey

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1997/1132/report-

thumb.jpg)

Year Published: 1997

### A strategy for monitoring glaciers

Glaciers are important features in the hydrologic cycle and affect the volume,
variability, and water quality of runoff. Assessing and predicting the effect
of glaciers on water resources require a monitoring program to provide basic
data for this understanding. The monitoring program of the U.S. Geological
Survey employs a nested approach whereby...

Fountain, Andrew G.; Krimmel, Robert M.; Trabant, Dennis C.

_Attribution:_ Alaska Science Center, Ecosystems

View Citation __

A strategy for monitoring glaciers; 1997; CIR; 1132; Fountain, Andrew G.;
Krimmel, Robert M.; Trabant, Dennis C.

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/thumbnails/fs11795.jpg)

Year Published: 1995

### Sea level change: lessons from the geologic record

Rising sea level is potentially one of the most serious impacts of climatic
change. Even a small sea level rise would have serious economic consequences
because it would cause extensive damage to the world's coastal regions. Sea
level can rise in the future because the ocean surface can expand due to
warming and because polar ice sheets and...

View Citation __

Sea level change: lessons from the geologic record; 1995; FS; 117-95; U.S.
Geological Survey

![Publication Thumbnail](https://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/70039226/report-thumb.jpg)

Year Published: 1995

### Glaciers: A water resource

Most Americans have never seen a glacier, and most would say that glaciers are
rare features found only in inaccessible, isolated wilderness mountains. Are
they really so rare? Or are they really potentially important sources of water
supply?

Meier, Mark; Post, Austin

View Citation __

Glaciers: A water resource; 1995; USGS Unnumbered Series; Meier, Mark; Post,
Austin

Filter Total Items: 9

Select Type

Select TopicEmployee in the NewsFeatured StoryNational News ReleaseScience
SnippetState News ReleaseTechnical Announcement

Select Location

Select LocationAlabamaAlaskaAmerican
SamoaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareDistrict of
ColumbiaFloridaGeorgiaGuamHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew
HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaNorthern
Mariana IslandsOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaPuerto RicoRhode IslandSouth
CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasU.S. Virgin
IslandsUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyoming

Year

Select Year20192018201720162015201420132012201120102009

Sort by Original SortRelease Date DescTitle AscTitle Desc

Apply Filter

Reset

![Flooding in California](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/san-diego-

fashion-valley-road-01072016-flood_0.JPG)

Date published: March 13, 2019

### New US Geological Survey-led Research Helps California Coastal Managers

Prioritize Planning and Mitigation Efforts Due to Rising Seas and Storms

New U.S. Geological Survey-led coastal modeling research presents state,
federal, and commercial entities with varying storm and sea level-rise
scenarios to assist with planning for future infrastructure and mitigation
needs along the California coast.

_Attribution:Natural Hazards, Coastal and Marine Hazards and Resources
Program, Pacific Coastal and Marine Science Center_

![This image shows the perimeter of Sperry Glacier in Glacier National Park in

1966,1998, 2005, and 2015. ](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/Graphic_series_Sperry20150925_7x9.jpg)

Date published: May 10, 2017

### Glaciers Rapidly Shrinking and Disappearing: 50 Years of Glacier Change

in Montana

The warming climate has dramatically reduced the size of 39 glaciers in
Montana since 1966, some by as much as 85 percent, according to data released
by the U.S. Geological Survey and Portland State University.

_Attribution:Land Resources, Ecosystems, Northwest, Northern Rocky Mountain
Science Center (NOROCK)_

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-

placeholder_0.png?c=5e77aef459261830cd6ce4930b863462)

Date published: October 3, 2016

### Rising Sea Levels, Coastal Development’s Effect on Gulf Coast Wetlands

As coastal development along the Gulf Coast continues to expand, tidal saline
wetlands could have difficulty adjusting to rising sea levels.

_Attribution:Land Resources, Ecosystems, Environmental Health, Water
Resources, Wetland and Aquatic Research Center_

![Image:  Black-footed Albatross with Chick](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/Black-

FootedAlbatrossWithChick_Wieteke_Holthuijzen_USGSvolunteer.JPG)

Date published: September 23, 2015

### Sea Level Rise and Storm Wave Flooding Threaten Seabirds

Islands used by tropical seabirds are highly vulnerable to sea level rise
according to a new study released today.

_Attribution:Pacific, Pacific Island Ecosystems Research Center_

![Image: Elevation Field Work at Bandon Marsh](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/CERCC_-1-.JPG?c=eddca51500ac23bffa2e032ee5d8a928)

Date published: August 14, 2015

### Study Shows Sea Level Rise to Threaten West Coast Tidal Wetlands Over the

Next 100 Years

The U.S. Geological Survey and Oregon State University released a report this
week examining Pacific Northwest tidal wetland vulnerability to sea level
rise. Scientists found that, while vulnerability varies from marsh to marsh,
most wetlands would likely be resilient to rising sea levels over the next
50-70 years.

_Attribution:Climate Adaptation Science Centers, Northwest, Northwest Climate
Adaptation Science Center, Western Ecological Research Center_

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-

placeholder_0.png?c=5e77aef459261830cd6ce4930b863462)

Date published: March 18, 2015

### From Icefield to Ocean - What Glacier Change Might Mean for the Future of

Alaska

Frozen bodies of ice cover nearly 10 percent of the state of Alaska, but the
influence of glaciers on the environment, tourism, fisheries, hydropower, and
other important Alaska resources is rarely discussed.

_Attribution:Climate Adaptation Science Centers, Alaska, Alaska Climate
Adaptation Science Center, Alaska Science Center_

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-

placeholder_0.png?c=5e77aef459261830cd6ce4930b863462)

Date published: December 9, 2013

### Communities of Southern Chesapeake Bay Find Sea Level Rise Heightened by

Sinking Land

Communities and coastal habitats in the southern Chesapeake Bay region face
increased flooding because, as seawater levels are rising in the bay, the land
surface is also sinking._ A new USGS report released today concludes that
intensive groundwater withdrawals are a major cause of the sinking land, or
'land subsidence', that contributes to flooding risks in the region.

_Attribution:Chesapeake Bay Activities_

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-

placeholder_0.png?c=5e77aef459261830cd6ce4930b863462)

Date published: June 24, 2012

### Sea Level Rise Accelerating in U.S. Atlantic Coast

Rates of sea level rise are increasing three-to-four times faster along
portions of the U.S. Atlantic Coast than globally, according to a new U.S.
Geological Survey report published in Nature Climate Change.

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_list_thumbnail/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-

placeholder_0.png?c=5e77aef459261830cd6ce4930b863462)

Date published: May 1, 2012

### Rising Groundwater Associated with Sea Level Rise Expected to Impact New

Haven

NEW HAVEN, Conn. – Basements of some local buildings and underground utilities
may be at risk of being inundated by rising groundwater by the end of the 21st
century due to projected rates of sea level rise for the area, according to a
preliminary study released today.

Filter Total Items: 16

Topics (field_topics)

Select TopicBiology and EcosystemsCitizen ScienceCoastsData, Tools, and
TechnologyEnergyEnvironmental HealthGeologyLand ResourcesMapping, Remote
Sensing, and Geospatial DataMineralsNatural HazardsOceansOtherPlanetary
ScienceWater

Select Location

Select LocationAlabamaAlaskaAmerican
SamoaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareDistrict of
ColumbiaFloridaGeorgiaGuamHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew
HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaNorthern
Mariana IslandsOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaPuerto RicoRhode IslandSouth
CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasU.S. Virgin
IslandsUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyoming

Year

Select
Year2019201820172016201520142013201220112010200920082007200620052004200320022001200019991998199719961995199419931992199119901989198819871986198519841983198219811980197919781977197619751974197319721971197019691968196719661965196419631962196119601959195819571956195519541953195219511950194919481947194619451944194319421941194019391938193719361935193419331932193119301929192819271926192519241923192219211920191919181917191619151914191319121911191019091908190719061905190419031902190119001899189818971896189518941893189218911890188918881887188618851884188318821881188018791878187718761875187418731872187118701869186818671866186518641863186218611860185918581857185618551854185318521851185018491848184718461845184418431842184118401839183818371836183518341833183218311830182918281827182618251824182318221821182018191818181718161815181418131812181118101809180818071806180518041803180218011800

Sort by Original SortRelease Date DescTitle AscTitle Desc

Apply Filter

Reset

__List __Grid

![The distribution of water on, in, and above the Earth](https://prd-

wret.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/Where-Is-Earths-Water-

Barcharts_0.jpg?c=8e6308d4c2c309a95f4e217a96ec9f2a)

March 31, 2019

### The distribution of water on, in, and above the Earth

**The World's Water - Distribution of Earth's Water**

The Earth is a watery place. But just how much water exists on, in, and above
our planet? About 71 percent of the Earth's surface is water-covered, and the
**_oceans_** hold about 96.5 percent

...

![Walrus Sea-Ice Habitats Melting Away](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/walrus_banner.gif)

January 9, 2017

### Walrus Sea-Ice Habitats Melting Away

Walrus Sea-Ice Habitats Melting Away

![Past and Future Impacts of Sea Level Rise on Coastal Habitats and

Species](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/langtimm1.png?c=6b882075d59f97932a3a3afa9a526807)

April 16, 2016

### Past and Future Impacts of Sea Level Rise on Coastal Habitats and Species

**Past and Future Impacts of Sea Level Rise on Coastal Habitats and Species**

![This is a glacier animation for Glacier National Park.](https://prd-

wret.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/glacier_animation.gif)

April 5, 2016

### Glacier Animation

The simulation below reflects the predicted exponential rise in atmospheric
CO2 concentrations, a 2xCO2 "global warming" scenario, with a concurrent
warming of 2-3 degrees centigrade (4-5 degrees Fahrenheit) by the year 2050.
In addition it assumes that precipitation, primarily in the form of rain, will
increase over the same time period about 10 percent (based on the

...

_Attribution:Northern Rocky Mountain Science Center (NOROCK)_

![](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/video/sep15thumb_0.jpg)

September 24, 2015

### PubTalk 9/2015 — Coral Reefs, Climate Change, and Atoll Sustainability

### _Will Micronesians become the U.S.'s first climate change refugees?_

**by Curt Storlazzi, USGS Research Geologist and Oceanographer**

        
                  * Sea level is rising, threatening low-lying atoll islands throughout the western Pacific Ocean
          * Climate change is degrading the coral reefs that atoll islands have developed upon, decreasing
        

...

![USGS scientists use a boat and geophysical equipment to record geological

and hydrological conditions in a coastal embayment. ](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/Cape%20Cod_Sea%20Level%20Rise_edited.jpg?c=86d8c67f95a5bc49e6b44c030649f8d2)

April 9, 2015

### Cape Cod Sea Level Rise

U. S. Geological Survey Scientists Carol Johnson, Eric White and Tim McCobb
prepare to deploy geophysical equipment in a coastal embayment April 9, 2015
in Falmouth, Massachusetts. This equipment will outline the geological
conditions under the water, which will give the scientists a better
understanding of the geology and hydrology of the sandy glacial deposits
underlying

...

![Iceberg on Lake Superior](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/2014_06_03_VinsonMark1_0.JPG)

June 3, 2014

### Iceberg on Lake Superior

An iceberg floating in Lake Superior, June 2014. Photographed from the R/V
Kiyi.

_Attribution:Great Lakes Science Center_

![coastal road and palm trees on a small flat island, with water waves from

the sea washing over the road](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/DSCN1868_mod.jpg?c=a49af0fb3173dc79e6f36b4ca6371b73)

March 31, 2014

### Wave-driven flooding and overwash on Roi-Namur Atoll

Wave-driven flooding and overwash on Roi-Namur Atoll, Republic of the Marshall
Islands

_Attribution:Natural Hazards, Coastal and Marine Hazards and Resources
Program, Pacific, Pacific Coastal and Marine Science Center_

![lone road lined by palm trees on a small flat island, with water from the

sea washing over the road](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/DSCN1841.JPG?c=da4a9dbce8f283c37551897fe839c2f8)

March 31, 2014

### Wave-driven flooding and overwash on Roi-Namur Atoll

Wave-driven flooding and overwash on Roi-Namur Atoll, Republic of the Marshall
Islands

_Attribution:Natural Hazards, Coastal and Marine Hazards and Resources
Program, Pacific, Pacific Coastal and Marine Science Center_

May 29, 2013

### Impacts of Melting Glaciers on Gulf of Alaska

For questions about this project, please contact the speaker, John Crusius at
jcrusius@usgs.gov, (206) 543-6978. The northern Gulf of Alaska (GoA) maintains
a productive ecosystem, with commercially important fisheries. Virtually all
of the many glaciers that line the northern GoA coast are retreating, yet the
impacts on the marine

...

![USGS](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/usgs-placeholder_1.png)

August 6, 2009

### The Cold Facts About Melting Glaciers

Most glaciers in Washington and Alaska are dramatically shrinking in response
to a warming climate.

USGS scientist Edward Josberger discusses research from the past 50 years to
measure changes in the mass (length and thickness) of three glaciers in Alaska
and Washington. These are the longest such records in North America and among
the longest in the world.

![Marine terrace San Clemente Island, California](https://prd-wret.s3-us-

west-2.amazonaws.com/assets/palladium/production/s3fs-

public/styles/content_grid/public/thumbnails/image/wss-banner-sea-level-

rise.jpg?c=64ece2a55c48aec5503fea8adeebbc6c)

April 23, 2006

### Seal Levels and Climate

**San Clemente Island, California:** "Stair-step" landscape of uplifted marine
terraces on western San Clemente Island. The lowest terrace, where the road
near the shore is visible, has been dated to 120,000 years by U-series
analysis of corals (Muhs and others, 2002).

        
                  * 1
          * 2
          * next ›
          * last »
        

## Explore More Science

        
                  * effects of climate change
          * snow and ice cover
          * atmospheric and climatic processes
          * Snow
          * Ice
          * polar
          * Land Resources
        

View All __

![Home](https://www.usgs.gov/sites/all/themes/usgs_palladium/logo.png)

        
                  * DOI Privacy Policy
          * Legal
          * Accessibility
          * Site Map
          * Contact USGS
        

Science

        
                  * Science Explorer
          * Mission Areas
          * Regions
          * Frequently Asked Questions
          * Education
        

Products

        
                  * Data and Tools
          * Maps
          * Publications
          * Software
          * Multimedia Gallery
          * Park Passes
          * USGS Library
        

News

        
                  * Featured Stories
          * News Releases
          * Science Snippets
          * Technical Announcements
          * Employees in the News
          * Get Our News
          * Media Contacts
          * I'm a Reporter
        

Connect

        
                  * Headquarters
          * Locations
          * Contact Us
          * Staff Profiles
          * Social Media
        

About

        
                  * About Us
          * Organization
          * Key Officials
          * Congressional
          * Budget
          * Opportunities
          * Doing Business
          * Emergency Management
          * Survey Manual
        

* * *
        
                  * U.S. Department of the Interior
          * DOI Inspector General
          * White House
          * E-Gov
          * No Fear Act
          * FOIA
        
          * Follow
          * _Twitter_
          * _Facebook_
          * _GitHub_
          * _Flickr_
          * _YouTube_
          * _Instagram_
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

