

Skip to main content

Environmental Defense Fund

        
                  * Careers
          * Offices
          * Contact us
          * For the media
        

Search:

Donate

## Breadcrumb

        
                  1. Home
          2. Our work
          3. Climate and energy
          4. Global initiatives
          5. Carbon markets
          6. How cap and trade works
        

# How cap and trade works

![](/themes/edf/images/transparent1px.png)
![](/sites/default/files/primary_images_hero_two_col/iStock-power-plant-with-

pollution---cap-and-trade-182513306-960x350.jpg)

Cap and trade reduces emissions, such as those from power plants, by setting a
limit on pollution and creating a market.

The best climate policy – environmentally and economically – limits emissions
and puts a price on them. Cap and trade is one way to do both.

It’s a system designed to reduce pollution in our atmosphere.

The **cap** on greenhouse gas emissions that drive global warming is a firm
limit on pollution. The cap gets stricter over time.

The **trade** part is a market for companies to buy and sell allowances that
let them emit only a certain amount, as supply and demand set the price.
Trading gives companies a strong incentive to save money by cutting emissions
in the most cost-effective ways.

### Caps limit harmful emissions

The government sets the cap across a given industry, or ideally the whole
economy. It also decides the penalties for violations.

Carbon dioxide and related pollutants that drive global warming are main
targets of such caps. Other pollutants that contribute to smog can also be
capped.

In carbon dioxide's case, the heat-trapping greenhouse gas mixes into the
upper atmosphere and has a global effect. Reducing emissions locally lowers
levels around the world.

### Companies are allowed to emit set amounts

The total amount of the cap is split into allowances, each permitting a
company to emit one ton of emissions. (You'd have to drive 2,400 miles,
roughly the distance between New York and Las Vegas, to emit that much carbon
dioxide.)

The government distributes the allowances to the companies, either for free or
through an auction.

The cap typically declines over time, providing a growing incentive for
industry and businesses to reduce their emissions more efficiently, while
keeping production costs down.

### Trading can lead to cuts in pollution sooner

Companies that cut their pollution faster can sell allowances to companies
that pollute more, or "bank" them for future use.

This market – the "trade" part of cap and trade – gives companies flexibility.
It increases the pool of available capital to make reductions, encourages
companies to cut pollution faster and rewards innovation.

> Cap and trade lets the market find the cheapest way to cut emissions.

>

> ![Nat Keohane](/sites/default/files/nat_keohane_48_x_48.jpg)

>

> Nathaniel Keohane, Vice President, Global Climate

Because there are only so many allowances available, total pollution drops as
the cap falls.

As companies use established techniques to lower emissions, such as adopting
energy-efficient technology, entrepreneurs see opportunity.

Ever wonder why you don't hear about acid rain anymore? Thank cap and trade,
which slashed levels of sulfur dioxide to solve the problem – at a fraction of
the projected cost.

### Cap and trade is lowering emissions globally

A market-based approach like cap and trade allows countries to make more
ambitious climate goals.

![enforcement officers in China](/sites/default/files/inline-

images/enforcement-officer-DSC00529-600x400.jpg)

Environmental enforcement officials, trained by EDF, conduct an on-site
inspection at a factory in China.

China, the world's largest greenhouse gas emitter, launched the initial phase
of a national carbon market in 2017 with help from EDF.

The new emissions trading system is expected to be the world’s largest,
dwarfing all existing programs, and is a central component of China’s strategy
to tackle climate pollution.

The national program builds on pilot emissions trading systems, which have
included elements of cap and trade and are already underway in seven cities
and provinces in China.

They cover more than 2,600 companies in regions with a population of more than
258 million.

In the European Union's Emissions Trading System, capped emissions from
stationary structures were 26 percent lower in 2016 than when the program
started in 2005.

In the United States, California’s climate policies have led to a steady
decline of the state's carbon dioxide pollution. The centerpiece is the cap-
and-trade program, which EDF has helped design and implement.

California's emissions from sources subject to the cap declined 8.8 percent
between the program’s launch in 2013 and 2016. Meanwhile, the state’s economy
is thriving.

Cap and trade makes even deeper cuts possible when countries cooperate, such
as the United States and Canada. California and Quebec connected their systems
in 2014, building a strong market that shows great potential.

## Act when it matters most

Every day **more than 60 people sign up** for news and alerts, to find out
when their support helps most. Will you join them? (Read our privacy policy.)

## Donate to support this work

$35

$50

#### Cap-and-trade experts

![Nathaniel

Keohane](/sites/default/files/styles/related_expert_sidebar_image/public/experts/nathaniel-

keohane.jpg?itok=C7Buponc)

**Nathaniel Keohane** Senior Vice President, Climate

Email Follow

* * *

![Dan J.

Dudek](/sites/default/files/styles/related_expert_sidebar_image/public/experts/Dan-

Dudek_G8J1369_287x377.jpg?itok=5L04QWlg)

**Dan J. Dudek** Vice President

Email

* * *

**See all climate experts »**

#### Policy resources

        
                  * Acid rain pollution solved using economics
          * The world's carbon markets
        

### Media contact

**Jennifer Andreassen** (202) 572-3387 (office)  
(202) 288-4867 (cell) EmailFollow

Share

Donate now

## Main navigation

        
                  * Our work
            * Climate and energy
              * Global initiatives
              * Clean energy
              * Oil and gas
              * Stronger laws and policies
            * Health
              * Cleaner air
              * Safer chemicals
            * Oceans
              * Overfishing: How bad is it?
              * Restoring fisheries
              * Fisheries finance
              * Work by region
            * Ecosystems
              * Sustainable agriculture
              * Wildlife protection
              * Coastal resilience
              * Western water
            * Where we work
              * International websites
          * How we get results
            * Science
              * Sensor technology
              * Our scientists
            * Economics
              * Case study: Acid rain
              * Case study: Energy markets
              * Research and partnerships
            * Fourth Wave: Innovation
              * Fourth Wave: A quick history
            * Partnerships
              * Business and industry
              * Collaborating with Walmart
              * Our experts
            * Nonpartisan policy
              * Case study: Delta recovery
              * Our experts
            * Our impact
              * Case study: McDonald's
              * Past achievements
          * How you can help
            * Take action
              * Sign up for updates
              * EPA in danger
            * Getting results together
              * Solutions newsletter
              * Become a member
              * Renew your membership
            * Make a donation
              * Our charity ratings
              * Honor someone special
            * More ways to give
              * Donor-Advised Funds
              * Workplace giving
              * Planned giving
            * Special giving circles
              * Catalyst Circle
              * Osprey Society
              * Leadership Team
              * Eco Partner
          * About us
            * Mission and values
              * Our story
              * Diversity
              * Strategic plan
            * 2018 annual report
              * Financial information
              * Previous annual reports
            * Our people
              * Board of trustees
              * Executive team
              * Q&A with Ilissa Ocko
            * Careers
              * Culture
              * Internships and fellowships
            * Our offices
              * Beijing
              * London
              * New York
              * San Francisco
              * Washington, D.C.
              * Complete list
          * News and blogs
            * EDF Voices blog
              * Economics
              * Innovation
              * Partnerships
              * Politics
              * Science
              * All posts
            * EDF blog network
              * Climate 411
              * EDF+Business
              * EDF Health
              * Energy Exchange
              * Growing Returns
              * Oceans blog: EDFish
            * For the media
            * Reports and publications
        

![EDF](/themes/edf/images/transparent1px.png)

#### About EDF

Contact us Offices International websites

#### Resources

Blogs Reports and publications Media contacts

#### Members

Become a member Visit MyEDF How you can help

#### Connect

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

About this site * Privacy policy

257 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10010  
Copyright (C) 2019 Environmental Defense Fund. All Rights Reserved.

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

