

Skip to main content

![libretexts_section_complete_photon_124.png](https://chem.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/85425/libretexts_section_complete_chem_sm_124.png?revision=1&size=bestfit&width=289&height=124)

![](https://stats.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/1873/Capture.PNG)![beyondbenign

logo for

Summit](https://chem.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/188135/15598593389258281.png?revision=3)

Catch us June 10th at the 2nd Annual Green Chemistry Commitment Summit (Reston
VA)

        
                  1. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/bio.png)Biology
          2. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/biz.png)Business
          3. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/chem.png)Chemistry
          4. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/eng.png)Engineering
          5. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/espanol.png)Español
          6. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/geo.png)Geosciences
          7. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/human.png)Humanities
          1. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/math.png)Mathematics
          2. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/med.png)Medicine
          3. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/phys.png)Physics
          4. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/socialsci.png)Social Sciences
          5. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/stats.png)Statistics
          6. ![](https://libretexts.org/img/LibreTexts/glyphs_blue/workforce.png)Workforce
        
          1. Periodic Table of the Elements
          2. Reference Tables
          3. Physical Constants
          4. Units and Conversions
          5. Organic Chemistry Glossary
        

Wed, 05 Jun 2019 18:49:04 GMT

Catalytic Converters

1381

{ }

Anonymous

2

false

false

[ "article:topic", "Catalytic Converter", "showtoc:no" ]

![Chemistry

LibreTexts](https://a.mtstatic.com/@public/production/site_4334/1474925093-logo.png)

        
                  1. Search site
        

Search Search

Go back to previous article

        
                  2.         1. Username
        

Password

Sign in

        
                    2. Sign in
              * Sign in 
              * Registration 
              * Forgot password
        

Expand/collapse global hierarchy

        
                  1. Home 
          2. Bookshelves 
          3. Physical & Theoretical Chemistry 
          4. Supplemental Modules (Physical and Theoretical Chemistry) 
          5. Kinetics 
          6. Case Studies: Kinetics
        

Expand/collapse global location

# Catalytic Converters

        
                  1. Last updated
        
          2. Save as PDF 
          3.     * Page ID
        1381
        
          1. Introduction
          2. Functions
          3. Dangers of pollutants
          4. Catalytic inhibition and destruction
          5. Thermodynamics of catalytic converters
          6. Catalytic converter theft
          7. Global Warming
          8. References
          9. Problems
          10. Contributors
        

A catalytic converter is a device used to reduce the emissions from an
internal combustion engine (used in most modern day automobiles and vehicles).
Not enough oxygen is available to oxidize the carbon fuel in these engines
completely into carbon dioxide and water; thus toxic by-products are produced.
Catalytic converters are used in exhaust systems to provide a site for the
oxidation and reduction of toxic by-products (like nitrogen oxides, carbon
monoxide, and hydrocarbons) of fuel into less hazardous substances such as
carbon dioxide, water vapor, and nitrogen gas.

## Introduction

Catalytic converters were first widely introduced in American production cars
in 1975 due to EPA regulations on toxic emissions reductions. The United
States Clean Air Act required a 75% decrease in emissions in all new model
vehicles after 1975, a decrease to be carried out with the use of catalytic
converters. Without catalytic converters, vehicles release hydrocarbons,
carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide. These gases are the largest source of
ground level ozone, which causes smog and is harmful to plant life. Catalytic
converters can also be found in generators, buses, trucks, and trains--almost
everything with an internal combustion engine has a form of catalytic
converter attached to its exhaust system.

A catalytic converter is a simple device that uses basic redox reactions to
reduce the pollutants a car makes. It converts around 98% of the harmful fumes
produced by a car engine into less harmful gases. It is composed of a metal
housing with a ceramic honeycomb-like interior with insulating layers. This
honeycomb interior has thin wall channels that are coated with a washcoat of
aluminum oxide. This coating is porous and increases the surface area,
allowing more reactions to take place and containing precious metals such as
platinum, rhodium, and palladium. No more than 4-9 grams of these precious
metals are used in a single converter.

The converter uses simple oxidation and reduction reactions to convert the
unwanted fumes. Recall that oxidation is the loss of electrons and that
reduction is the gaining of electrons. The precious metals mentioned earlier
promote the transfer of electrons and, in turn, the conversion of toxic fumes.

![Basic Catalytic Converter

\(2\).bmp](https://chem.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/8361/Basic_Catalytic_Converter_\(2\).bmp?revision=1&size=bestfit&width=533&height=314)

The last section of the converter controls the fuel-injection system. This
control system is aided by an oxygen sensor that monitors how much oxygen is
in the exhaust stream, and in turn tells the engine computer to adjust the
air-to-fuel ratio, keeping the catalytic converter running at the
stoichiometric point and near 100% efficiency.

## Functions

A three-way catalytic converter has three simultaneous functions:

        
                  1. Reduction of nitrogen oxides into elemental nitrogen and oxygen: \[NO_x \rightarrow N_x + O_x \]
          2. Oxidation of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide: \[CO + O_2 \rightarrow CO_2\]
          3. Oxidation of hydrocarbons into carbon dioxide and water: \[C_xH_{4x} + 2xO_2 \rightarrow xCO_2 + 2xH_2O \]
        

There are two types of "systems" running in a catalytic converter, "lean" and
"rich." When the system is running "lean," there is more oxygen than required,
and the reactions therefore favor the oxidation of carbon monoxide and
hydrocarbons (at the expense of the reduction of nitrogen oxides). On the
contrary, when the system is running "rich," there is more fuel than needed,
and the reactions favor the reduction of nitrogen oxides into elemental
nitrogen and oxygen (at the expense of the two oxidation reactions). With a
constant imbalance of the reactions, the system never achieves 100%
efficiency.

Note: converters can store "extra" oxygen in the exhaust stream for later use.
This storage usually occurs when the system is running lean; the gas is
released when there is not enough oxygen in the exhaust stream. The released
oxygen compensates for the lack of oxygen derived from NOx reduction, or when
there is hard acceleration and the air-to-fuel ratio system becomes rich
faster than the catalytic converter can adapt to it. In addition, the release
of the stored oxygen stimulates the the oxidation processes of CO and CxH4x​.

## Dangers of pollutants

Without the redox process to filter and convert the nitrogen oxides, carbon
monoxides, and hydrocarbons, the air quality (especially in large cities)
becomes harmful to the human being.

**Nitrogen oxides:** These compounds are of the same family as nitrogen
dioxide, nitric acid, nitrous oxide, nitrates, and nitric oxide. When NO x is
released into the air, it reacts, stimulated by sunlight, with organic
compounds in the air; the result is smog. Smog is a pollutant and has adverse
effects on children's lungs. NOx reacting with sulfur dioxide produces acid
rain, which is highly destructive to everything it lands on. Acid rain
corrodes cars, plants, buildings, national monuments and pollutes lakes and
streams to an acidity unsuitable for fish. NOx can also bind with ozone to
create biological mutations (such as smog), and reduce the transmission of
light.

![Health

Hazards.bmp](https://chem.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/8362/Health_Hazards.bmp?revision=1&size=bestfit&width=914&height=257)

**Carbon monoxide:** This is a harmful variant of a naturally occurring gas,
CO 2. Odorless and colorless, this gas does not have many useful functions in
everyday processes.

**Hydrocarbons:** Inhaling hydrocarbons from gasoline, household cleaners,
propellants, kerosene and other fuels can be fatal to children. Further
complications include central nervous system impairments and cardiovascular
problems.

## Catalytic inhibition and destruction

The catalytic converter is a sensitive device with precious metals coating the
inside. Without these metals, the redox reactions cannot occur. There are
several substances and chemicals that inhibit the catalytic converter.

        
                  1. Lead: Most vehicles run on unleaded gasoline, in which all the lead has been removed from the fuel. However, if lead is added to the fuel and is burned, it leaves a residue that coats the catalytic metals (Pt, Rh, Pd, and Au) and prevents contact with the exhaust fumes, which is necessary in performing the necessary redox reactions.
          2. Manganese and silicon: Manganese is primarily found in the organometallic compound MMT (methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl). MMT is a compound used in in the 1990's to increase fuel's octane rating (a higher octane rating indicates that the gas is less likely to combust, causing the engine to explode. This is important since higher performing engines have a high compression ratio, which would need a higher octane gas to complement the amount of compression in the engine), and has now been banned from commercial sale due to the EPA's regulations. Silicon can leak from the combustion chamber into the exhaust stream from the coolant inside the engine.
        

These contaminants prevent the catalytic converter from functioning properly.
However, this process could be reversed by running the engine at a high
temperature to increase the hot exhaust flow through the converter, melting or
liquefying some of the contaminants and removing them from the exhaust pipe.
This process does not work if the metal is coated with lead, because lead has
a high boiling point. If the lead poisoning is severe enough, the whole
converter is rendered useless and must be replaced.

## Thermodynamics of catalytic converters

Recall that thermodynamics predicts whether or not a reaction or process is
spontaneous under certain conditions, but not the rate of the process. The
redox reactions below occur slowly without a catalyst; even if the processes
are thermodynamically favorable, they cannot occur without proper energy. This
energy is the activation energy ((E_a) in the figure below) required to
overcome the initial energy barrier preventing the reaction. A catalyst aids
in the thermodynamic process by lowering the activation energy; the catalyst
itself does not produce a product, but it does affect the amount and the speed
at which the products are formed.

        
                  1. Reduction of nitrogen oxides into elemental nitrogen and oxygen: \[NO_x \rightarrow N_x + O_x \]
          2. Oxidation of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. \[CO + O_2 \rightarrow CO_2 \]
          3. Oxidation of hydrocarbons into carbon dioxide and water. \[C_xH_{4x} + 2xO_2 \rightarrow xCO_2 + 2xH_2O \]
        

![Activation

Energy.bmp](https://chem.libretexts.org/@api/deki/files/8359/Activation_Energy.bmp?revision=1&size=bestfit&width=609&height=444)

## Catalytic converter theft

Due to the precious metals in the coating of the inner ceramic structure, many
catalytic converters have been targeted for theft. The converter is the most
easily-accessible component because it lies on the outside and under the car.
A thief could easily slide under the car, saw the connecting tubes on each
end, and leave with the catalytic converter. Depending on the type and amount
of precious metals inside, a catalytic converter can be easily sold for $200
apiece.

## Global Warming

Although the catalytic converter has helped reduce toxic emissions from car
engines, it also has detrimental environmental effects. In the conversion of
hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide is produced. Carbon dioxide
is one of the most common greenhouse gases and contributes significantly to
global warming. Along with carbon dioxide, the converters sometimes rearrange
the nitrogen-oxygen compounds to form nitrous oxide. This is the same compound
used in laughing gas and as a speed enhancer in cars. As a greenhouse gas,
nitrous oxide is a 300 times more potent than carbon dioxide, and contributes
proportionally to global warming.

## References

        
                  1. Timberlake, Karen C. _Chemistry : An Introduction to General, Organic, and Biological Chemistry_. 10th ed. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall Higher Education, 2008.
          2. Petrucci, Ralph H., William S. Harwood, and Geoff E. Herring. _General Chemistry : Principles and Modern Applications_. 9th ed. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2006. _d Biological Chemistry_. 10th ed. Timberlake, Karen C. _Chemistry : An Introduction to General, Organic, and Biological Chmi_
        

## Problems

        
                  1. What are the potential hazards of the toxic substances emitted by a car without a catalytic converter?
          2. Which 3 redox reactions occur in a three-way catalytic converter?
          3. Does the catalytic converter run at 100% efficiency? Why or why not?
          4. How can catalytic converters be damaged or misused?
          5. Why are catalytic converters targeted for theft?![Edit section](../../../../skins/common/icons/icon-trans.gif)What ar
        

## Contributors![Edit section](../../../../skins/common/icons/icon-trans.gif)

        
                  * Avneet Kahlon, Tony Tang
        
          1. Back to top
          2.         * Case Studies: Kinetics
            * Chymotrypsin
        

# Recommended articles

        
                  1. There are no recommended articles.
        
          1. Article type
        Topic
        

Show TOC

        
                no
          2. Tags
        
            1. Catalytic Converter
        
          1. (C) Copyright 2019 Chemistry LibreTexts
          2. Powered by MindTouch ®
        

The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by MindTouch® and are supported by the
Department of Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable
Learning Solutions Program, and Merlot. We also acknowledge previous National
Science Foundation support under grant numbers 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Unless otherwise noted, LibreTexts content is licensed by CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.
Have questions or comments? For more information contact us at
info@libretexts.org or check out our status page at
https://status.libretexts.org.

![CSU ALS Logo](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/CSU_ALS.png) ![DOE

Logo.png](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/DOE.png) ![UC Davis

Logo](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/UCD.png) ![Merlot

Logo](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/Merlot.png) ![NSF

Logo.png](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/NSF.png) ![UC Davis

Library Logo](https://libretexts.org/img/sponsors/clear/UCD_Library.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

