

Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-
solutions.html

(C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National Geographic
Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

* * *

Photograph by Annie Griffiths, Nat Geo Image collection

Read Caption

A sunset lights a glacier in New Zealand's Fiordland National Park. Around the
world, many glaciers are melting quickly as the planet warms.

Photograph by Annie Griffiths, Nat Geo Image collection

Reference

# Global warming solutions, explained

## Humans have the solutions to address climate change. The question is: Do we

have the will?

3 Minute Read

* * *

By **Christina Nunez**

* * *

PUBLISHED January 24, 2019

The evidence that humans are causing climate change, with drastic consequences
for life on the planet, is overwhelming, but the question of what to do about
it remains controversial. Economics, sociology, and politics are all important
factors in planning for the future.

A global conversation that began with concern over warming has now turned to
the broader term climate change, preferred by scientists to describe the
complex shifts now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems. Climate
change encompasses not only rising average temperatures but also extreme
weather events, shifting wildlife populations and habitats, rising seas, and a
range of other impacts. All of these changes are emerging as humans continue
to add heat-trapping greenhouse gases to the atmosphere.

Countries around the world acknowledged the imperative to act on climate
change with the Paris Agreement in 2015, making pledges to reduce greenhouse
gas pollution. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which
synthesizes the scientific consensus on the issue, has set a goal of keeping
warming under 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 Fahrenheit) and pursuing an even lower
warming cap of 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit).

Both of those targets are in jeopardy. Major countries are already falling
behind on their pledges, according to a UN report issued at the end of 2018,
and emissions levels in 2030 need to be approximately 25 to 55 percent lower
than they were in 2017. Previous research suggests that even if countries do
meet their pledges to reduce emissions, those commitments won't be enough to
stave off severe warming.

Causes and Effects of Climate Change What causes climate change (also known as
global warming)? And what are the effects of climate change? Learn the human
impact and consequences of climate change for the environment, and our lives.

## **What can be done?**

Addressing climate change will require many solutions—there's no magic bullet.
Yet nearly all of these solutions exist today, and many of them hinge on
humans changing the way we behave, shifting the way we make and consume
energy. The required changes span technologies, behaviors, and policies that
encourage less waste and smarter use of our resources. For example,
improvements to energy efficiency and vehicle fuel economy, increases in wind
and solar power, biofuels from organic waste, setting a price on carbon, and
protecting forests are all potent ways to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide
and other gases trapping heat on the planet.

Scientists are also working on ways to sustainably produce hydrogen, most of
which is currently derived from natural gas, to feed zero-emission fuel cells
for transportation and electricity. Other efforts are aimed at building better
batteries to store renewable energy; engineering a smarter electric grid; and
capturing carbon dioxide from power plants and other sources with the goal of
storing it underground or turning it into valuable products such as gasoline.
Some people argue that nuclear power—despite concerns over safety, water use,
and toxic waste—should also be part of the solution, because nuclear plants
don't contribute any direct air pollution while operating.

While halting new greenhouse gas emissions is critical, scientists have also
emphasized that we need to extract existing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. More fanciful ideas for cooling the planet—so-called
“geoengineering” schemes such as spraying sunlight-reflecting aerosols into
the air or blocking the sun with a giant space mirror—have largely been
dismissed because they may pose more environmental risks than proven benefits.

But planting trees, restoring seagrasses, and boosting the use of agricultural
cover crops could help clean up significant amounts of carbon dioxide.
Restoring forests already chopped down in Brazil, for example, could draw
about 1.5 billion metric tons of CO2 out of the air, and a recent study
published by the National Academies of Science estimates the world’s forests
and farms could store 2.5 gigatons. Those are relatively modest numbers given
historic carbon emissions of 2.2 trillion metric tons, but every contribution
is needed to curtail the world’s current trajectory.

## Adapt or else

Communities around the world are already recognizing that adaptation must also
be part of the response to climate change. From flood-prone coastal towns to
regions facing increased droughts and fires, a new wave of initiatives focuses
on boosting resilience. Those include managing or preventing land erosion,
building microgrids and other energy systems built to withstand disruptions,
and designing buildings with rising sea levels in mind.

Recent books such as _Drawdown_ and _Designing Climate Solutions_ have
proposed bold and comprehensive yet simple plans for reversing our current
course. The ideas vary, but the message is consistent: We already have many of
the tools needed to address climate change. Some of the concepts are broad
ones that governments and businesses must implement, but many other ideas
involve changes that anyone can make—eating less meat, for example, or
rethinking your modes of transport.

"We have the technology today to rapidly move to a clean energy system," write
the authors of _Designing Climate Solutions_. "And the price of that future,
without counting environmental benefits, is about the same as that of a
carbon-intensive future."

Continue Reading

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

