

Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

        
                  * Tech
          * Finance
          * Politics
          * Strategy
          * Life
          * All
        

##### Tech

        
                    * Tech Insider
            * Media
            * Science
            * Transportation
        

##### Finance

        
                    * Finance
            * Markets Insider
            * Retail
            * Your Money
        

##### Politics

        
                    * Politics
            * Military & Defense
        

##### Strategy

        
                    * Strategy
            * Advertising
            * Careers
        

##### Life

        
                    * Life
            * Coupons
            * Entertainment
            * Insider Picks
            * Sports
        

##### Featured

        
                    * Better Capitalism
            * Embracing Disruption
            * Insider TV
        

##### Subscribe

        
                    * BI Intelligence
            * BI Prime
        

##### About BI

        
                    * About
            * Careers
            * Contact Us
            * Advertise
            * Contributors FAQ
            * Corporate
            * Corrections Policy
        

##### Follow BI

        
                    * Newsletters
            * Events
            * RSS
            * Facebook
            * Twitter
            * Instagram
            * YouTube
            * LinkedIn
        

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

        
                  * BUSINESS INSIDER
          * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
          * BI INTELLIGENCE
        

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

        
                  * BI Prime
          * Intelligence
        

Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

Edition

International Editions:

        
                  * United States US
        

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

        
                  * International INTL
          * Deutschland DE
          * Australia AUS
          * France FR
          * India IN
          * Italy IT
          * Japan JP
          * Malaysia MY
          * Netherlands NL
          * Nordic SE
          * Poland PL
          * Singapore SG
          * South Africa ZA
          * Spain ES
        

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click
to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating
different international options."

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

        
                  * BUSINESS INSIDER
          * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
          * BI INTELLIGENCE
        
          * Tech Enterprise  Science  advertising  Media  Transportation  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
          * Finance Markets Insider  Retail  Your Money  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
          * Politics Military & Defense  News  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
          * Strategy Careers  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
          * Life Entertainment  Travel  Sports  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
          * All
          * Coupons Target  Walmart  EBay  Nike  Container Store
        

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

        
                  * BUSINESS INSIDER
          * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
          * BI INTELLIGENCE
        

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera. * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights
reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

        
                  * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
          * Sitemap
          * Disclaimer
          * Commerce Policy
          * Coupons
          * Made in NYC
          * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
        

Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

# Scientists calculated a 'point of no return' for dealing with climate change

â€” and time is running out

Kevin Loria

Aug. 30, 2018, 8:00 AM

Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It symobilizes
a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the ability to send
an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn
icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon Two
crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or
dismiss a notification.

![uncharted territory

jungle](https://amp.businessinsider.com/images/5979f099b50ab1011c8b4585-750-562.jpg)The
world is approaching a "point of no return" for dealing with climate change.
AP / Ed Wray

        
                  * **The goal of the Paris Agreement was to ensure global temperatures didn't rise more than 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.**
          *  **If temperatures hit that point, we'll be more likely to see the worst projected effects of climate change, including rising seas, severe storms, extreme heat, drought, and fires.**
          *  **The world needs to transition to renewable energy fast if we don't want temperatures to rise that much, according to a new study.**
          *  **In that study, the authors calculated a " point of no return" for  acting on climate-- and it's soon.**
        

* * *

There's nothing mysterious about what it will take to limit climate change:
The world needs to transition away from fossil fuels towards renewable energy.

But the timing of that transition is extremely important.

According to a new study published in the journal Earth System Dynamics, we
could soon cross a point of no return. After that, it'll be almost impossible
to keep Earth's temperature from rising 2 degrees Celsius.

The goal of the Paris agreement was to cut emissions enough to keep the planet
from crossing that limit, since scientists have determined that more than 2
degrees of warming could have catastrophic effects.

The new study calculates that if the world's governments don't initiate a
transition to clean energy sources by 2035 -- meaning that the share of
renewables starts to grow by at least 2% each year -- we'll almost certainly
pass that point of no return.

The exact year could change, according to the researchers' model, if new
technology can remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere, or if we see
quicker growth in renewables. But no matter what, the deadline is coming soon.

"In our study we show that there are strict deadlines for taking climate
action," Henk Dijkstra, a professor at Utrecht University in the Netherlands
and one of the study authors, said in a statement. "We conclude that very
little time is left before the Paris targets [to limit global warming] become
infeasible."

Not hitting those targets makes the worst effects of climate change far more
likely. These include rising seas that could swamp coastal cities, searing
heat waves that would cause tens of thousands of deaths, drought, wildfires,
and extreme storms.

Flash floods in Oman cut off roads.Anita Di Chiara

## A warming world

By burning fossil fuels, we release carbon dioxide and other gases. Doing so
has already altered Earth's atmosphere in a way that has led it to trap more
heat from the sun. And global temperatures have crept up -- they've already
risen more than 1 degree C higher than in pre-industrial times.

The more greenhouse gases we pump into atmosphere, the more heat we trap. That
part of the equation is certain.

Skye Gould/Business Insider

As the study authors wrote, "nowadays, the question is not so much if but by
how much and how quickly the climate will change as a result of human
interference, whether this change will be smooth or bumpy."

Scientists have calculated how much warming will result from the release of
different amounts of carbon dioxide. The new study took those numbers and
combined them with projections of future emissions that will continue to rise
as nations develop and consume more energy.

Based on that model, the new study's authors figured out a potential "point of
no return": the year 2035, unless the share of renewables were to start
growing by 2% a year before then.

That's an ambitious number, considering that from the late 1990s to 2017 (in
about 20 years), the percentage of energy from renewables only grew a total of
3.6%.

Greenhouse gases make air pollution worse. Shutterstock/J Dennis

## Predicting the point of no return

The authors aren't saying there's one decisive point after which all hope is
lost.

If global energy use were to rise faster, the switch to renewables would have
to happen sooner.

On the other hand, if the share of renewables were to grow by 5% a year
instead of 2%, that could push the date back 10 years. The development of
negative emissions technology that could suck greenhouse gases out of the air
could also push back that no-return date. But even that would only give us six
to 10 extra years -- and the switch to renewables still would be required.

Regardless of these caveats, the study suggests that the clock is ticking, and
it's going to get harder to meet our goals the longer we delay.

Searing heat waves and drought are consequences of climate change that we're
already seeing. REUTERS/Stringer

## Uncertain consequences

In the study, the authors explain that it gets harder to predict climate
consequences and the world's response to them as the Earth's temperature gets
higher.

That's because research suggests that certain natural systems on the planet
could be activated by warming and consequently trigger further warming. A
recent paper that explained this concept: if those systems are triggered at 2
degrees, it said, that might cause temperatures to spike even higher
regardless of how we control emissions. The study dubbed this scenario
"hothouse Earth."

In that situation, Earth's average temperature could rise 4 or 5 degrees
Celsius above pre-industrial levels, leading to sea levels up to 200 feet
higher than they are now.

Because of that uncertainty, the paper's authors hope that establishing a
timeline for a potential point of no return will spur the world's leaders (and
voters) to act sooner rather than later.

"We hope that 'having a deadline' may stimulate the sense of urgency to act
for politicians and policy makers," Dijkstra said in a statement. "Very little
time is left."

### SEE ALSO: The world faces a future of floods, famine, and extreme heat â€”

hereâ€™s what itâ€™ll take to bounce back

### NOW WATCH: 6 major US cities could be underwater within 80 years â€” here

are the disturbing â€˜afterâ€™ images

More: Climate Change Global Warming Paris Agreement 2 degrees Celsius

        
                  * Emissions
          * Environment
        

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options.

### Popular

#### Jeff Bezos took the controls of some 'weirdly natural' giant robot hands

but could not solve the riddle of a Rubik's cube

### Popular

#### Paul Pierce confessed to a long-standing NBA conspiracy theory about his

infamous 'wheelchair injury' in the NBA Finals

### Popular

#### The riskiest vacation hot spots in the Caribbean, ranked

### Popular

#### Sorry, Apple's controversial $1,000 computer-screen stand isn't a rip-

off â€” it's a missed opportunity

### Popular

#### Jeff Bezos explains why he prefers people who 'are right a lot' and how

anyone can learn to be right a lot, too

Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an
open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play button
in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

Also check out: * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

        
                  * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
          * Sitemap
          * Disclaimer
          * Commerce Policy
          * Coupons
          * Made in NYC
          * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
        

Edition

International Editions:

        
                  * United States US
        

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

        
                  * International INTL
          * Deutschland DE
          * Australia AUS
          * France FR
          * India IN
          * Italy IT
          * Japan JP
          * Malaysia MY
          * Netherlands NL
          * Nordic SE
          * Poland PL
          * Singapore SG
          * South Africa ZA
          * Spain ES
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

