

# Greenpeace USA

        
                  * What We're Doing
        

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/GP0STQA8Z_Medium_res-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Power the resistance with a gift to Greenpeace.

donate

        
                    * Saving the Arctic
            * Protecting Forests
            * Fighting Global Warming
            * Protecting Our Oceans
            * Living Toxic-Free
            * Promoting Sustainable Food
            * Defending Democracy
        

Close X

        
                  * How It Works
        

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/11/GP0STQT80_Medium_res-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Protect Our Oceans, Not Oil Profits

Take Action

        
                    * Investigate
            * Connect
            * Act
        

Close X

        
                  * Get Involved
        

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/peoplevoil_1024-200x280-c-default.jpg)

### Say NO to Offshore Drilling

Take Action

        
                    * Donate
            * Volunteer
            * Membership FAQ
            * Take Action
            * Careers
            * Internships
            * Frontline
        

Close X

Give to Greenpeace

Monthly Single

        
                  * facebook
          * Twitter
          * YouTube
          * Instagram
        

Global Africa Arabic Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria
Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Czech Republic Denmark East Asia EU
Finland France Germany Greece Greenland Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia
International Israel Italy Japan Korea Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands New
Zealand Norway Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia
Slovenia Southeast Asia Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey UK USA

Donate

Menu

        
                  * About
          * Stories & Victories
          * News & Media
          * Research
          * Blog
          * Contact
        

Search icon

        
                  * What We're Doing
        
            * Saving the Arctic
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Global Warming
                * Oil Drilling
        
              * Stopping Offshore Drilling
              * Creating an Arctic Sanctuary
        
            * Protecting Forests
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Agribusiness
                * Illegal Logging
        
              * Solutions to Deforestation
              * Amazon
              * Boreal Forest
              * Congo Basin
              * Great Bear Rainforest
              * Indonesia
              * Our Voices Are Vital
        
            * Fighting Global Warming
        
              * Energy Issues
        
                * Coal
                * Oil
                * Fracking
                * Natural Gas
                * Nuclear Energy
        
              * 100% Renewable Energy
              * Keep It in the Ground
              * #ExxonKnew
        
                * Infographic: Exxon’s Long History of Climate Denial
        
              * Exposing Climate Deniers
        
                * PolluterWatch Site
                * Koch Industries
                * Koch-funded Climate Denial Front Groups
                * David H. Koch
                * Charles G. Koch
                * Bill Koch
        
              * Click Clean
              * Climate Science
        
                * Extreme Weather & Climate Change
        
              * Greenpeace v. Energy Transfer Partners: The Facts
        
            * Protecting Our Oceans
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Overfishing & Destructive Fishing
                * Commercial Whaling
                * Human Rights
                * Pollution & Climate Change
        
              * Ocean Wildlife Facts
              * Save the Whales
        
                * Threats: Commercial Whaling
                * Whale Facts
                * International Whaling Commission
                * Whaling Myths
                * Seismic & Sonar Testing
        
              * Sustainable Seafood
        
                * Tuna Shopping Guide
                * Sustainable Seafood Hub
        
              * Marine Reserves Now
              * Preventing Plastic Pollution
        
                * Key Facts About Plastic Pollution
                * Plastic Pollution FAQs
        
            * Living Toxic-Free
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Chemical Disasters
                * Industrial Pollution
        
              * Preventing Chemical Disasters
              * Green Electronics
              * Go PVC-Free
        
            * Promoting Sustainable Food
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Corporate Control
                * GMOs & Pesticides
                * More Meat
                * Support Small Farmers
        
              * An Eco-Farming Revolution
        
                * Say No to Industrial Agriculture
                * Buy Fresh Food
                * Eat More Plants
        
              * 12 Things You Can Do
              * Bees in Crisis
        
            * Defending Democracy
        
              * Issues & Threats
        
                * Money in Politics
                * Voting Rights
        
              * Kick Corporate Money Out of Politics
              * The Democracy Initiative
        
          * How It Works
        
            * Investigate
            * Connect
            * Act
        
          * Get Involved
        
            * Donate
            * Volunteer
            * Membership FAQ
            * Take Action
            * Careers
            * Internships
            * Frontline
        
          * About
          * Stories & Victories
          * News & Media
          * Research
          * Blog
          * Contact
        

Search icon

Global Africa Arabic Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria
Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Czech Republic Denmark East Asia EU
Finland France Germany Greece Greenland Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia
International Israel Italy Japan Korea Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands New
Zealand Norway Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia
Slovenia Southeast Asia Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey UK USA

        
                  * facebook
          * Twitter
          * YouTube
          * Instagram
        
          * What We're Doing
            * Saving the Arctic
              * Issues & Threats
                * Global Warming
                * Oil Drilling
              * Stopping Offshore Drilling
              * Creating an Arctic Sanctuary
            * Protecting Forests
              * Issues & Threats
                * Agribusiness
                * Illegal Logging
              * Solutions to Deforestation
              * Amazon
              * Boreal Forest
              * Congo Basin
              * Great Bear Rainforest
              * Indonesia
              * Our Voices Are Vital
            * Fighting Global Warming
              * Energy Issues
                * Coal
                * Oil
                * Fracking
                * Natural Gas
                * Nuclear Energy
              * 100% Renewable Energy
              * Keep It in the Ground
              * #ExxonKnew
                * Infographic: Exxon’s Long History of Climate Denial
              * Exposing Climate Deniers
                * PolluterWatch Site
                * Koch Industries
                * Koch-funded Climate Denial Front Groups
                * David H. Koch
                * Charles G. Koch
                * Bill Koch
              * Click Clean
              * Climate Science
                * Extreme Weather & Climate Change
              * Greenpeace v. Energy Transfer Partners: The Facts
            * Protecting Our Oceans
              * Issues & Threats
                * Overfishing & Destructive Fishing
                * Commercial Whaling
                * Human Rights
                * Pollution & Climate Change
              * Ocean Wildlife Facts
              * Save the Whales
                * Threats: Commercial Whaling
                * Whale Facts
                * International Whaling Commission
                * Whaling Myths
                * Seismic & Sonar Testing
              * Sustainable Seafood
                * Tuna Shopping Guide
                * Sustainable Seafood Hub
              * Marine Reserves Now
              * Preventing Plastic Pollution
                * Key Facts About Plastic Pollution
                * Plastic Pollution FAQs
            * Living Toxic-Free
              * Issues & Threats
                * Chemical Disasters
                * Industrial Pollution
              * Preventing Chemical Disasters
              * Green Electronics
              * Go PVC-Free
            * Promoting Sustainable Food
              * Issues & Threats
                * Corporate Control
                * GMOs & Pesticides
                * More Meat
                * Support Small Farmers
              * An Eco-Farming Revolution
                * Say No to Industrial Agriculture
                * Buy Fresh Food
                * Eat More Plants
              * 12 Things You Can Do
              * Bees in Crisis
            * Defending Democracy
              * Issues & Threats
                * Money in Politics
                * Voting Rights
              * Kick Corporate Money Out of Politics
              * The Democracy Initiative
          * How It Works
            * Investigate
            * Connect
            * Act
          * Get Involved
            * Donate
            * Volunteer
            * Membership FAQ
            * Take Action
            * Careers
            * Internships
            * Frontline
        

## What We're Doing

        
                  * facebook
          * Twitter
          * Email
        

We've been campaigning for a green and peaceful future for 40 years — and
we're not stopping now. It's time to rise up like never before and fight for
our climate and communities.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/48ea25f9-gp0stp9oe_medium_res_with_credit_line.jpg)

Colorful streamers float on the wind under the St. Johns Bridge where climbers
and kayaktivists attempt to prevent the Shell-leased icebreaker MSV Fennica
from joining Shell's Arctic oil drilling fleet. The Fennica came to Portland
to have a gash in its hull repaired after being damaged in the Arctic as Shell
prepared to explore for oil in the Chukchi Sea.

© Steve Dipaola / Greenpeace

We defend the natural world and promote peace by investigating, exposing, and
confronting environmental abuse, championing environmentally responsible
solutions, and advocating for the rights and well-being of all people.

With the election of Donald Trump to the presidency, the road to a green and
peaceful future became a lot steeper — but we're not backing down.

The threat Trump poses is nearly as enormous as climate change itself. He's
trying to move this country backwards while the rest of the world is moving
forward. When a force vows to undo all the progress the people in this country
have made, the only way to stop it is to unite in peaceful resistance. That's
why we're so glad to have you on our side.

It's going to take a huge effort, made possible by people all over the world.
That's where you come in. Our movement is inclusive, people-powered, and
collective, with people like you at the center.

Empowerment goes both ways. The weight and resources that we're able to devote
to pushing for a greener and more peaceful world are only made possible
because of the courage, heart, and the collective power of people like you.

## Our Campaigns

### Saving the Arctic

The Arctic is one of the most unique places on Earth. It spans eight
countries, is home to more than 13 million people and provides a habitat for
some of the most incredible wildlife on Earth. And now, it’s become a major
battleground in the fight to stop climate change and keep fossil fuels where
they belong — in the ground.

### Protecting Forests

Forests are crucial for the health and well-being of people, wildlife and our
planet. They’re home to roughly two-thirds of all land-dwelling plant and
animal species, critical lifelines for communities big and small, and one of
the last lines of defense against catastrophic climate change.

### Fighting Global Warming

If climate denial is going to be the default position of the Trump White
House, then relentless resistance will be the default position of the American
people. Our world is warmer than ever before, and people and wildlife are
already suffering the consequences. But that’s nothing compared to what we’re
leaving future generations if these trends continue. It’s time to stop the
destruction and build the clean energy future we deserve.

### Protecting Our Oceans

Healthy oceans are the life support system for our planet, providing 97
percent of the Earth’s livable habitat and a home to more than 700,000
species. The oceans are vital to human health as well, providing jobs,
enjoyment, and food to billions of people. Half of the oxygen we breathe is
generated by our oceans.

### Living Toxic-Free

We all deserve to live our lives free of the harmful impacts of toxic
chemicals. Whether by pushing for safer chemical plants or detoxing the
clothing we wear every day, we’re working towards a toxic-free future for all.

### Promoting Sustainable Agriculture

Agriculture should work with our natural environment, not against it. We all
deserve food that’s nutritious, delicious, and healthy — both for people and
the planet. That’s not the reality we live in today, but it can be.

### Defending Democracy

The most powerful force on the planet is people power. It’s stronger than any
government and any climate-denying, white supremacist, xenophobic president —
but only if we act. Now more than ever, we must unite as a movement against a
Trump presidency that means more fossil fuel corruption and less protection
for people and the planet.

### Learn more about how we're fighting for a green and peaceful future at the

links below.

## Learn More

        
                  * ![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/GP0STO7P6_PressMedia-e1438624867906-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## How It Works

        
                  * ![Photo by Steve Morgan / Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/arctic-oil-rig-e1493759550752-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Saving the Arctic

        
                  * ![Moose in Alaska's Boreal Forest](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/GP0370R_Medium_res-e1495488095330-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Protecting Forests

        
                  * ![Defend the Amazon Reef Protest \(Global Day of Action\) in Maranhão, BrazilProtesto em defesa aos Corais da Amazônia \(Dia de Ação Global\) no Maranhão](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/GP0STQT80_Medium_res-e1500580173462-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Fighting Global Warming

        
                  * ![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GP0STOE38_Medium_res-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Protecting Our Oceans

        
                  * ![Girl with Respiratory Problems in Louisiana](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/GP0AL1_Web_size_with_credit_line-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Living Toxic-Free

        
                  * ![Sustainable Agriculture \(Oranges\)](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/17626020750_3b554bedc5_k-e1435260099828-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Promoting Sustainable Food

        
                  * ![RESIST at the Peoples Climate March](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/resist-peoples-climate_full-e1500592709191-150x150-c-default.jpg)
        

## Defending Democracy

## Take Action

        
                  * ### Demand big corporations do their part to end plastic pollution!
        

take action

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/GP0STR221_Medium_res-340x330-c-default.jpg)

        
                  * ### Protect Our Oceans, Not Oil Profits
        

Take Action

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-

content/uploads/2017/11/GP0STQT80_Medium_res-340x330-c-default.jpg)

## We Need Your Voice. Join Us!

## Want to learn more about tax-deductible giving, donating stock and estate

planning?

Visit Greenpeace Fund, a nonprofit, 501(c)(3) charitable entity created to
increase public awareness and understanding of environmental issues through
research, the media and educational programs.

Greenpeace

702 H Street, NW, STE 300, Washington, D.C. 20001 | 1-800-722-6995

Take action Donate

        
                  * What We’re Doing
            * Saving the Arctic
            * Protecting Forests
            * Fighting Global Warming
            * Protecting Our Oceans
            * Living Toxic-Free
            * Promoting Sustainable Food
            * Defending Democracy
          * How It Works
            * Investigate
            * Connect
            * Act
          * Get Involved
            * Make a Donation
            * Take Action
            * Volunteer
            * Frontline
          * About
            * Board Members
            * Leadership
            * Issue Experts
            * Careers
            * Internship Opportunities
          * News & Media
            * Photos & Videos
            * News Releases
            * Media Contacts
            * Publications
            * Blog
        
          * Stories & Victories 
          * Research
          * Contact
          * facebook
          * Twitter
          * YouTube
          * Instagram
        
          * Copyright
          * Privacy Policy
        

Other Greenpeace USA Sites & Blogs Tuna Secrets Bering Sea Canyons Polluter
Watch

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/GP_CL_HP-

Assets_0519_Lightbox_720x375-720x375-c-default.jpg)

It's here! The Greenpeace #Climate2020 Candidate Scorecard

view scorecard

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

