

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0e553796583c3715187e614a9d81cebb?s=100&d=mm&r=g)

Chris Lang

## Published

## 1 February 2019

Skip to content

        
                  * REDD in the news
          * About REDD-Monitor
          * Looking for something?
          * REDD: An introduction
          * Contact
        

![](https://i2.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-121855_1259x1052_scrot.png?fit=700%2C350&ssl=1)

## Chris Lang in Uncategorized | 1 February 2019

# Climate breakdown: Forests and soils are reaching the limit of CO2

absorption

![Tweet about this on Twitter](https://i2.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/twitter.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Twitter

![Share on Facebook](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/facebook.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Facebook

![Share on LinkedIn](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/linkedin.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Linkedin

Every year, the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases.
The CO2 concentration currently stands at 411.36 parts per million. In 2019,
the UK Met Office predicts that the increase in CO2 in the atmosphere will be
larger than in 2018. The increase in 2019 is likely to be one of the largest
in 62 years of measurements.

Professor Richard Betts of the Met Office Hadley Centre explains the predicted
increase as follows:

> _“Since 1958, monitoring at the Mauna Loa observatory in Hawaii has
registered around a 30 per cent increase in the concentration of carbon-
dioxide in the atmosphere. This is caused by emissions from fossil fuels,
deforestation and cement production, and the increase would have been even
larger if it were not for natural carbon sinks which soak up some of the
excess CO 2. This year we expect these carbon sinks to be relatively weak, so
the impact of record high human-caused emissions will be larger than last
year.”_

The reason that the Met Office anticipates that carbon sinks will be
"relatively weak" this year is because the tropical Pacific will be warmer
than usual. The Met Office states that, "In years with a warmer tropical
Pacific, many regions become warmer and drier, which limits the ability of
plants to grow and absorb CO2."

Currently, the oceans and forests absorb about half of all CO2 emissions
caused by human activities. Clearly, we cannot continue our current rates of
burning fossil fuels, clearing forests, and building with concrete. We also
cannot rely on forests to continue absorbing our greenhouse gas emissions.

### Soil moisture and carbon uptake

Last week, a study published in _Nature_ showed that vegetation may not be
able to continue absorbing these emissions.

The paper is titled, "Large influence of soil moisture on long-term
terrestrial carbon uptake”, and was written by Julia K. Green (Department of
Earth and Environmental Engineering, Columbia University), Sonia I.
Seneviratne (Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH Zurich), Alexis
M. Berg (Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton
University), Kirsten L. Findell (Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory,
Princeton), Stefan Hagemann (Institute of Coastal Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum  
Geesthacht), David M. Lawrence (Climate and Global Dynamics Laboratory,
Terrestrial Sciences, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder) and
Pierre Gentine (Department of Earth and Environmental Engineering, Columbia
University, and The Earth Institute, Columbia University).

Pierre Gentine, associate professor of earth and environmental engineering at
Columbia University and affiliated with the Earth Institute led the study. In
a press statement, he said that,

> _" It is unclear … whether the land can continue to uptake anthropogenic
emissions at the current rates. Should the land reach a maximum carbon uptake
rate, global warming could accelerate, with important consequences for people
and the environment. This means that we all really need to act now to avoid
greater consequences of climate change.”_

When the soil is dry, plants are stressed and growth is slower. As the global
climate warms, droughts in the tropics are becoming more common.

Gentine worked with his PhD student, Julia Green, aiming to understand how
droughts, floods, and long-term drying trends were affecting the capacity of
terrestrial carbon sinks, including forests, to absorb CO2 emissions.

### "This is a big deal!"

Gentine and Green analysed net biome productivity (NBP) that the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change defines as the net gain or loss of
carbon from a region. They used data from four Earth System Models from the
Global Land Atmosphere Coupling Experiment—Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project experiments.

They found that soil moisture had a dramatic impact on the amount of carbon
absorbed. Green said that,

> _“We saw that the value of NBP, in this instance a net gain of carbon on the
land surface, would actually be almost twice as high if it weren 't for these
changes (variability and trend) in soil moisture.

>

> “This is a big deal! If soil moisture continues to reduce NBP at the current
rate, and the rate of carbon uptake by the land starts to decrease by the
middle of this century—as we found in the models—we could potentially see a
large increase in the concentration of atmospheric CO2 and a corresponding
rise in the effects of global warming and climate change.”_

REDD-Monitor has written many posts about the dangers of relying on forests to
offset emissions from burning fossil fuels. As the climate worsens, forests
are becoming an extremely unstable store of carbon. Reducing deforestation is
urgently needed. But to address climate breakdown (and to prevent forests
going up in smoke) we have to leave fossil fuels underground.

The following links are to posts on REDD-Monitor based on what climate
scientists have said over the past 10 years about the impact of the changing
climate on tropical forests:

![](https://i2.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-110355_1116x692_scrot.png?resize=700%2C170)

![](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-111627_1116x692_scrot.png?resize=700%2C172)

![](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-113205_1116x692_scrot.png?resize=700%2C176)

![](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-114001_1116x692_scrot.png?resize=700%2C178)

![](https://i0.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-01-114638_1116x692_scrot.png?resize=700%2C175)

![Tweet about this on Twitter](https://i2.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/twitter.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Twitter

![Share on Facebook](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/facebook.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Facebook

![Share on LinkedIn](https://i1.wp.com/redd-monitor.org/wp-

content/plugins/simple-share-buttons-

adder/buttons/somacro/linkedin.png?w=700&ssl=1)

Linkedin

### Like this:

Like Loading...

### _Related posts_

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0e553796583c3715187e614a9d81cebb?s=100&d=mm&r=g)

Chris Lang

## Published

## 1 February 2019

__Write a Comment

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

        
                  * Related Content by Tag
          * Deforestation
        

Search

# REDDisms:

"For 11 months, they enjoyed nice air from Indonesia and they never thanked
us. They have suffered because of the haze for one month and they get upset."

-- Jusuf Kalla, Indonesia's Vice President, March 2015

# Subscribe via Email

Enter your email address to receive notifications of new posts by email

Email Address

Subscribe

# Recent comments

        
                  * Chris Lang on ClearView Partnership Ltd: The most incompetent carbon credit boiler room so far?
          * Chris Lang on ClearView Partnership Ltd: The most incompetent carbon credit boiler room so far?
          * Gary Kennedy on ClearView Partnership Ltd: The most incompetent carbon credit boiler room so far?
          * Sheila Smith on Renwick Haddow pleads guilty to involvement in "the fraudulent scheme related to Bar Works". Sam Aura pleads not guilty
          * Jan Novak on Bar Works: The return of Renwick Haddow
        

Independent Publisher empowered by WordPress

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

