

Skip to main content

![Lumen](https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-sociology/wp-

content/themes/bombadil/assets/images/LumenOnDark-150x69.png)

# Boundless Sociology

### Stratification, Inequality, and Social Class in the U.S.

Search for:

## The Class Structure in the U.S.

## Class Structure in the U.S.

American society is stratified into social classes based on wealth, income,
educational attainment, occupation, and social networks.

### Learning Objectives

Discuss America’s class structure and its relation to the concept of the
"American Dream"

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * There are competing models for thinking about social classes in the U.S. — most Americans recognize a three-tier structure that includes the upper, middle, and lower classes, but variations delineate an upper-middle class and a working class.
          * High income earners likely are substantially educated, have high- status occupations, and maintain powerful social networks.
          * According to the "American Dream," American society is meritocratic and class is achievement-based. In other words, one's membership in a particular social class is based on educational and career accomplishments.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **social network** : The web of a person's social, family, and business contacts, who provide material and social resources and opportunities.
          * **The American Dream** : The belief that with hard work, courage, and determination, anyone can prosper and achieve success.
          * **Corporate Elite** : A class of high-salaried stockholders, such as corporate CEOs, who do not necessarily have inherited privilege but have achieved high status through their careers.
        

Most social scientists in the U.S. agree that society is stratified into
social classes. Social classes are hierarchical groupings of individuals that
are usually based on wealth, educational attainment, occupation, income, or
membership in a subculture or social network. Social class in the United
States is a controversial issue, having many competing definitions, models,
and even disagreements over its very existence. Many Americans recognize a
simple three-tier model that includes the upper class, the middle class, and
the lower or working class. Some social scientists have proposed more complex
models that may include as many as a dozen class levels. Meanwhile, some
scholars deny the very existence of discrete social classes in American
society. In spite of debate, most social scientists do agree that in the U.S.
people are hierarchically ranked in a social class structure.

### Models of U.S. Social Classes

A team of sociologists recently posited that there are six social classes in
America. In this model, the upper class (3% of the population ) is divided
into upper-upper class (1% of the U.S. population, earning hundreds of
millions to billions per year) and the lower-upper class (2%, earning millions
per year). The middle class (40%) is divided into upper-middle class (14%,
earning $76,000 or more per year) and the lower-middle class (26%, earning
$46,000 to $75,000 per year). The working class (30%) earns $19,000 to $45,000
per year. The lower class (27%) is divided into working poor (13%, earning
$9000 to 18,000 per year) and underclass (14%, earning under $9000 per year).
This model has gained traction as a tool for thinking about social classes in
America, but it does not fully account for variations in status based on non-
economic factors, such as education and occupational prestige. This critique
is somewhat mitigated by the fact that income is often closely aligned with
other indicators of status; for example, those with high incomes likely have
substantial education, high status occupations, and powerful social networks.

![image](https://textimgs.s3.amazonaws.com/boundless-sociology/class-

us.svg#fixme)

**United States Social Classes** : While social scientists offer competing
models of class structure, most agree that society is stratified by
occupation, income, and educational attainment.

A commonly used model for thinking about social classes in the U.S. attributes
the following general characteristics to each tier: the upper class has vast
accumulated wealth and significant control over corporations and political
institutions, and their privilege is usually inherited; the corporate elite
consists of high-salaried stockholders, such as corporate CEOs, who did not
necessarily inherit privilege but have achieved high status through their
careers; the upper-middle class consists of highly educated salaried
professionals whose occupations are held in high esteem, such as lawyers,
engineers, and professors; the middle class (the most vaguely defined and
largest social class) is generally thought to include people in mid-level
managerial positions or relatively low status professional positions, such as
high school teachers and small business owners; the working class generally
refers to those without college degrees who do low level service work, such as
working as a sales clerk or housekeeper, and includes most people whose
incomes fall below the poverty line. In the above outline of social class,
status clearly depends not only on income, but also occupational prestige and
educational attainment.

### Debates over the Existence and Significance of U.S. Social Classes

According to the "American Dream," American society is meritocratic and class
is achievement-based. In other words, membership in a particular social class
is based on educational and career accomplishments. Many sociologists dispute
the existence of such class mobility and point to the ways in which social
class is inherited. For example, a son or daughter of a wealthy individual may
carry a higher status and different cultural connotations than a member of the
nouveau riche ("new money"). Likewise, being born into a particular social
class may confer advantages or disadvantages that increase the likelihood that
an adult will remain in the social class into which they were born.

Social theorists who dispute the existence of social classes in the U.S. tend
to argue that society is stratified along a continuous gradation, rather than
into delineated categories. In other words, there is inequality in America,
with some people attaining higher status and higher standards of living than
others. But there is no clear place to draw a line separating one status group
from the next. Whether one ascribes to the view that classes are discrete
groups or levels along a continuum, it is important to remember that all
social classes in the United States, except the upper class, consist of tens
of millions of people. Thus social classes form social groups so large that
they feature considerable internal diversity and any statement regarding a
given social class' culture should be seen as a broad generalization.

## The Upper Class

The American upper class is the highest socioeconomic bracket in the social
hierarchy and is defined by its members' great wealth and power.

### Learning Objectives

Discuss the most important characteristics of the upper class in the U.S.

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * Members of the upper class accumulate wealth through investments and capital gains, rather than through annual salaries.
          * Households with net worths of $1 million or more may be identified as members of the upper-most socioeconomic demographic, depending on the class model used.
          * Sociologist Leonard Beeghley asserts that all households with a net worth of $1 million or more are considered "rich. " He divides the rich into two sub- groups: the rich and the super-rich.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **investment** : The expenditure of capital in expectation of deriving income or profit from its use.
          * **capital gain** : An increase in the value of a capital asset, such as stock or real estate.
        

The American upper class refers to the "top layer," or highest socioeconomic
bracket, of society in the United States. This social class is most commonly
described as those with great wealth and power, and may also be referred to as
the capitalist class, or simply as "the rich. " People in this class commonly
have immense influence in the nation's political and economic institutions as
well as in the media.

Many politicians, heirs to fortunes, top business executives such as CEOs,
successful venture capitalists, and celebrities are considered members of the
upper class. Some prominent and high-rung professionals may also be included
if they attain great influence and wealth. The main distinguishing feature of
this class is their source of income. While the vast majority of people and
households derive their income from salaries, those in the upper class derive
their income primarily from investments and capital gains.

Households with a net worth of $1 million or more may be identified as members
of the upper-most socioeconomic demographic, depending on the class model
used. While most contemporary sociologists estimate that only 1% of households
are members of the upper class, sociologist Leonard Beeghley asserts that all
households with a net worth of $1 million or more are considered "rich. " He
divides the rich into two sub-groups: the rich and the super-rich. The rich
constitute roughly 5% of U.S. households and their wealth is largely in the
form of home equity. Other contemporary sociologists, such as Dennis Gilbert,
argue that this group is not part of the upper class but rather part of the
upper middle class, as its standard of living is largely derived from
occupation-generated income and its affluence falls far short of that attained
by the top percentile. The super-rich, according to Beeghley, are those able
to live off their wealth without depending on occupation-derived income. This
demographic constitutes roughly 0.9% of American households. Beeghley's
definition of the super-rich is congruent with the definition of upper class
employed by most other sociologists. The top.01% of the population, with an
annual income of $9.5 million or more, received 5% of the income of the United
States in 2007. These 15,000 families have been characterized as the "richest
of the rich. "

## The Upper Middle Class

The upper-middle class refers to people within the middle class that have high
educational attainment, high salaries, and high status jobs.

### Learning Objectives

Identify the central characteristics of the upper-middle class in the U.S.

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * Members of the upper-middle class have substantially less wealth and prestige than the upper class, but a higher standard of living than the lower-middle class or working class.
          * The U.S. upper-middle class consists mostly of white-collar professionals who have a high degree of autonomy in their work. The most common professions of the upper-middle class tend to center on conceptualizing, consulting, and instruction.
          * In addition to having autonomy in their work, above-average incomes, and advanced educations, the upper middle class also tends to be powerful; members are influential in setting trends and shaping public opinion.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **educational attainment** : Educational attainment is a term commonly used by statisticians to refer to the highest degree of education an individual has completed.
          * **salaried professionals** : White-collar employees whose work is largely self-directed and is compensated with an annual salary, rather than an hourly wage.
        

Sociologists use the term "upper-middle class" to refer to the social group
consisting of higher-status members of the middle class. This is in contrast
to the term "lower-middle class," which is used for the group at the opposite
end of the middle class stratum, and to the broader term "middle class. "
There is considerable debate as to how to define the upper-middle class.
According to the rubric laid out by sociologist Max Weber, the upper-middle
class consists of well-educated professionals with graduate degrees and
comfortable incomes.

In 1951, sociologist C. Wright Mills conducted one of first major studies of
the middle class in America. According to his definition, the middle class
consists of an upper-middle class, made up of professionals distinguished by
exceptionally high educational attainment and high economic security; and a
lower-middle class, consisting of semi-professionals. While the groups
overlap, differences between those at the center of both groups are
considerable.

Among modern sociologists, the American upper-middle class is defined using
income, education, and occupation as primary indicators. There is some debate
over what exactly the term "upper-middle class" means, but in academic models,
the term generally applies to highly educated, salaried professionals whose
work is largely self-directed. The U.S. upper-middle class consists mostly of
white-collar professionals who have a high degree of autonomy in their work.
The most common professions of the upper-middle class tend to center on
conceptualizing, consulting, and instruction. They include such occupations as
lawyer, physician, dentist, engineer, professor, architect, civil service
executive, and civilian contractor. Many members of the upper-middle class
have graduate degrees, such as law, business, or medical degrees, which are
often required for professional occupations. Educational attainment is a
distinguishing feature of the upper-middle class. Additionally, household
incomes in the upper-middle class commonly exceed $100,000, with some smaller
one-income earners earning incomes in the high 5-figure range.

In addition to autonomy in their work, above-average incomes, and advanced
educations, the upper middle class also tends to be powerful; members are
influential in setting trends and shaping public opinion. Moreover, members of
the upper-middle class are generally more economically secure than their
lower-middle class counterparts. Holding advanced degrees and high status in
corporations and institutions tends to insulate the upper-middle class from
economic downturns. Members of this class are likely to be in the top income
quintile, or the top 20% of the economic hierarchy.

![image](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images/wp-

content/uploads/sites/1988/2017/05/31175847/campus-spring.jpeg)

**University Campus** : Advanced education is one of the most distinguishing
features of the upper-middle class.

## The Lower Middle Class

The lower-middle class are those with some education and comfortable salaries,
but with socioeconomic statuses below the upper-middle class.

### Learning Objectives

Discuss the differences between the lower and upper-middle class

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * The lower-middle class, also sometimes simply referred to as "middle class," includes roughly one third of U.S. households, and is thought to be growing.
          * Individuals in the lower-middle class tend to hold low status professional or white collar jobs, such as school teacher, nurse, or paralegal.
          * The lower-middle class is among the largest social classes, rivaled only by the working class, and it is thought to be growing.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **college education** : Education beyond secondary school, usually culminating in a bachelor's degree and serving as a necessary credential for middle class occupations.
          * **White Collar** : Describes a person who performs professional, managerial, or administrative work for a salary.
          * **professional** : A person whose occupation is highly skilled, salaried, and requires high educational attainment.
        

In developed nations across the world, the lower-middle class is a sub-
division of the middle class that refers to households and individuals who are
somewhat educated and usually stably employed, but who have not attained the
education, occupational prestige, or income of the upper-middle class.

In American society, the middle class is often divided into the lower-middle
class and upper-middle class. The lower-middle class (also sometimes simply
referred to as the middle class) consists of roughly one third of
households—it is roughly twice as large as the upper-middle and upper classes.
Lower-middle class individuals commonly have some college education or a
bachelor's degree and earn a comfortable living. The lower-middle class is
among the largest social classes, rivaled only by the working class, and it is
thought to be growing.

Individuals in the lower-middle class tend to hold low status professional or
white collar jobs, such as school teacher, nurse, or paralegal. These types of
occupations usually require some education but generally do not require a
graduate degree. Lower-middle class occupations usually provide comfortable
salaries, but put individuals beneath the top third of incomes.

![image](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images/wp-

content/uploads/sites/1988/2017/05/31175849/ndorf-2c-jp-mit-dorflehrer.jpeg)

**Elementary School Teacher** : Primary school teachers are generally
considered lower-middle class. They usually hold college degrees, but often do
not hold graduate degrees; they make comfortable incomes, but have low
accumulated wealth; their work is largely self-directed, but is not high
status.

According to some class models the lower middle class is located roughly
between the 52nd and 84th percentile of society. In terms of personal income
distribution in 2005, that would mean gross annual personal incomes from about
$32,500 to $60,000. Since 42% of all households had two income earners, with
the majority of those in the top 40% of gross income, household income figures
would be significantly higher, ranging from roughly $50,000 to $100,000
annually. In terms of educational attainment, 27% of persons had a bachelor's
degree or higher. If the upper middle and upper class combined are to
constitute 16% of the population, it becomes clear that some of those in the
lower middle class boast college degrees or some college education.

## The Working Class

The working class consists of individuals and households with low educational
attainment, low status occupations, and below average incomes.

### Learning Objectives

Explain how differences in class culture may affect working-class students who
enter the post-secondary education system

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * Members of the working class usually have a high school diploma or some college education, and may work in low-skilled occupations like retail sales or manual labor.
          * Due to differences between middle and working-class cultures, working-class college students may face "culture shock" upon entering the post-secondary education system, with its "middle class" culture.
          * Working classes are mainly found in industrialized economies and in the urban areas of non-industrialized economies.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **working class** : The social class of those who perform physical or low-skilled work for a living, as opposed to the professional or middle class, the upper class, or the upper middle class.
          * **Blue Collar** : Describes working-class occupations, especially those involving manual labor.
          * **manual labor** : Any work done by hand; usually implying it is unskilled or physically demanding.
        

Working class is a term used in the social sciences and in ordinary
conversation to describe those employed in lower tier jobs (as measured by
skill, education, and income), often extending to those who are unemployed or
otherwise earning below-average incomes. Working classes are mainly found in
industrialized economies and in the urban areas of non-industrialized
economies.

In the United States, the parameters of the working class remain vaguely
defined and are contentious. Since many members of the working class, as
defined by academic models, are often identified in the vernacular as being
middle class, there is considerable ambiguity over the term's meaning. In the
class models devised by sociologists, the working class comprises between 30
percent and 35 percent of the population, roughly the same percentage as the
lower middle class. Those in the working class are commonly employed in low-
skilled occupations, including clerical and retail positions and blue collar
or manual labor occupations. Low-level, white-collar employees are sometimes
included in this class, such as secretaries and call center employees.

Education, for example, can pose an especially intransigent barrier in the
United States. Members of the working class commonly have only a high school
diploma, although some may have minimal college courses to their credit as
well. Due to differences between middle and working-class cultures, working-
class college students may face "culture shock" upon entering the post-
secondary education system, with its "middle class" culture. Research showing
that working-class students are taught to value obedience over leadership and
creativity can partially account for the difficulties that many working-class
individuals face upon entering colleges and universities.

![image](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images/wp-

content/uploads/sites/1988/2017/05/31175851/751px-battle-strike-1934.jpeg)

**Battle Strike** : Class War: Workers battle with the police during the
Minneapolis Teamsters Strike of 1934.

## The Lower Class

The lower class consists of those at the bottom of the socioeconomic hierarchy
who have low education, low income, and low status jobs.

### Learning Objectives

Differentiate between the terms "lower class," "working poor," and
"underclass"

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * Low educational attainment and disabilities are two of the main reasons individuals can either struggle to find work or fall into the lower class.
          * Generally, the term lower class describes individuals working easily-filled employment positions. These positions typically have little prestige or economic compensation, and do not require workers to have a high school education.
          * Lower class households are at the greatest risk of falling below the poverty line if a job holder suddenly becomes unemployed.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **Poverty line** : This is the threshold of poverty used by the U.S. Census Bureau to define the minimum income one must earn to meet basic material needs.
          * **public assistance** : the various forms of material aid provided by the government to those who are in need
          * **underclass** : the poorest class of people in a given society
          * **manual labor** : Any work done by hand; usually implying it is unskilled or physically demanding.
        

### Defining the Lower Class

The lower class in the United States refers to individuals who are at, or
near, the lower end of the socioeconomic hierarchy. As with all social classes
in the United States, the lower class is loosely defined, and its boundaries
and definitions are subject to debate. When used by social scientists, the
lower class is typically defined as service employees, low-level manual
laborers, and the unemployed. Those who are employed in lower class
occupations are often colloquially referred to as the working poor. Those who
do not participate in the labor force, and who rely on public assistance, such
as food stamps and welfare checks, as their main source of income, are
commonly identified as members of the underclass, or, colloquially, the poor.
Generally, lower class individuals work easily-filled employment positions
that have little prestige or economic compensation. These individuals often
lack a high school education.

### Unemployment and the Poverty Line

A number of things can cause an individual to become unemployed. Two of the
most common causes are low educational attainment and disabilities, the latter
of which includes both physical and mental ailments that preclude educational
or occupational success. The poverty line is defined as the income level at
which an individual becomes eligible for public assistance. While only about
12% of households fall below the poverty threshold at one point in time, the
total percentage of households that will, at some point during the course of a
single year, fall below the poverty line, is much higher. Many such households
waver above and below the line throughout a single year. Lower class
households are at the greatest risk of falling below this poverty line,
particularly if a job holder becomes unemployed. For all of these reasons,
lower class households are the most economically vulnerable in the United
States.

![image](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images/wp-

content/uploads/sites/1988/2017/05/31175853/gilbert-model.png)

**Gilbert Model** : This is a model of the socio-economic stratification of
American society, as outlined by Dennis Gilbert.

## Income Distribution

The United States has a high level of income inequality, with a wide gap
between the top and bottom brackets of earners.

### Learning Objectives

Explain the development of income distribution in the US since the 1970's and
what is meant by the "Great Divergence"

### Key Takeaways

#### Key Points

        
                  * Since the 1970s, inequality has increased dramatically in the United States.
          * Different groups get different compensation for the same work. The discrepancy in wages between males and females is called the " gender wage gap," and the discrepancy between whites and minorities is called the "racial wage gap".
          * While earnings from capital and investment are still a significant cause of inequality, income is increasingly segregated by occupation as well. Of earners, 60% in the top 0.1% are executives, managers, supervisors, and financial professionals.
        

#### Key Terms

        
                  * **Race Wage Gap** : The difference in earnings between racial or ethnic groups.
          * **Gender Wage Gap** : The difference between male and female earnings expressed as a percentage of male earnings.
          * **great divergence** : Refers to the growth of economic inequality in America since the 1970s.
        

![image](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images/wp-

content/uploads/sites/1988/2017/05/31175855/education-median-income-2.png)

**Income Distribution by Education** : This graph illustrates the unequal
distribution of income between groups with different levels of educational
attainment. Education is an indicator of class position, meaning that unequal
distribution of income by education points to inequality between the classes.

Unequal distribution of income between genders, races, and the population, in
general, in the United States has been the frequent subject of study by
scholars and institutions. Inequality between male and female workers, called
the "gender wage gap," has decreased considerably over the last several
decades. During the same time, inequality between black and white Americans,
sometimes called the "race wage gap," has stagnated, not improving but not
getting worse. Nevertheless, data from a number of sources indicate that
overall income inequality in the United States has grown significantly since
the late 1970s, widening the gap between the country's rich and poor.

A number of studies by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Congressional Budget
Office (CBO), and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) have found that the
distribution of income in the United States has become increasingly unequal
since the 1970s. Economist Paul Krugman and journalist Timothy Noah have
referred to this trend as the "Great Divergence." Since the 1970s, income
inequality has grown almost continuously, with the exceptions being during the
economic recessions in 1990-91, 2001, and 2007. The Great Divergence differs
in some ways from the pre-Depression era inequality observed in the early
1900s (the last period of great inequality). Before 1937, a larger share of
top earners' income came from capital (interest, dividends, income from rent,
capital gains). Post-1970, a higher proportion of the income of high-income
taxpayers comes predominantly from employment compensation–60% of earners in
the top 0.1% are executives, managers, supervisors, and financial
professionals, and the five most common professions among the top 1% of
earners are managers, physicians, administrators, lawyers, and financial
specialists. Still, much of the richest Americans' accumulated wealth is in
the form of stocks and real estate.

Licenses and Attributions

CC licensed content, Shared previously

        
                  * Curation and Revision. **Provided by** : Boundless.com. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
        

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

        
                  * Social class in the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_class_in_the_United_States%23Academic_models. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/social-network. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * The American Dream. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/The+American+Dream. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/corporate-elite. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * American upper class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_upper_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * investment. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/investment. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * capital gain. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/capital_gain. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * educational attainment. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/educational%20attainment. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Upper middle class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Upper_middle_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/salaried-professionals. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Campus Spring. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Campus_Spring.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * American middle class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_middle_class%23Lower_middle_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Lower middle class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lower_middle_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/college-education. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * White Collar. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White%20Collar. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * professional. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/professional. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Campus Spring. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Campus_Spring.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Teacher. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Working class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Working_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Working class in the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Working_class_in_the_United_States. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Blue Collar. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Blue+Collar. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * working class. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/working_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * manual labor. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/manual_labor. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Campus Spring. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Campus_Spring.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Teacher. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Battle strike 1934. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Battle_strike_1934.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * American lower class. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_lower_class. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * underclass. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/underclass. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Poverty line. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Poverty+line. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * public assistance. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/public_assistance. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * manual labor. **Provided by** : Wiktionary. **Located at** : http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/manual_labor. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Campus Spring. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Campus_Spring.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Teacher. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Battle strike 1934. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Battle_strike_1934.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Gilbert model. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Gilbert_model.png. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Income inequality in the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_inequality_in_the_United_States. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Gender Wage Gap. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gender%20Wage%20Gap. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/race-wage-gap. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Boundless. **Provided by** : Boundless Learning. **Located at** : http://www.boundless.com//sociology/definition/great-divergence. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Social structure of the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_structure_of_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Campus Spring. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Campus_Spring.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Teacher. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
          * Battle strike 1934. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Battle_strike_1934.jpg. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Gilbert model. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Gilbert_model.png. **License** : _CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike_
          * Income inequality in the United States. **Provided by** : Wikipedia. **Located at** : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_inequality_in_the_United_States. **License** : _Public Domain: No Known Copyright_
        

Previous Next

![Footer Logo Lumen Candela](https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-

sociology/wp-content/themes/bombadil/assets/images/FooterLumenCandela.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

