

![Energy Explained](images/style-images/e-explained_150x75.jpg)

Home > Energy Explained > Energy and the Environment > Where Greenhouse Gases
Come From

* * *

![Energy Explained - Home](images/style-images/e-explained-home.jpg)

                
                                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) What Is Energy?
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Forms of Energy
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Sources of Energy
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Laws of Energy
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Units and Calculators
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Energy Conversion Calculators
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) British Thermal Units (Btu)
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Degree-Days
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) U.S. Energy Facts
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) State and U.S. Territory Data
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Energy
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) In Industry
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) For Transportation
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) In Homes
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) In Commercial Buildings
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Efficiency and Conservation
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Energy and the Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Greenhouse Gases
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Effect on the Climate
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Greenhouse Gases Come From
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Outlook for Future Emissions
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Recycling and Energy
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) **Nonrenewable Sources**
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Oil and Petroleum Products
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Refining Crude Oil
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Oil Comes From
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Imports and Exports
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Offshore Oil and Gas
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Oil
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Outlook
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Oil and the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Gasoline
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Gasoline Comes From
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Gasoline
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Outlook
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Factors Affecting Gasoline Prices
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Regional Price Differences
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Price Fluctuations
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) History of Gasoline
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Gasoline & the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Diesel Fuel
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Diesel Comes From
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Diesel
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Outlook
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Factors Affecting Diesel Prices
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Diesel Fuel Surcharges
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Diesel & the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Heating Oil
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Heating Oil Comes From
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Heating Oil
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Outlook
                          * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Factors Affecting Heating Oil Prices
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Hydrocarbon Gas Liquids
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where do Hydrocarbon Gas Liquids Come From?
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Transporting and Storing
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Uses of Hydrocarbon Gas Liquids
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Imports and Exports
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Natural Gas
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Delivery and Storage
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Natural Gas Pipelines
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Liquefied Natural Gas
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Natural Gas Comes From
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Imports and Exports  
                 _Offshore: See Oil_
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) How Much Gas Is Left
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Natural Gas
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Factors Affecting Natural Gas Prices
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Natural Gas & the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Customer Choice Programs
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Coal
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Mining and Transportation
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Coal Comes From
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Imports and Exports
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) How Much Coal Is Left
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Coal
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Outlook
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Coal &Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Nuclear
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Nuclear Power Plants
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) The Nuclear Fuel Cycle
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Our Uranium Comes From
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) U.S. Nuclear Industry
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Nuclear Power & the Environment
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) **Renewable Sources**
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Hydropower
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Hydropower Is Generated
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Hydropower & the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Tidal Power
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Wave Power
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Biomass
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Wood and Wood Waste
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Waste-to-Energy (MSW)
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Landfill Gas and Biogas
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Biomass & the Environment
                

_See also: Biofuels_

                
                                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Biofuels: Ethanol & Biodiesel
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Ethanol
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Use of Ethanol
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Ethanol & the Environment
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Biodiesel
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Use of Biodiesel
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png)     Biodiesel & the Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Wind
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Electricity Generation from Wind
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Wind Power Is Harnessed
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Types of Wind Turbines
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) History of Wind Power
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Wind Energy & the Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Geothermal
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Geothermal Energy Is Found
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Geothermal Energy
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Geothermal Power Plants
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Geothermal Heat Pumps
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Geothermal Energy & the Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Solar
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Photovoltaics and Electricity
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Where Solar Is Found
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Solar Thermal Power Plants
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Solar Thermal Collectors
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Solar Energy and the Environment
                  * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) **Secondary Sources**
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Electricity
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) The Science of Electricity
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Magnets and Electricity
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Batteries, Circuits, & Transformers
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Measuring Electricity
                        * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) How Electricity Is Generated
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Electricity in the U.S.
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Delivery To Consumers
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Electricity
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Prices and Factors Affecting Prices
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Electricity & the Environment
                    * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Hydrogen
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Production of Hydrogen
                      * ![](images/style-images/acpage.png) Use of Hydrogen
                

![badge](/todayinenergy/badges/smt1.png)

![Help promote Energy Explained with the outreach toolkit](images/style-

images/outreach.jpg)

|

#

Where Greenhouse Gases Come From

                
                                      * **Basics**
                

![Print this page icon](images/style-images/print-this.png) | ![Email this

page](images/style-images/email-this.png) ![Email this page](images/style-

images/email-this.png) | ![Share this page](images/style-images/share-

this2.png)

![A pie chart showing the anthropogenic \(gaseous emissions that are the

result of human activities\) greenhouse gas emissions by gas in 2016.

](/energyexplained/images/charts/greenhouse_gas_emissions_by_gas-small.jpg)

Click to enlarge »

#### Did you know?

In 2016, fossil fuels were the source of about 76% of total U.S. human-caused
greenhouse gas emissions.

In the United States, most of the emissions of human-caused (anthropogenic)
greenhouse gases (GHG) come primarily from burning fossil fuels--coal,
hydrocarbon gas liquids, natural gas, and petroleum--for energy use. Economic
growth (with short-term fluctuations in growth rate) and weather patterns that
affect heating and cooling needs are the main factors that drive the amount of
energy consumed. Energy prices and government policies can also affect the
sources or types of energy consumed.

## Carbon dioxide

In 2016, emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) produced from burning fossil fuels
for energy were equal to 76% of total U.S. anthropogenic GHG emissions (based
on global warming potential) and about 94% of total U.S. anthropogenic CO2
emissions. Carbon dioxide emissions from other anthropogenic sources and
activities were about 5% of total GHG emissions and about 6% of total CO2
emissions.1

## Other greenhouse gases

The U.S. and international GHG emissions estimates include several other GHG
that are emitted as a result of human activity:

                
                                      * Methane (CH4), which comes from landfills, coal mines, agriculture, and oil and natural gas operations
                      * Nitrous oxide (N2O), which comes from using nitrogen fertilizers and certain industrial and waste management processes and burning fossil fuels 
                      * High global warming potential (GWP) gases, which are human-made industrial gases 
                        * Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
                        * Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
                        * Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
                        * Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3)
                

The combined emissions of these other greenhouse gases accounted for about 18%
of total U.S. anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2016.

## The energy connection

Fossil fuels consist mainly of carbon and hydrogen. When fossil fuels are
burned, oxygen combines with carbon to form CO2 and with hydrogen to form
water (H2O). These reactions release heat that we use for energy. The amount
of CO2 produced depends on the carbon content of the fuel, and the amount of
heat produced depends on the carbon and hydrogen content. Because natural gas,
which is mostly methane (CH4), has a high hydrogen content, combustion of
natural gas produces less CO2 for the same amount of heat produced from
burning other fossil fuels. For example, for the same amount of energy
produced, burning natural gas produces about half of the amount of CO2
produced by burning coal.

## Nearly half of U.S. energy-related CO2 emissions are from petroleum use

In 2017, about 45% of U.S. energy-related carbon dioxide emissions came from
burning petroleum fuels, 29% came from burning natural gas, and 26% came from
burning coal.2 Although the industrial sector is the largest consumer of
energy (including direct fuel use and electricity purchased from the electric
power sector), the transportation sector emits more CO2 because of its near
complete dependence on petroleum fuels.

![2 pie charts. The first pie chart shows U.S. energy consumption by major

fuel/energy sources in 2016: Coal 15%; Non-fossil fuels 19%, natural gas 29%,

and petroleum 37%. The second pie chart shows the resulting carbon dioxide

emissions by type of fossil fuel: Coal 26%, natural gas 29%, and petroleum

45%.](/energyexplained/images/charts/energy_consumption_major_fuel_type-

small.jpg)

The residential sector and the commercial sector have lower CO2 emission
levels than the transportation sector and the industrial sector. Most of the
CO2 emissions associated with energy use by the residential and commercial
sectors are from fossil fuel combustion by the electric power sector to
produce the electricity that it sells to the residential and commercial
sectors.

![2 stacked bar charts: The first showing U.S. energy consumption by end-use

sectors in 2016 and the second shwoing resulting carbon dioxide emissions for

each sector.](/energyexplained/images/charts/energy_consumption_use_sector-

small.jpg)

## Coal is the dominant CO2 emissions source related to electricity generation

In 2017, the electric power sector accounted for about 38% of U.S. primary
energy consumption and produced 34% of total U.S. energy-related CO2
emissions. Coal accounted for 69% and natural gas for 29% of electric power
sector CO2 emissions. Emissions from burning petroleum fuels and non-biomass
waste (mainly plastics) in waste-to-energy power plants and emissions from
some types of geothermal power plants accounted for about 2% of power sector
CO2 emissions.

![2 pie charts. The first pie chart shows the shares of the types of energy

consumption by U.S. electric power sector for electricity generation in 2016:

Coal 34%; Non-fossil fuels 37%, natural gas 27%, and petroleum 1%. The second

pie chart shows the resulting shares of carbon dioxide emissions from

consumption of fossil fuels for electricity generation: Coal 68% natural gas

30%, and 1etroleum

3%.](/energyexplained/images/charts/major_fuel_energy_sources_elec_generation-

small.jpg)

1 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2015, Executive Summary_ , April 2017.  
2 U.S. Energy Information Administration, _Monthly Energy Review_ ,
Environment, April 2017, preliminary data.

|

## Also on _Energy Explained_

                
                                      * Greenhouse Gases' Effect on the Climate
                      * Energy and the Environment
                      * Electricity and the Environment
                      * Oil and the Environment
                      * Coal and the Environment
                

## FAQs

                
                                      * What are energy-related carbon dioxide emissions by source and sector for the United States? -- /tools/faqs/faq.php?id=75&t;=11
                      * How much of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions are associated with electricity generation? -- /tools/faqs/faq.php?id=77&t;=11
                      * What are the energy-related carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels for the United States and the world? -- /tools/faqs/faq.php?id=79&t;=11
                      * More environment FAQs -- /tools/faqs/index.php#environment
                

|

## Learn more

                
                                      * Carbon dioxide emissions from U.S. energy consumption -- /totalenergy/data/monthly/index.php#environment
                      * Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions -- https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions
                      * Overview of Greenhouse Gases -- https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/overview-greenhouse-gases
                      * Articles on greenhouse gases -- /todayinenergy/index.php?tg=greenhouse%20gases
                

---|--- 

Last updated: July 20, 2018

« Greenhouse Gases' Effect on the Climate | Outlook for Future Emissions »  
---|--- 

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

