

* * *

Nov. 10, 1999: Metric Math Mistake Muffed Mars Meteorology Mission

Sign In

![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-subscribe-

button-5-30-18.png)![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-subscribe-

button-5-30-18.png)

Subscribe

__

                
                                      * business
                      * culture
                      * gear
                      * ideas
                      * science
                      * security
                      * transportation
                      * photo
                      * video
                      * backchannel
                

Search

                
                                      *  __business
                      *  __culture
                      *  __gear
                      *  __ideas
                      *  __science
                      *  __security
                      *  __transportation
                      *  __photo
                      *  __video
                      *  __backchannel
                

Sign In

                
                                      * Photo
                      * Video
                      * Backchannel
                      * Magazine
                      * Wired Insider
                      * Coupons
                

#### Get Our Newsletter

##### WIRED's biggest stories delivered to your inbox.

__submit

                
                                      * Author: Lisa GrossmanLisa Grossman
                
                      * 11.10.10
                      * 07:00 am
                

# Nov. 10, 1999: Metric Math Mistake Muffed Mars Meteorology Mission

![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5933c541a88f414d9a8c963a/master/w_60,c_limit/rover_60x60.jpg)

#### Share

                
                                      *  __
                

share

                
                                      *  __
                

tweet

                
                                      *  __
                

comment

                
                                      *  __
                

email

                
                                      * Author: Lisa GrossmanLisa Grossman
                
                      * 11.10.10
                      * 07:00 am
                

# Nov. 10, 1999: Metric Math Mistake Muffed Mars Meteorology Mission

![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5933c541a88f414d9a8c963a/master/w_60,c_limit/rover_60x60.jpg)

![](https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/thisdayintech/2010/09/mco_mapping.jpg)

**1999:** A disaster investigation board reports that NASA 's Mars Climate
Orbiter burned up in the Martian atmosphere because engineers failed to
convert units from English to metric.

Mars Photo
Galleries:![](https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/thisdayintech/2010/11/rover_60x60.jpg)Where
Will Next Mars Rover
Land?![](https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/thisdayintech/2010/11/moon_60x60.jpg)Exotic
New Mars Images From Orbiting Telephoto
Studio![](https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/thisdayintech/2010/11/mars_60x60.jpg)Strange
Places on Mars: What Do You Want to See Next?The $125 million satellite was
supposed to be the first weather observer on another world. But as it
approached the red planet to slip into a stable orbit Sept. 23, the orbiter
vanished. Scientists realized quickly it was gone for good.

"It was pretty clear that morning, within half-an-hour, that the spacecraft
had more or less hit the top of the atmosphere and burned up," recalled NASA
engineer Richard Cook, who was project manager for Mars exploration projects
at the time.

A NASA review board found that the problem was in the software controlling the
orbiter's thrusters. The software calculated the force the thrusters needed to
exert in _pounds_ of force. A separate piece of software took in the data
assuming it was in the metric unit: _newtons_.

"The units thing has become the lore, the example in every kid's textbook from
that point on," Cook said. "Everyone was amazed we didn't catch it."

There had been warning signs, the mishap board found. En route to Mars, the
spacecraft had to make 10 to 14 times more minor adjustments than engineers
expected. And the last few signals from the orbiter indicated that it was
dipping dangerously low into the Martian atmosphere, about 105 miles lower
than it was supposed to go.

Ultimately, the Mars Climate Orbiter came within 37 miles of the Martian
surface. Simulations showed that, at any altitude lower than 53 miles,
atmospheric friction would tear the fragile craft apart.

The whole thing could be written off as a miscommunication. Propulsion
engineers, like those at Lockheed Martin who built the craft, typically
express force in pounds, but it was standard practice to convert to newtons
for space missions. One pound of force is about 4.45 newtons. Engineers at
NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab assumed the conversion had been made, and didn't
check.

But there was an underlying issue in the culture of NASA's space exploration
at the time, Cook said.

"'Better, faster, cheaper' was the mantra at the time," Cook said. "Certainly
that project was trying to do a whole lot for a limited amount of money."

_The New York Times_ ran a preview article Sept. 21 titled "Beginning a
Bargain-Basement Invasion of Mars," foreshadowing the disasters to come.

The Mars Polar Lander, which launched 23 days after Mars Climate Orbiter, also
disappeared on the way to the planet's surface. Vibrations in that craft's
legs may have convinced the craft's on-board computer it had already landed,
when it was still 100 feet in the air.

"The specific reasons [for that failure] were totally different," Cook said.
"But the underlying part[s], this overly ambitious appetite, were the same."

Cook said NASA made some "big-time" changes after that. Several planned
missions, including a mission that was to bring Mars rocks back to Earth, were
scrapped. The space agency went back to basics, rebuilding its Mars program
based on conservative strategies and concepts that had already been tested.

And it worked. The fantastically successful Mars Exploration Rovers, Spirit
and Opportunity, rose from the ashes. Not only did the rovers both land safely
and complete their original 90-day mission, but they're still running six
years later.

"In this business, you're either just shy of it working ... or the thing looks
bulletproof," Cook said.

_Source: Various_

Image: Mars Climate Orbiter/NASA

**See Also:**

                
                                      22. Feb. 5, 1999: Web Tempest in a D-Cup
                      23. March 21, 1999: Around the World in 20 Days
                      24. March 26, 1999: 'Melissa' Wreaks Havoc on Net
                      25. March 31, 1999: _The Matrix_ Hooks Us
                      26. May 28, 1999: Newly Restored Last Supper Returns to Public Eye
                      27. July 3, 1999: Gobbling Up a 'Pac-Man' Record
                      28. July 10, 1999: Reddi-wip Inventor Sputters Out
                      29. July 15, 1999: Hey, Sorry About the Beryllium Poisoning
                      30. Sept. 9, 1999: 9/9/99 No Big Deal for Computers
                      31. Dec. 7, 1999: RIAA Sues Napster
                      32. Dec. 31, 1999: Horror or Hype? Y2K Arrives and World Trembles
                      33. Nov. 10, 1983: Computer 'Virus' Is Born
                      34. Nov. 10, 1983: Gates Opens Windows a Bit Early
                
                      * #20th century
                      * #disasters
                      * #Mars
                      * #NASA
                      * #space
                

#### Most Popular

                
                                      * science
                

##### A Mythical Form of Space Propulsion Finally Gets a Real Test

Author: Daniel OberhausDaniel Oberhaus

                
                                      * security
                

##### Apple's 'Find My' Feature Uses Some Very Clever Cryptography

Author: Andy GreenbergAndy Greenberg

                
                                      * culture
                

##### 'Black Mirror' Isn't Surprising Anymore. We're Screwed

Author: Peter RubinPeter Rubin

__More Stories

__View Comments

#### Sponsored Stories

Powered By Outbrain

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf849aec3e961d2e7ec9f35/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Abortion-Pill-72432780.jpg)
                

Lydia Horne

##### Telemedicine as a Workaround to Abortion Regulations, and More News

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf84433d7427c67af883bb7/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Youtube-CARLOS-MAZA.jpg)
                

Emma Grey Ellis

##### YouTube Continues to Fail Its Queer Creators

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf708ef8f6eb22767598ef9/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Science%20-%20Feature%20art%20-%20Genome%20patent%20law%20-%20165809667.jpg)
                

Megan Molteni

##### Congress Is Debating—Again—Whether Genes Can Be Patented

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf80764f2022464080c3449/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Campaign-621867024.jpg)
                

Lily Hay Newman

##### A Push to Protect Political Campaigns from Hackers Hits a Snag

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf807299c2a7cf91b5976c8/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/GettyImages-1146336898.jpg)
                

Paris Martineau

##### YouTube Is Banning Extremist Videos. Will It Work?

#### More Stories

                
                                      *           * Photo Gallery
                

## Gritty Postcards From the Russian Hinterland

Author: Michael HardyMichael Hardy

                
                                      *           * Robo-Van
                

## This Startup Wants to Remake the Last Mile of Parcel Delivery

Author: Alex DaviesAlex Davies

                
                                      *           * Environment
                

## Monterey Bay Is a Natural Wonder--Poisoned With Microplastic

Author: Matt SimonMatt Simon

                
                                      *           * Handiwork
                

## _Dark_ _Phoenix_ Is Trash, But the Hand Work Is Pretty OK?

Author: Angela WatercutterAngela Watercutter

                
                                      *           * Buying Guide
                

## Sink Your Teeth Into These Toothbrush Subscription Services

Author: Christopher NullChristopher Null

                
                                      *           * WIRED Opinion
                

## Russia and Iran Plan to Fundamentally Isolate the Internet

Author: Justin ShermanJustin Sherman

#### We Recommend

Powered By Outbrain

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf83815f5153c680f15d0e8/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_oil-rig_481758213.jpg)
                

Eric Niiler

##### What to Do About CO2? Try Stuffing It Into the Gulf of Mexico

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf6cbd4f2022426ae0c3435/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Ideas_LBMSF.jpg)
                

Collier Meyerson

##### _The Last Black Man_ Searches for ‘Authenticity’ but There Is None

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf860ece2e49186508ae0ff/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Backchannel-Orania-Torgovnik-DSCF5324.jpg)
                

Gregory Barber

##### Inside an All-White Town’s Divisive Experiment With Cryptocurrency

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf73696c3e9614f96ec9f12/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Ideas_Voice-Assistant-908389436.jpg)
                

Noam Cohen

##### Why Siri and Alexa Weren’t Built to Smack Down Harassment

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf82980253bc5aa327abfa2/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/Security_Voting_TA-1058154548.jpg)
                

Lily Hay Newman

##### Election Security Is Still Hurting at Every Level

![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-box.png)

#### Get Our Newsletter

##### WIRED's biggest stories delivered to your inbox.

__submit

__

                
                                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      * Subscribe
                      * Advertise
                      * Site Map
                      * Press Center
                      * FAQ
                      * Accessibility Help
                      * Customer Care
                      * Contact Us
                      * Securedrop
                      * Coupons
                      * Newsletter
                      * Wired Staff
                      * Jobs
                      * RSS
                

CNMN Collection

(C) 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved.

Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance
of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie
Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your California Privacy Rights. The material on
this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise
used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices.

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c4=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2010%2F11%2F1110mars-

climate-observer-report%2F&c1=2&c2=6035094)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

