  
                  
                                      *  
                      * Look up a Term Close Panel
                      *  
                      * CLAM Bake Close Clams
                      *
                

# Climate Science Glossary

## Term Lookup

Enter a term in the search box to find its definition.

## Settings

Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of
terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off).

# Term Lookup

Term:

Define

# Settings

Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life: 5 seconds 10
seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds 1 minute Until closed

* * *

_All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. 941-954.
Cambridge University Press._

![](images/_core/head/button_sks_200.jpg)
![](images/_core/head/button_sks2_200.jpg)

![](images/_core/head/wflag_english.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_chinese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_czech.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_croatian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_danish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_dutch.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_finnish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_french.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_german.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_israel.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_hungarian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_icelandic.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_indonesian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_italian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_japanese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_korean.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_norwegian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_polish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_portugese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_russian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovak.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovene.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_spanish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_swedish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_thai.gif)

* * *

Home ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) Arguments
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Software ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Resources
Comments ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)The Consensus Project
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Translations ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)About
Donate  
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![Twitter](images/_core/head/icon_twitter.gif)
![Facebook](images/_core/head/icon_facebook.gif)
![YouTube](images/_core/head/icon_youtube.gif)
![Pinterest](images/_core/head/icon_pinterest.gif)

![RSS Posts](images/_core/head/icon_rss_posts.gif) ![RSS

Comments](images/_core/head/icon_rss_comments.gif) ![Email

Subscribe](images/_core/head/icon_email2.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_header.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/left_1.gif) |
Climate's changed before  
---|---  
![](images/_core/head/left_2.gif) | It's the sun  
![](images/_core/head/left_3.gif) | It's not bad  
![](images/_core/head/left_4.gif) | There is no consensus  
![](images/_core/head/left_5.gif) | It's cooling  
![](images/_core/head/left_6.gif) | Models are unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_7.gif) | Temp record is unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_8.gif) | Animals and plants can adapt  
![](images/_core/head/left_9.gif) | It hasn't warmed since 1998  
![](images/_core/head/left_10.gif) | Antarctica is gaining ice  
![](images/_core/head/left_11.gif) | View All Arguments...  
![](images/_core/head/left_therm_bottom.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

![](images/_core/left_margin/IPCC_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/rcp_icon.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/theConsensusProject_88.png)
![](images/_core/left_margin/trend_button_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/pp88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/Predictions_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_oanotok_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/climate_myths88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_history.gif)
![](images/_core/left_margin/button_misinformers_88.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
Username| |  
---|---|---  
Password| |  
Keep me logged in  
| | New? Register here  
Forgot your password?  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

## Latest Posts

                
                                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Climate Change vs Cosmological Catastrophe
                      * Effects of Global Warming
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #22
                      * Humans and volcanoes caused nearly all of global heating in past 140 years
                      * Four scientists make creativity a key to communicating their research
                      * Beleaguered journalism interests seek to aid ailing planet
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #21
                      * New research, May 13-19, 2019
                      * Introducing a new citizens initiative for carbon pricing in Europe
                      * Deep sea carbon reservoirs once superheated the Earth – could it happen again?
                      * Climate Adam reacts to Bill Nye: "The planet's on f@*&ing; fire!"
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #20
                      * New research, May 6-12, 2019
                      * IPCC Updates Methodology for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                      * Inspiring, not depressing, film fest messages
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #19
                      * New research, April 29 - May 5, 2019
                      * Fox News made the US a hotbed of climate denial. Kids are the cure.
                      * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                      * Nature’s Dangerous Decline ‘Unprecedented’; Species Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’
                      * Former climate 'denier' regrets 'how wrongheaded but certain I was'
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #18
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #18
                      * New research, April 22-28, 2019
                      * What's Earth's ideal temperature?
                      * Climate change could cost the U.S. economy hundreds of billions a year by 2090
                      * Rebellious Times
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #17
                      * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #17
                

Archives

Climate Hustle

![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/flags/flag_finnish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_spanish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_german.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_swedish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_polish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_portugese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_japanese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_french.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_dutch.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_russian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_italian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovak.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_israel.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovene.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_norwegian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_indonesian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_croatian.gif)

# Global cooling - Is global warming still happening?

Link to this page

## What the science says...

| Select a level...| ![](images/_core/other/level1.gif) Basic | |
![](images/_core/other/level2.gif) **Intermediate** | |  
---|---|---|---|---|--- 

Empirical measurements of the Earth's heat content show the planet is still
accumulating heat and global warming is still happening. Surface temperatures
can show short-term cooling when heat is exchanged between the atmosphere and
the ocean, which has a much greater heat capacity than the air.

## Climate Myth...

It's cooling  
"In fact global warming has stopped and a cooling is beginning. No climate
model has predicted a cooling of the Earth - quite the contrary. And this
means that the projections of future climate are unreliable." (source: Henrik
Svensmark)

To say we're currently experiencing global cooling overlooks one simple
physical reality - the land and atmosphere are only one small fraction of the
Earth's climate (albeit the part we inhabit). Global warming is by definition
_global_. The entire planet is accumulating heat due to an energy imbalance.
The atmosphere is warming. Oceans are accumulating energy. Land absorbs energy
and ice absorbs heat to melt. To get the full picture on global warming, you
need to view the Earth's entire heat content.

Church et al 2011 extends the analysis of Murphy 2009 which calculated the
Earth's total heat content through to 2003. This new research combines
measurements of ocean heat, land and atmosphere warming and ice melting to
find that our climate system continued to accumulate heat through to 2008.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/graphics/Total_Heat_Content_2011_med.jpg)  
_Figure 1: Total amount of heat from global warming that has accumulated in
Earth's climate system from 1962 to 2008, fromChurch et al. (2011). Also see
this graphic that shows the ocean heating in two layers, 0-700 meters and
700-2000 meters deep.  
_

A look at the Earth's total heat content clearly shows global warming has
continued past 1998. So why do surface temperature records show 1998 as the
hottest year on record? Figure 1 shows the heat capacity of the land and
atmosphere are small compared to the ocean (the tiny brown sliver of "land +
atmosphere" also includes the heat absorbed to melt ice). Hence, relatively
small exchanges of heat between the atmosphere and ocean can cause significant
changes in surface temperature.

In 1998, an abnormally strong El Nino caused heat transfer from the Pacific
Ocean to the atmosphere. Consequently, we experienced above-average surface
temperatures. Conversely, the last few years have seen moderate La Nina
conditions which had a cooling effect on global temperatures. And the last few
months have swung back to warmer El Nino conditions. This has coincided with
the warmest June-August sea surface temperatures on record. This internal
variation where heat is shuffled around our climate is the reason why surface
temperature is such a noisy signal.

Figure 1 also underscores just how much global warming the planet is
experiencing. Since 1970, the Earth's heat content has been rising at a rate
of 6 x 1021 Joules per year. In more meaningful terms, the planet has been
accumulating energy at a rate of 190,260 gigawatts. Considering a typical
nuclear power plant has an output of 1 gigawatt, imagine 190,000 nuclear power
plants pouring their energy output directly into our oceans. Our climate is
still accumulating heat. Global warming is still happening.

Moreover, even if we focus exclusively on surface and lower atmosphere
temperatures, the warming continues. Foster and Rahmstorf (2011) used multiple
linear regression to filter out the effects of the El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), and solar and volcanic activity (Figure 2), and found that
the underlying global surface and lower atmosphere warming trends have
remained very steady in recent years (Figure 3).

![before/after

filtering](https://skepticalscience.com/graphics/FR11_All_500.gif)

_Figure 2: Five datasets of global surface temperature and lower troposphere
temperature are shown before and after removing the short-term effects of
theEl Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), solar variability, and volcanic
aerosols. A 12-month running average was applied to each dataset.  
_

![figure 8](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/FR11_Figure8.jpg)

_Figure 3: Average of all five data sets (GISS, NCDC, HadCRU, UAH, and RSS)
with the effects of ENSO, solar irradiance, and volcanic emissions removed
(Foster and Rahmstorf 2011)_

intermediate rebuttal written by LarryM

* * *

**Update July 2015** :

Here is a related lecture-video from Denial101x - Making Sense of Climate
Science Denial

Last updated on 5 July 2015 by pattimer. View Archives

Printable Version | Offline PDF Version | Link to this page

## Related Arguments

                
                                      * Global warming stopped in ~~1998~~ , ~~1995~~ , ~~2002~~ , ~~2007~~ , ~~2010~~ , ????
                

## Further reading

                
                                      * _New York Times_ has an article, "Skeptics on Human Climate Impact Seize on Cold Spell", featuring quotes from prominent climate scientists and skeptics, that highlights the dangers of mistaking short-term weather for long-term climate trends.
                

## Update

On 21 January 2012, 'the skeptic argument' was revised to correct a minor
formatting error.

## Comments

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Next

Comments 1 to 50 out of 305:

                
                                      1. **Evolver109** at 07:59 AM on 14 October, 2009
                

Not only does this site have depth and clarity, you're a model of how to
present facts without demonizing those with contrary views. Thanks!

                
                                      2. **Ron333wood** at 23:43 PM on 20 October, 2009
                

Thank you for a website that provides information without a political agenda.
I would like to understand the global warming debate without feeling like I am
being manipulated by someone with a political agenda and most web-sites seem
to promote an agenda for one side or the other. Thanks.

                
                                      3. **Mizimi** at 06:46 AM on 31 October, 2009
                

It is worth looking at fig 6 in Trenberth's paper...it shows ocean heat
content derived from 4 sources; GODAS, JMA, ECCo-GECCO & ECCO-GODAE.  
Two data sets show an increasing trend in OHT and two show the beginning of a
steep decline.  
You can download the ECCO report from  
http://www.ecco-group.org/pdfs/reports/report44.pdf  
and compare it with the graphs from GODAS ( Google  
Meridional Overturning Circulation Simulated by NCEP GODAS...quick view).  
GODAS seems to show warming is essentially confined to the North Atlantic..the
tropics and N. pacific show no trend, whilst the S pacific, S. Indian and S.
Atlantic show steep declines since around 2006.  
So which do we believe??

                
                                      4. **aku** at 21:08 PM on 24 November, 2009
                

i'm new to this and i'm a skeptic.  
however, i'll admit that the planet is still warming.

using satellite data from UAH and RSS, if you look at the past decade or so
including 1998, it shows a cooling trend. however, if you remove the 1998 el
nino freak year, the planet is still warming at a similar rate to pre-1998.

                
                                      5. **Barry Brook** at 15:40 PM on 28 November, 2009
                

Great work, just a slight niggle:

"Considering a typical nuclear power plant has an output of 1 GigaWatt,
imagine 190,000 nuclear power plants pouring their energy output directly into
our oceans."

A decent sized nuclear power plant is 1 GWe, which at a 33% thermal
efficiency, is close to 3 GWt. 190 TWt of energy going into the ocean each
year is closer to the heat output of 65,000 1 GWe nuclear power plants.

                
                                      6. **Australis** at 14:41 PM on 13 December, 2009
                

If the ocean has warmed to this extent, it must surely have expelled many
millions of extra tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere.

Has this new stream been detected at Mauna Loa? And does it advance the
expected date for reaching the fateful 450ppm?

                
                                      7. **ianw01** at 02:58 AM on 16 December, 2009
                

I'm a first time visitor to this site and I'm impressed. (Understanding any of
the science of global warming from the general press is futile!)

I'll offer an answer and a question here:

Australis: Just because the ocean has absorbed so much heat does not not mean
that its temperature has increased a lot. That is because water has a high
specific heat capacity. A few degrees of warming does imply that water could
hold (at maximum) less CO2; however its CO2 content is largely a function of
the equilibrium with the atmosphere. As atmospheric CO2 concentrations rise,
the oceans will continue to absorb more CO2 despite their increasing
temperatures. (Once they get close to carbonated water as we find in soft
drinks, then a few degrees of temperature change could make a big difference!
:-P )

And now my question: Figure 1 could also be used to advance the idea that the
oceans have a tremendous ability to buffer us (on land) from global warming,
and that while things may change, the consequences may be overstated. I know
there are potential holes in that reasoning, but I'd appreciate links to
science addressing the extension of this topic to the potential impacts.

Thanks!!

                
                                      8. **tulkki** at 09:32 AM on 20 December, 2009
                

Hello, this is my first comment on this page.

My question: Wouldn't it be possible that the heat contet of oceans rise even
after radiative forcing has stopped changing? I would assume that the
"response time" of oceans to global warming is much longer than that of the
atmosphere because of the drastic differences in their heat capacities.

                
                                      9. **Tom Dayton** at 10:54 AM on 20 December, 2009
                

tulkki, regarding lag:

Appetizer 1: It’s the sun, but skip down to the section "Ocean Thermal
Inertia." Note that there is a ten-year lag from solar increase. Not 50 years.

Appetizer 2: It’s the ocean.

Main Course: How we know global warming is still happening

                
                                      10. **fudge123** at 19:46 PM on 28 December, 2009
                

''The atmosphere is warming''

My understanding is that is not warming enough to be able to confirm that an
increased greenhouse effect is causing global warming. Also it's not warming
enough in the right area which is supposed to be in the Troposphere at around
10km. Has this suddenly changed?

Also regarding ''Oceans are accumulating energy''  
Some 3,000 scientific robots that are plying the ocean have sent home a
puzzling message. These diving instruments suggest that the oceans have not
warmed up at all over the past four or five years. That could mean global
warming has taken a breather. Or it could mean scientists aren't quite
understanding what their robots are telling them

But Josh Willis at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory says the oceans are what
really matter when it comes to global warming.

In fact, 80 percent to 90 percent of global warming involves heating up ocean
waters. They hold much more heat than the atmosphere can. So Willis has been
studying the ocean with a fleet of robotic instruments called the Argo system.
The buoys can dive 3,000 feet down and measure ocean temperature. Since the
system was fully deployed in 2003, it has recorded no warming of the global
oceans

**Response:** Josh Willis is right. Over 90% of global warming goes into the
oceans. Some studies of upper ocean heat (using the "3000 robots" that
comprise the Argo network) have shown cooling over the last few years during a
time when the Pacific has transitioned from El Nino to La Nina conditions.
However, when the Argo data is examined to greater depths, down to 2000
metres, it's seen that the ocean is still accumulating heat (von Schuckmann
2009):

![](http://www.skepticalscience.com/images/ocean-heat-2000m.gif)

                
                                      11. **From Peru** at 09:20 AM on 4 January, 2010
                

John Cook:  
Comparing the OHC results from the:

1)Upper 700 meters : 0.089 Wm^ −2  
(data source:http://climexp.knmi.nl/daily2longer.cgi, and the trend obtained
in EXCEL)  
2)Upper 2000 meters: 0.77 ± 0.11 Wm^−2

It is clear that the heat was sequestered in the Deep Oceans by the
Termohaline Circulation, and that explain why the SST warming trend was near
zero between 2003 and 2008.

From this numbers is clear that if the Termohaline Circulation Shut Down then
a BLAST OF HEAT will occur in the Upper Ocean and Atmosphere.

Is there any current Climate Model of how much the warming will accelerate if
the Termohaline Circulation Shut Down?

                
                                      12. **selti** at 11:22 AM on 8 January, 2010
                

IPCC projections disproved.

As a result, CO2 has nothing to do with global warming.

                
                                      13. **Tom Dayton** at 13:13 PM on 8 January, 2010
                

selti, you are wrong about the IPCC projections being disproved.

See Comparing IPCC projections to observations. If that's not detailed enough
for you, click on the link that's in that post, to Tamino's related post.

                
                                      14. **selti** at 15:53 PM on 9 January, 2010
                

# 13 Tom Dayton

How could I be wrong as I used the data without any spin. Here are the data
for the mean global temperature anomaly for the Hadley center.

Year=>anomaly (deg C)  
2005=>0.47  
2006=>0.42  
2007=>0.40  
2008=>0.33

And the chart itself is from IPCC 2007 WG1-AR4.

I am not wrong.

The IPCC projections are deadly wrong.

                
                                      15. **selti** at 16:19 PM on 9 January, 2010
                

**There is no global warming that is taking place at _the moment._**

Here is a chart for the mean global temperature anomaly from the Hadley
center.

The above graph shows a linear warming of 0.44 deg C/ Century, and
superimposed on this linear warming there is an oscillating component that
moves up and down about the linear trend line.

The linear warming of 0.44 deg C/ Century is only 0.004 deg C/ year. As a
result, this linear warming is insignificant when looking at mean global
temperature trends at the moment.

To look at mean global temperature trends, this linear warming of 0.004 deg C/
year can be removed by de-trending the anomaly, which gives the oscillating
global temperature anomaly pattern.

This pattern shows global cooling and warming phases of about 30 year
duration, and the current trend is global cooling until 2030.

There is no global warming that is taking place at _the moment._

                
                                      16. **Riccardo** at 19:56 PM on 9 January, 2010
                

selti,  
the only thing your graph shows is that a linear trend from 1880 is not
adequate to describe the actual temperature trend, let alone prove the
existence of a periodic oscillation. Indeed, there's no cycle.

Although in some (rare) cases it is possible to do a statistical-only analysis
of physical phenomena, it needs to be done appropiately.

                
                                      17. **selti** at 21:23 PM on 9 January, 2010
                

# 16 Riccardo

There is a cycle!

The cycle is approximate 30 years of warming followed by 30 years of cooling.

Cooling phase from 1880s to 1910s.

Warming phase from 1910s to 1940s.

Cooling phase from 1940s to 1970s.

Warming phase from 1970s to 2000s.

And the current cooling phase from 2000s to 2030s.

No more spin please. The data is cyclic.

                
                                      18. **Tom Dayton** at 01:42 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

selti, your link "The IPCC projections are deadly wrong" is to an IPCC chart
whose ranges of model runs (the shaded areas) and the observed data (the black
dots and line) go up only to 2005. The black line for HADCRUT3 observed
temperatures _smoothed_ has been extended beyond that not by the IPCC, but by
someone who modified (doctored, faked, falsified, as in Elvis with Bigfoot)
the graph but adding an _unsmoothed_ line! Perhaps the added black dots after
2005 really are the observed anomalies, but the _line's_ extension is _not
smoothed across the dots!_ The resulting and false impression is that the
smoothed line dove after 2005. The actual smoothed line makes a much shallower
dip after 2005, especially if you add 2009 data. If you want to look at
smoothed data then you must smooth it all the way from 1990 through 2008.

If you want to look at unsmoothed data then you must look at unsmoothed data
across all years, by ignoring the black line and just looking at all the black
dots starting in 1990 and going up through 2008. If you want to draw a line
from dot to dot you must do so for all the dots starting in 1990, not just
starting in 2006.

You must also look at either the line or the dots within the range of
projections (the shaded areas) beyond 2005. That is shown on RealClimate in
the post Updates to Model-Data Comparisons. Guess what? Observations are
within the bounds of the projections!

                
                                      19. **selti** at 02:23 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

# 18 Tom Dayton

What I am comparing is the data after 2005.

For all the data points after 2005, the actual anomaly measured observations
are BELOW the anomaly projections with CO2 restricted at the 2000 level:

Year Measured (deg C) Projections (deg C)  
2005 0.47 0.45  
2006 0.42 0.47  
2007 0.40 0.48  
2008 0.33 0.52

As a result, the IPCC projections are utterly wrong.

                
                                      20. **selti** at 02:34 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

# 18 Tom Dayton

What I am comparing is the data after 2005.

For all the data points after 2005, the actual anomaly measured observations
are BELOW the anomaly projections with CO2 restricted at the 2000 level:

Year | Measured (deg C) | Projections (deg C)  
---|---|--- 

2005 | 0.47 | 0.45  
| 2006 | 0.42 | 0.47  
| 2007 | 0.40 | 0.48  
| 2008 | 0.33 | 0.52

As a result, the IPCC projections are utterly wrong.

Are you asking you me to believe you and deny my own lying eyes?

                
                                      21. **Tom Dayton** at 03:40 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

selti: Look at the forest, not the individual trees.

                
                                      22. **selti** at 05:19 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

# 21 Tom Dayton.

Sooner than later, it will be established that CO2 driven global warming is
the greatest scientific stuff up of all times.

The stuff up is caused by assuming the temperature rise from 1970 to 2000 was
unprecedented. Actually, as shown in this oscillating anomaly, this rise in
temperature is similar to those at the end of 1880s and 1940s. Once the
oscillating anomaly reaches its maximum it reverses and the cooling phase
starts.

                
                                      23. **Riccardo** at 05:19 AM on 10 January, 2010
                

selti,  
i'm afraid you didn't even bother to look at how a cycle is define and
identified from the links i gave you. Indeed, statistics is no joke, just
looking at a couple of up and downs does not define a cycle. It looks like you
are following a pre-defined idea and do not care of contrast it with science.  
Do you have any physical _and_ statistical reason to claim that there is a
cycle, other than looking at a couple of up and downs?

                
                                      24. **Doug Cannon** at 02:10 AM on 15 January, 2010
                

"How do we find out what's happened from 2003 until now? Unfortunately, there
is no time series (that I know of) of the planet's total heat content up to
present time."  
Information from Sydney Levitus, Geophysical Research Letters, 2009 shows that
for past few years the heat content of the oceans has not been rising (rising
sea level in that period can be accounted for by runoff; not temperature.)  
This is what Trenberth and Latif have been referring to.  
Basically the books don't balance.  
I appreciate that not everyone places a high faith in satellite measurements,
but they all say that the earth has been absorbing more energy during that
time. If so, it has to show up somewhere and the mystery is that it hasn't.  
Latif seems to think it's in the oceans. Probably more sensible than any other
alternative. But he acknowledges that we don't understand enough about the
natural forcing elements.  
To me this also raises serious doubts that we really can get a true average
measurement of ocean heat content. To those of us who believe that scientific
skepticism is healthy, it would seem to be a mistake to conclude that we know
the earths total heat content is still rising without looking for alternative
answers to the mystery.

**Response:** Levitus' data covers only the upper ocean heat which shows more
variability than the total ocean heat. Measurements of ocean heat down to 2000
metres deep show that the oceans are still accumulating heat.

                
                                      25. **Riccardo** at 04:32 AM on 15 January, 2010
                

Doug Cannon,  
in your comment i found two different concepts mixed arbitrarly, short versus
long term variability. If, with Tremberth, we can't say where the heat has
gone on a sesonal or yearly basis, the same does not apply to longer periods.
You are not allowed to do this extrapolation. Even worst, you cannot conclude
that "we don't understand enough about the natural forcing elements." unless
by "enough" you mean, for example, the timing of next El Nino and its strength
or the like.  
Skepticism is definitely healthy and is at the very core of the progresses of
science; misinterprenting or disregarding what is known is not.

                
                                      26. **Doug Cannon** at 09:30 AM on 15 January, 2010
                

Riccardo  
Perhaps my reference to Latif implied I was focusing on a relationship between
short term and long term variability. There may be one but that wasn't my
intention. But trying to say too much in too few words may have caused
confusion.

I referred to the "past few years". Being more specific, the GRL data at issue
is from 2005 up to 2009.  
When Trenberth said "...we can't account for the lack of warming at the moment
and it is a travesty that we can't" he was referring to a similar period. He
wasn't talking about a seasonal or yearly basis. He has subsequently made it
clear that, his intent was to say that with todays technology we should be
able to find the effect of the increased trapped heat, but we haven't yet been
able to. (My reading of his meaning is that we will be able to, given all the
effort being put on it.)

I've not concluded that "we don't understand enough about the natural forcing
elements" as you suggest. The point I was making is that Latif has made that
conclusion; specifically about "internal decadal variability". He was talking
about the North Atlantic in that particular case. In fact he is "lobbying" for
a research program to be able to predict that variability.  
He wasn't referring to El Nino and neither was I.  
(I don't think you mean to say that we know enough about all the natural
forcing elements except for short term phenomena like El Nino. But your
comment seems to imply that.)

So, to belabor the "arbitary mixing" a bit further: (a)the lack of warming
that Latif suspects is due to natural forcing that we need to understand
better and.. (b)Trenberth's frustration with our inability to find the warming
that has to be there based on the absorbed/reflected radiation imbalance...
are connected in a way. They relate to the same earth during the same period
of time.  
It doesn't seem to arbitrary to wonder if the long term cycle in (a) is in a
phase of it's cycle that affects the warming in (b).  
I shouldn't be so presumptious to think that I know the answer. I don't. But I
reserve the right to wonder if understanding the decadal oscillations of the
oceans and an improved ability to measure the heat content of the oceans would
lead us to an answer.

                
                                      27. **Riccardo** at 10:18 AM on 15 January, 2010
                

Doug Cannon,  
the fact that we still cannot identify the details of how heat goes around in
the climate system in the short term (four years is not that much) should not
rise any alarm.  
Altough some phenomena show a (sort of) cyclic behaviour they all average out
in the long run. For example, look here for the PDO. In the end, they could at
best justify some "noise" in the trend; no overall energy balance has been
altered and these "oscillation" can just move around the heat through the
climate system.  
Indeed, this is what Trenberth refers to in the stolen email, look at the
other things he said.

                
                                      28. **Doug Cannon** at 11:34 AM on 15 January, 2010
                

Riccardo,  
"no overall energy balance has been altered"  
I totally agree. That's the point.  
Actually, one of my sources for Trenberth's position is last week's
"Economist". Unless they have totally misinterpreted his comments he believes
the data show an energy imbalance. Since we all know that can't be true,
something is wrong with the data.  
I think a fair paraphrasing of all Trenberth's comments would be: We don't
have the right data. Yet. But we'll find it. Then the data will demonstrate
there is no imbalance.

                
                                      29. **Riccardo** at 22:25 PM on 15 January, 2010
                

Doug Cannon,  
we get always back to the same point, short and long term. There's nothing
wrong in the data, just not accurate enough to details the short term
variability which we all would like to account for. The long term global
warming is put aside and not questioned at all by Trenberth.

Rememebr also that there's not just black or white, we know everything or we
know nothing. Indeed, it's well known that part, the largest probably, of the
short term variability can be explained by ENSO alone. This part is know, but
it's not all; the remainder comes from other, smaller, contributions.

                
                                      30. **Riccardo** at 22:49 PM on 15 January, 2010
                

Doug,  
just after having hit the submit button, i ended up in Trenberth's own words:

"It relates to our ability to track energy flow through the climate system. We
can do this very well from 1992 to 2003, when large warming occurred, but not
from 2004 to 2008. The quote refers to our observation system which is
inadequate to observe Earth's energy flows at the accuracy needed to
understand small fluctuations in climate;"

Take his words, much better than mine.

                
                                      31. **Qwerty** at 21:48 PM on 17 January, 2010
                

Does this data only go back to 1950?

                
                                      32. **Doug Cannon** at 00:31 AM on 2 February, 2010
                

Note that NODC has updated the ocean heat content figures through 2009. You
may want to update your graph.

                
                                      33. **Pat T** at 17:39 PM on 5 February, 2010
                

If your kid grows an inch and a half each year between fifth grade and eighth
grade and then doesn't grow any more through high school, is he still growing?

No.

And if someone says "but but but his average height during high school is
taller than his average height during middle school!" does that change your
mind?

It's not still warming. It's still warm. Perhaps it shouldn't be - the known
natural forcings over the last decade should perhaps have caused cooling but
haven't yet.

Is 1998 "cherry picking one year?" No. It's one year of natural variability -
but 11, going on 12, years of CO2 emissions. And 1998 is warmer than - or if
you use GISS, within 0.01 deg C as warm as, each year since then. If 11
becomes 15 or 20, that's the skeptics' point - - if the climate is as
CO2-sensitive as is thought, then no single year of natural variability should
offset two decades of cumulative CO2 buildup.

11 hasn't become 15 or 20, so I don't think that "it's still warm though it's
neither warming nor cooling" disproves your thesis. So one has to ask, why
continue to belabor the point? I understand that "it's still warm even though
perhaps it shouldn't be" is complex and you might lose people at the lowest
common denominator, but when you oversimplify to the point that you've reduced
the thesis to a statement that isn't really accurate, you lose some critical
thinkers - as with the "anthropogenic cause of tree ring divergence," this
practice probably fuels more skepticism than it quells.

**Response:** I understand the use of metaphors but eventually metaphors get
so tortured, the usefulness fades. In the case of the 'growing kid' metaphor,
an appropriate comparison would be if you had a child that would grow 2 inches
in one year, shrink 1 inch the next year, grow 1.5 inches the year after that,
shrink .5 inches the next year. His height is shooting up and down but
gradually in the long term rising. But really, that's just a weird metaphor!

Don't be beguiled by the year 1998. Be aware that the HadCRUT record which
finds 1998 as the hottest year on record doesn't include the whole globe - it
excludes regions where the warming trend is greatest. A fully global
temperature record finds 2005 as the hottest year on record, 2009 as the 2nd
hottest year on record and a statistically significant warming trend
throughout this period.

                
                                      34. **Pat T** at 07:22 AM on 8 February, 2010
                

.....and GISS is Northern Hemisphere-biased. Either way, even the measures
that put 2005 as the warmest put it at 0.01 deg C above 1998. I.e., about
even. 1 year of natural variability offsetting 11 years of CO2 isn't "cherry
picking one year." If it's "still warming" then the temperature should still
be rising - rather than simply still warm relative to the recent past.

The height analogy is a good one because the temperature has remained within a
few tenths of a degree C below to, by some measures one hundredth of a degree
above the 1998 mean. It's been flat.

Perhaps it's been flat DESPITE natural forcings that ought to have pushed it
down. So say that.

                
                                      35. **Riccardo** at 08:21 AM on 8 February, 2010
                

Pat T,  
simplification is a quite risky game. Thinking of a monotonic warming when a
monotonic forcing is applied is such a game.  
Look at the instrumental record and you'll see many periods of no warming and
yet overall the temperature has increased. From 2002 to 2009 all the yearly
averaged temperatures are within about 0.14 °C, i.e. +/- 0.07 °C. This is what
the numbers _say_ , undisputable.  
But this is only the begining of the story, not the end. Next step is
understand what those numbers _mean_. To do this you have to look at how
temperature behaves. You'll soon discover that there's an interannual
varibility of about +/- 0.1 °C and that, in turn, in ten years you can not
(statistically) assess a trend lower than about 0.2 °C/decade. Look at this
graph (thanks to Tamino); temperature fluctuates between the lower and the
upper bounds. You can (statistacally) say that temperature is still following
the trend line until it goes out of the bounds. We are not there, not even
close.  
This is as far as the numbers are concerned. Then comes the physics, explained
by John in this post. Not the numbers nor the physics make us think it's
cooling.

                
                                      36. **jimrhiz** at 17:57 PM on 20 February, 2010
                

Great site and page thank you! One very small cavil ...

"Since 1970, the Earth's heat content has been rising at a rate of 6 x 10^21
Joules per year. In more meaningful terms, the planet has been accumulating
energy at a rate of 190,260 GigaWatts. Considering a typical nuclear power
plant has an output of 1 GigaWatt, imagine 190,000 nuclear power plants
pouring their energy output directly into our oceans."

The value 6 x 10^21 Joules per year has one significant digit (similar in
accuracy to other figures one the page, like 0.77 ± 0.11). So it gives a
misleading idea of accuracy to say "190,260 GigaWatts", with 5 significant
digits.

It would be better to stick to one significant digit, and conclude:

"the planet has been accumulating energy at a rate of about 200,000 GigaWatts"

and then also adjust the nuclear power plan count accordingly (bearing mind as
well that Barry Brook's comment 5 above challenged the 1GW per plant
estimate).

                
                                      37. **GSW** at 07:52 AM on 21 February, 2010
                

nice article, very clear what you are getting at.

Question: Don't the models take the Oceans (as a heat sink) into account? If
so, how have they got it so wrong?

                
                                      38. **kwoods01** at 07:33 AM on 27 March, 2010
                

Very interesting article. About the 6 x 10^21 Joules per year (200,000 GWth),
the comparison to nuclear power plants is an unfounded comparison because what
is heating the earth is the sun. If we consider that the sun is hitting the
earth with 1300 W/m^2, and the radius of the earth is 6.3 x 10^6 meters, the
energy input by the sun is:

Insolation x Area = 1300 W/m^2 * pi _((6.3_ 10^6)^2) = approx. 160,000,000 GW.
Compared to 200,000 GW of warming.

I think this is a better comparison. So approximately 0.12% of the insolation
hitting the earth is being absorbed and held. If 200,000 GW is entering an
ocean of 100,000,000 mi^2 and 0.25 miles deep, the change in ocean temperature
is

(200,000x10^6 kJ/s)/((100,000,000 mi^2)(0.25mi) _(4x10^9 m^3/mi^3)_
(1000kg/m^3) _(4.184kJ/kgK)) = 5_ 10^-10 K/s = 0.015 K/year = 1.5
Kelvin/century

which is close to the temperature change of the earth. Kudos goes to the
person who made the very good estimation in the above article of the change in
internal energy of the oceans.

However, I am an experimentalist. The second comment I would like to pose is
about taking temperature data. The scope of the experiment is that the earth's
surface area is 200,000,000 mi^2, and temperature data from 1880 - 1961(Tiros
I launched) was taken with < 1,000-10,000 thermometers and averaged to get a
full year's average temperature. Making a gross assumption that the
thermometers are homogeneously dispursed around the globe, each thermometer
must have encompassed a region from >20,000 - 200,000 mi^2. To put that into
perspective, Texas is 250,000 mi^2 and West Virginia is approximately 25,000
mi^2. I question whether the data obtained can produce an average annual
temperature value within 0.5°C, let alone 0.1°C. If these values are certain,
as given by Smith and Reynolds (2004,2005) found on the NOAA website, I
question what can be deduced from them. The average surface temperature of the
earth is not measured directly just like the temperatures from past climates
were not measured directly. However, past climates deviated in degrees over
millenia compared to tenths of a degree over decades. The same analysis goes
for any water temperature measurement that was done. To derive an average
water temperature from measurements of an ocean that is on the order of
100,000,000 mi^2 in surface area and on the order of 0.25 miles deep is
unfounded. It is a vast volume to extrapolate precise and accurate temperature
data from.

This analysis provides me with enough skepticism to wait for more conclusive
data.

                
                                      39. **Ned** at 08:43 AM on 27 March, 2010
                

kwoods01, you're right that absolute temperatures can vary at fine spatial
scales, such that it would be difficult to calculate an accurate average
temperature based on a limited number of thermometers. But temperature
**anomalies** are spatially correlated over very broad areas.

Thus, it's possible to come up with a very good estimate of _changes_ in the
global mean surface temperature based on a relatively small number of stations
(i.e., hundreds, not millions) as long as they're reasonably well distributed.

Finally, "waiting for more conclusive data" isn't actually possible, since we
can't freeze all emissions of greenhouse gases while we wait. The decision to
continue with business as usual or to start reducing emissions will have to be
made with imperfect information. If we decide to just continue with business
as usual while we wait for the scientists to do their thing, that will lock in
a lot of warming that can't then be recalled if we later decide that the
science is convincing after all.

                
                                      40. **sleepership** at 20:44 PM on 30 April, 2010
                

April has been record breaking in Connecticut for warm temperatures.

Today it will be 77 degrees- after a month that has been 6.7 degrees above
normal. Tomorrow 85 degrees, and Sunday 90.

Of course this is day to day weather- however, warming of this magnitude after
years of milder winters and earlier springs is troubling to say the least.

The climate models always predicted that after 2010 we would begin to see
record warming-is this 'that' beginning?

                
                                      41. **muoncounter** at 10:26 AM on 5 May, 2010
                

And its been 90 here (on the coast of that great bowl of oil and vinegar we
call the Gulf of Mexico) already - two days running.

However, this new study suggests that we ain't seen nothing yet.

"Researchers for the first time have calculated the highest tolerable "wet-
bulb" temperature and found that this temperature could be exceeded for the
first time in human history in future climate scenarios if greenhouse gas
emissions continue at their current rate."

                
                                      42. **Steven Sullivan** at 07:11 AM on 18 May, 2010
                

Oh joy, we're about to get another revival of this argument

http://climatedepot.com/a/6574/search.asp?cx=partner-
pub-2896112664106093%3Am5ewh74pu5c
&cof;=FORID%3A9&ie;=ISO-8859-1&q;=global+cooling

"Geologist Declares 'global warming is over' -- Warns U.S. Climate Conference
of 'Looming Threat of Global Cooling' "

                
                                      43. **chudiburg** at 02:29 AM on 20 May, 2010
                

We have just experienced the warmest January-April period on record when
considering the combined land and ocean temps. Here is the link.

http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/index.php#global_highlights

                
                                      44. **michaelkourlas** at 11:13 AM on 25 May, 2010
                

I'm sorry but I think I'm missing something. Both surface and atmospheric
measurements show cooling, or, at least, minimal warming since 2002. How can
the planet be accumulating heat when over the course of 8 years global
temperature records show it has not really warmed at all?

                
                                      45. **doug_bostrom** at 11:35 AM on 25 May, 2010
                

Michael, I think one of the things you're missing is taking a moment to read
John's post, or if you have and believe you've found something wrong there,
perhaps you could mention it?

                
                                      46. **scaddenp** at 12:38 PM on 25 May, 2010
                

michaelkourlas - why do you think John spends time on discussing the ocean
heat above? Pay particular attention to John's first 2 sentences above.

                
                                      47. **DrTom** at 14:41 PM on 5 June, 2010
                

Aloha All,

I am new here but I am not new to the subject matter. Pardon me for writing
simply. I am retired and simplicity appeals to me.

It is becoming difficult to pretend nothing is happening. Even if we discard
anthropogenic causation, we cannot disregard our observations. The earth is
getting warmer every year. 2010 is already the hottest year on record.

128.3°F was measured at the town of MohenjuDaro, Pakistan, on Wednesday, May
26. As I write this, temperatures in parts of India are 125°F and both the
flora and fauna are dying. How is that possible? Well, in fact, it IS
possible. The earth used to be much warmer than it is now. Before humans
existed.

Whether the fluctuation is natural or not doesn't concern me any longer.
People will rationalize arguments that the ecosphere is not warming because
they don't want to believe it is. Either way the outcome is the same. We are
entering an extinction event. We will last longer than Atlantic Bluefin tuna;
they will be extinct within a couple of years. The human race may have 25
years left...or fifty...or ten.

Even assuming that we are simply at the beginning of the next natural
Milankovitch warming cycle or, on a shorter scale, a Bond Event or a natural
orbital perturbation or a solar max or for no discernible reason whatsoever,
we can interpolate that the oceans will become net exporters of CO2 before
2040 just as the forests are now. By that time we will have a CH4 problem.

If we happen to be in one of the 'abrupt' climate changes, we can expect
temperature increases within a few years to a few decades, depending on the
causality, to increase right past the sweet spot at which humans can survive.
Potentially thirty to fifty degrees Fahrenheit warmer. We have an historical
record of those sorts of temperatures. And that assumes the 20 BILLION tons of
CO2 we are happily pumping into the atmosphere annually is not a factor. That
the 7 billion people on earth are not a factor. That the hydrological cycle is
beginning to fluctuate is not a factor. That the annual loss of millions of
Hectares of arable land to erosion and millions more to desertification are
not factors. Because, in fact, they are no longer factors if we have jumped
the shark.

The tropics have encroached into sub-tropical zones by four degrees of
longitude in the recent past. The weather, never predictable, was at least
stable within recorded history. Now it isn't. Now EVERY flood is a 'hundred
year' or 'thousand year' flood. Now there are going to be hurricanes for which
another level of intensity will have to be made. Category 6. Now the once-
predictable seasons of the year are changing. Everywhere. Given that weather
is dynamic, I still defy anyone to tell me the weather where they are is not
anomalous.

The type of anomaly and the direction of temperature variation at any given
point is of no import. That we cannot account for some of the trapped heat
merely means we don't know where to look. It could be hiding in the AMO but it
could just as easily be involved in a previously unobserved chemical reaction
of which we know nothing. My suspicion is that it is charging the clathrate
gun but I do not care to debate postulates.

Imagine a spinning top as a metaphor. As the rotation decreases, a wobble
begins but it wobbles through it's steady state enough that the wobble is
barely noticeable. During that period three observers could debate whether it
is speeding up, slowing down or naturally imbalanced at a steady momentum. The
only way to know is when it collapses. Predicting the collapse event is not
possible until it happens; there is a real possibility that it might never
collapse.  
Schrödinger's top.

My belated point is this: If you live on Easter Island, cutting down coconut
trees for the nuts might seem like a good idea until you have cut down the
last one. After that, further debate about whether to do it becomes
meaningless.

a hui hou  
T

                
                                      48. **doug_bostrom** at 14:48 PM on 5 June, 2010
                

Mahalo and Aloha, Dr. Tom!

                
                                      49. **DrTom** at 18:51 PM on 5 June, 2010
                

Aloha e, Doug. Mahalo for your kind words. I shall not post regularly but it
is really a very pleasant place to visit.

a hui hou, kakoa  
T

                
                                      50. **Esop** at 22:59 PM on 12 June, 2010
                

It has been unusually quiet from Mr. Svensmark and the rest of the "it's the
sun" fraction of the denialist movement over the last six months. For good
reason. Instead of continuing cooling as they predicted in 2008 and early 09,
temperatures bounced back with a vengeance once the La Nina calmed down. The
last 12 months is the hottest 12 months in recorded history, with even the
skeptic run UAH dataset setting records, despite continuing tweaks to bring
the anomalies down. With all time high temperature records being set when the
cooling effect from the deepest solar minimum in more than a century is at its
peak, Svensmarks hypothesis has failed in a spectacular fashion. It would be
good if the MSM would start focusing their attention on the massive failures
of the denialist predictions instead of harassing the real scientists.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Next

## Post a Comment

Political, off-topic or ad hominem comments will be deleted. Comments
Policy...

You need to be logged in to post a comment. Login via the left margin or if
you're new, register here.

Link to this page | ![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/eureka.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/protruth_pledge.gif)

![](https://www.skepticalscience.com//pics/crowdsourcing.png)

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Denial101x_ad.png)

:

:

![](images/_core/foot/tcpsite.png)  
The Consensus Project Website

THE ESCALATOR  
![](images/_core/foot/SkepticsvRealists_180.gif)  
(free to republish)

(C) Copyright 2019 John Cook | |  
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)  
Home | Links | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

