

__

__

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

Support Our Work

# ![Climate

Central](/assets/img/cc_logo_horiz_667x50_flat_header_large_color.png)

_Researching and reporting the  
science and impacts of climate change_

* * *

× +

#### Who We Are

An independent organization of leading scientists and journalists researching
and reporting the facts about our changing climate and its impact on the
public.

#### What We Do

Climate Central surveys and conducts scientific research on climate change and
informs the public of key findings. Our scientists publish and our journalists
report on climate science, energy, sea level rise. Read More

#### About Our Expertise

Members of the Climate Central staff and board are among the most respected
leaders in climate science. Staff members are authorities in communicating
climate and weather links, sea level rise, climate. Read More

![Climate

Central](/assets/img/cc_logo_horiz_667x50_flat_header_large_color.png)

                
                                      * Home
                      * Research
                        * Publications
                      * Partnerships Journalism
                      * Gallery
                        * Interactives
                        * Graphics
                        * Maps
                        * Collections
                      * Videos
                        * Extreme Weather
                        * States of Change
                        * On the Media
                        * Climate in Context
                        * News and Reports
                      * Media Library
                      * News Archive
                      * What We Do
                        * Mission Statement
                        * What We Do
                        * Board
                        * Staff
                        * Our Programs
                          * Climate Science
                          * Energy
                          * Climate Matters
                          * Sea Level Rise
                        * History
                        * Funding
                        * For the Media
                        * Legal
                        * Jobs
                        * Climate Services
                        * Press Releases
                        * Editorial Independence Policy
                      * Support Our Work
                      *             * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                      * __
                

# The Last Time CO2 Was This High, Humans Didn't Exist

![Andrew

Freedman](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/made/Andrew_Freedman_Politco_Headshot_50_50_s_c1_c_t.JPG)

By Andrew Freedman

__

                
                                      * **Published:** May 3rd, 2013
                

The last time there was this much carbon dioxide (CO2) in the Earth 's
atmosphere, modern humans didn't exist. Megatoothed sharks prowled the oceans,
the world's seas were up to 100 feet higher than they are today, and the
global average surface temperature was up to 11°F warmer than it is now.

As we near the record for the highest CO2 concentration in human history --
400 parts per million -- climate scientists worry about where we were then,
and where we're rapidly headed now.

According to data gathered at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii, the 400 ppm
mark may briefly be exceeded this month, when CO2 typically hits a seasonal
peak in the Northern Hemisphere, although it is more likely to take a couple
more years until it stays above that threshold, according to Ralph Keeling, a
researcher at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography.

CO2 levels are far higher now than they have been for anytime during the past
800,000 years.  
**Click image to enlarge.** Credit: Scripps Institution of Oceanography.

Keeling is the son of Charles David Keeling, who began the CO2 observations at
Mauna Loa in 1958 and for whom the iconic "Keeling Curve" is named.

Carbon dioxide is the most important long-lived global warming gas, and once
it is emitted by burning fossil fuels such as coal and oil, a single CO2
molecule can remain in the atmosphere for hundreds of years. Global CO2
emissions reached a record high of 35.6 billion tonnes in 2012, up 2.6 percent
from 2011. Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases warm the planet by
absorbing the sun's energy and preventing heat from escaping back into space.

The news that CO2 is near 400 ppm for the first time highlights a question
that scientists have been investigating using a variety of methods: when was
the last time that CO2 levels were this high, and what was the climate like
back then?

There is no single, agreed-upon answer to those questions as studies show a
wide date range from between 800,000 to 15 million years ago. The most direct
evidence comes from tiny bubbles of ancient air trapped in the vast ice sheets
of Antarctica. By drilling for ice cores and analyzing the air bubbles,
scientists have found that, at no point during at least the past 800,000 years
have atmospheric CO2 levels been as high as they are now.

That means that in the entire history of human civilization, CO2 levels have
never been this high.

The Keeling Curve, showing CO2 concentrations increasing to near 400 ppm in
2013.  
Credit: NOAA.

Other research, though, shows that you have to go back much farther in time,
well beyond 800,000 years ago, to find an instance where CO2 was sustained at
400 ppm or greater.

For a 2009 study, published in the journal Science, scientists analyzed shells
in deep sea sediments to estimate past CO2 levels, and found that CO2 levels
have not been as high as they are now for at least the past 10 to 15 million
years, during the Miocene epoch.

"This was a time when global temperatures were substantially warmer than
today, and there was very little ice around anywhere on the planet. And so sea
level was considerably higher -- around 100 feet higher -- than it is today,"
said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann, in an email
conversation. "It is for this reason that some climate scientists, like James
Hansen, have argued that even current-day CO2 levels are too high. There is
the possibility that we've already breached the threshold of truly dangerous
human influence on our climate and planet."

Sea levels are increasing today in response to the warming climate, as ice
sheets melt and seas expand due to rising temperatures. Scientists are
projecting up to 3 feet or more of global sea level rise by 2100, which would
put some coastal cities in peril.

While there have been past periods in Earth's history when temperatures were
warmer than they are now, the rate of change that is currently taking place is
faster than most of the climate shifts that have occurred in the past, and
therefore it will likely be more difficult to adapt to.

A 2011 study in the journal Paleoceanography found that atmospheric CO2 levels
may have been comparable to today's as recently as sometime between 2 and 4.6
million years ago, during the Pliocene epoch, which saw the arrival of _Homo
habilis_ , a possible ancestor of modern homo sapiens, and when herds of
giant, elephant-like Mastadons roamed North America. Modern human civilization
didn't arrive on the scene until the Holocene Epoch, which began 12,000 years
ago.

Regardless of which estimate is correct, it is clear that CO2 levels are now
higher than they have ever been in mankind's history. With global CO2
emissions continuing on an upward trajectory that is likely to put CO2
concentrations above 450 ppm or higher, it is extremely unlikely that the
steadily rising shape of the Keeling Curve is going to change anytime soon.

"There's an esthetic to the curve that's beautiful science and troubling
reality," Keeling said. "I'd very much like to see the curve change from going
steadily upward to flattening out."

**Related Content**  
CO2 Emissions Expected to Rise Significantly By 2030  
Global Carbon Emissions Hit Record High  
Global CO2 Levels Set to Pass 400 ppm Milestone  
In the Curve: Monitoring Rising Carbon Emissions

                
                                      * ## Featured Content
                

![THE BURNING SOLUTION: Prescribed Burns Unevenly Applied Across

U.S.](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_29_19_Report_TheBurningSolution_og.jpg)

### THE BURNING SOLUTION: Prescribed Burns Unevenly Applied Across U.S.

![POURING IT ON: How Climate Change Intensifies Heavy Rain

Events](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_15_19_Report_flooding_og.jpg)

### POURING IT ON: How Climate Change Intensifies Heavy Rain Events

![FAITH AND FLOODING: How Sea Level Rise Threatens America’s Houses of

Worship](https://assets.climatecentral.org/images/uploads/news/5_1_19_Report_FaithAndFlooding_og.jpg)

### FAITH AND FLOODING: How Sea Level Rise Threatens America’s Houses of

Worship

# ![Climate Central](/assets/img/logo-climate-central-footer-rb.png)

Email Newsletter ![](/assets/img/footer-submit.png)

                
                                      * Copyright (C) 2019 Climate Central.
                      * Contact
                      * Terms
                      * Content Licensing
                      * Privacy
                      * Site Map
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

