

https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/all/themes/penton_subtheme_ehstoday/images/logos/footer.png

Informa

EHS Today is part of the Business Intelligence Division of Informa PLC

                
                                      * Informa PLC
                      * About us
                      * Investor relations
                      * Talent
                

This site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Informa PLC and all
copyright resides with them. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick
Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 8860726.

Discover:

                
                                      * Safety Leadership Conference
                      * ASC Awards
                      * Webinars
                      * White Papers
                      * More __
                

Menu

Log In or Register

                
                                      * Environment
                      * Health
                      * Safety
                      * Leadership
                      * Standards
                      * Construction
                      * PPE
                      * Safety Technology
                      * Training
                      * Emergency Management
                      * Industrial Hygiene
                      * Safety Leadership Conference
                      * ASC Awards
                      * Webinars
                      * White Papers
                      * Latest Headlines
                      * GHS
                      * Arc Flash
                      * Magazine Subscription
                      * eNewsletter Subscription
                      * Contact Us
                      * Advertise
                      * Content Licensing
                      * Privacy Statement
                      * Terms of Service
                      * Cookie Policy
                

* * *

![EHS

Today](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/all/themes/penton_subtheme_ehstoday/images/logos/header.png)

                
                                      * __Search
                      * Log In
                      * Register
                

Recent

Recent

Fatality Investigation: Gutter Installer Dies After Ladder Fall __

Jun 04, 2019

Webinar: Business Continuity During Natural Disasters: Supporting Your
Employees and Protecting Your Business __

Jun 03, 2019

* * *

Four Florida Contractors Face Violations After Serious Fall __

Jun 03, 2019

Sponsored Content

Machine Safeguarding Quiz __

Texas Companies Win Award for Driving Safety __

May 31, 2019

Featured

America's Safest Companies 2018 __

Nov 08, 2018

NSC 2018: OSHA's Top 10 Violations for 2018 __

Oct 23, 2018

The 12 Most Dangerous Companies of 2018 __

May 03, 2018

Safety 2018: What to Do in the First 30 Minutes of a Worker Injury __

Jun 06, 2018

Industrial Hygiene

# Oxygen Deficiency: The Silent Killer

Injury or death due to oxygen deficiency is a common hazard in the
petrochemical, refining and other industries, and confined spaces, if not
properly monitored, can create hazards for workers and rescuers.

Edward Naranjo | Dec 01, 2007

* * *

Toxic gas often is to blame when workers unnecessarily die due to asphyxiation
in environments where the oxygen actually is depleted by gases such as
nitrogen. In particularly tragic cases, other workers or first responders have
died trying to rescue workers trapped in oxygen-depleted environments.

To prevent these incidents, OSHA, the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) and other federal/state agencies have implemented
numerous regulations, required procedures and permit processes. They also
provide extensive preventative educational literature and announce major
enforcement actions.

OSHA investigations into worker deaths caused by oxygen deficiency or toxic
gas almost always reveal a failure to install safety systems or utilize
personal protective equipment and to follow the proper safety procedures -
especially in confined spaces. Today's fixed oxygen-deficiency and toxic-gas
monitoring systems are highly reliable, relatively easy to install and operate
and offer simple maintenance. They provide excellent protection for employees,
first responders and plant equipment.

Failing to provide a safe work environment can be costly in more than dollars
and cents terms. First, there is a tragic loss of life that includes employees
who are the primary victims as well as would-be rescuers. Then there is the
cost of the investigation, corrective action, regulatory fines as well as
major liability lawsuits that can completely drain a company both financially
and in terms of staff business focus.

### Oxygen Deficiency

Human beings normally breathe air that is 20.9 percent oxygen by volume under
normal atmospheric pressure conditions. When the concentration of oxygen
decreases even slightly by a little more than 1 percent to 2 percent, people
immediately begin to feel the effects. Healthy individuals are unable to work
strenuously and their coordination may be affected in oxygen environments of
15 percent to 19 percent. With the depletion of oxygen to a mix of only 10
percent to 12 percent, respiration increases, lips turn blue and judgment is
impaired. Fainting and unconsciousness begin to occur at 8 percent to 10
percent oxygen. Death occurs in 8 minutes at 6 percent to 8 percent oxygen;
recovery is possible after 4 to 5 minutes if oxygen is restored. These values
are approximate and may vary greatly depending on an individual's health,
physical activity and the specific working environment that they encounter.

There are a variety of causes that lead to oxygen deficiency. Leaking
materials from storage tanks, natural gas lines, process valves and more
release gas that displaces oxygen in poorly ventilated areas or confined
spaces. Decomposing organic matter, such as animal, human or plant waste,
produces methane, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide that
displace or consume oxygen. Even corrosion, such as rust, or fermentation or
other forms of oxidation will consume oxygen and pose a hazard.

### Confined Spaces

Oxygen deficiency often occurs in confined spaces, which are defined as being
large enough and configured so that a person can enter and perform assigned
work. Confined spaces have restricted means for entry or exit, and they are
not designed for continuous employee occupancy.

Some confined spaces are designated as "permit-required" areas. These areas
have material with the potential for engulfment, and are configured so an
employee or responder could be trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly converging
walls. They have a floor that slopes or tapers to a smaller cross-section, or
they may have any other recognized serious safety or health hazard.

Many confined spaces are easy to recognize, such as manholes, sewers, boilers,
silos, vessels, vats, pipelines, tunnels, storage tanks, ship compartments and
underground vaults. Other confined spaces are less obvious, including open-
topped water and degreaser tanks, open pits and enclosures with bottom access.
These confined spaces prohibit natural ventilation, are potential sources of
gas generation and can prevent gases from escaping to cause a hazardous
atmosphere.

Let's face it: If a work area isn't properly ventilated or hazardous materials
are in use, then there is serious potential for oxygen-deficient or toxic gas
conditions that could harm workers or rescuers. Explosive and toxic gases,
including hydrogen sulfide and carbon monoxide, combined with a lack of
oxygen, are the cause of most confined space accidents.

Heroic efforts by would-be rescuers who are overcome by oxygen deficiency or
other toxic gases actually result in 60 percent of all fatalities. When an
accident occurs, sound the alarm, get help and call the professionals. One
accident victim is more than enough. Do not attempt a rescue without knowing
the hazard, understanding the required response and using the proper safety
equipment.

_Edward Naranjo is a product manager for General Monitors
(http://www.generalmonitors.com)._

### Sidebar: Simple Prevention Steps

You can prevent oxygen-deficiency, toxic or combustible gas and confined space
accidents. There are many companies that specialize in assessing hazardous
working environments - even insurance companies often are willing to help.
Suppliers of fixed safety monitoring systems and personal protective devices
will generally share their years of experience with their customers.

All it will take is a couple of emails or phone calls and you will have
information coming your way on fixed or personal gas detectors and many other
devices designed to improve the safety of your plant or facility. Better yet,
go to the Internet, because the information resources available today are more
extensive than ever.

Safety monitoring equipment manufacturers also have the advantage of regularly
discussing potential hazards in multiple industries. They see the same or
similar hazards, problems and concerns at multiple companies and in many
different plant settings. They can apply their expertise and past lessons
learned in ways that you might not initially consider. It can save you
headaches, time, money and lives.

### Sidebar: Government Regulations

When working in confined spaces that may have oxygen deficient or toxic gas
environments, there are specific government regulations that apply to protect
workers. These include, but are not limited to, the following:

                
                                      * 29 CFR 1910.146 - Permit-required Confined Spaces: This section of the Code of Federal Regulations contains requirements for practices and procedures to protect employees in general industry from the hazards of entry into permit-required confined spaces.
                      * CPL 2.100 - Application of the Permit-Required Confined Spaces (PRCS) Standards, 29 CFR 1910.146: This compliance directive provides additional information and instruction for OSHA personnel for use in answering questions and to ensure uniform enforcement of 1910.146.
                      * Part 1915 Subpart B - Confined and Enclosed Spaces and Other Dangerous Atmospheres in Shipyard Employment: This subpart of the Code of Federal Regulations applies to work in confined and enclosed spaces and other dangerous atmospheres in shipyard employment
                

TAGS: Archive Emergency Management

0 comments

Hide comments

![](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/all/themes/penton_core_theme/images/account-

default-image.png)

Comment *

Switch to plain text editor

More information about text formats

Text format CommentsPlain text

### Comments

                
                                      * Allowed HTML tags: <em> <strong> <blockquote> <br> <p>
                

### Plain text

                
                                      * No HTML tags allowed.
                      * Web page addresses and e-mail addresses turn into links automatically.
                      * Lines and paragraphs break automatically.
                

PublishLog in or register to comment

Save

Leave this field blank

Related

![Feature-Avetta-

June.jpg](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/ehstoday.com/files/styles/article_related_thumb_standard/public/Feature-

Avetta-June.jpg?itok=xIKA4cYH)

Webinar: Don’t Let Your Supply Chain Put You at Risk

May 24, 2019

![Kathleen Murphy Sherwin

Williams.jpg](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/ehstoday.com/files/styles/article_related_thumb_standard/public/Kathleen%20Murphy%20Sherwin%20Williams_0.jpg?itok=EwMA40s8)

Don’t Be Afraid to Try New Things

May 16, 2019

![Imperial_Sugar_Georgia_One.png](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/ehstoday.com/files/styles/article_related_thumb_standard/public/Imperial_Sugar_Georgia_One.png?itok=efAY499o)

Dust in the Wind: A Scenario for Disaster

May 15, 2019

![Monsanto Earnings Jump on Corn Seed Pesticide Sales

](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/ehstoday.com/files/styles/article_related_thumb_standard/public/uploads/2013/01/monsanto-

promo.gif?itok=D2WU8v_A)

EPA Rules Glyphosate Presents No Risk to Public Health

May 01, 2019

                
                                      * Load More
                

![Logo](https://www.ehstoday.com/sites/all/themes/penton_subtheme_ehstoday/images/logos/footer.png)

![Powered by

Informa](/sites/all/themes/penton_core_theme/images/powered_by_informa_businessline.png)

                
                                      * RSS
                      * Sitemap
                      * Newsletter
                      * Contact Us
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Terms of Service
                      * Cookie Policy
                

Follow us:

* * *

(C) 2019 Informa USA, Inc., All Rights Reserved

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

