

Skip to content

![National Geographic logo](/static/images/logos/nglogo-stacked-

black.min.87da50cdd596.svg) ![National Geographic

logo](/static/images/logos/nglogo-stacked-white.min.6f3b65fe2af6.svg)

                
                                      * Donate
                      * _![account icon](/static/svg/user.8f38a17c7c81.svg) ![](/static/svg/user-white.55437cd30633.svg) _
                

Account

                
                                      * __
                

Menu

                
                                      * __
                

Close

                
                                      * ![](/static/svg/user-white.55437cd30633.svg) Account
                
                      * Impact
                      * Education
                        * Classroom Resources
                          * Resource Library
                          * Mapping
                          * Explorer Magazine
                        * Professional Development
                          * Online Courses
                          * Educator Network
                          * Grants for Educators
                          * Grosvenor Teacher Fellowships
                        * Student Experiences
                          * 2019 Geo Championships
                          * GeoBee
                          * GeoChallenge
                          * Explorer Classroom
                          * Student Matinees
                        * Blog
                      * Events
                        * Visit the Museum
                          * Contributing Membership
                          * Group Sales
                          * Museum Store
                        * Browse All Events
                        * Host an Exhibition
                        * Explorers Festival
                          * Schedule
                          * Awards
                          * Speakers and Entertainment
                          * Watch
                          * Past Festivals
                          * About
                      * Funding Opportunities
                        * Grants Program
                          * What We Fund
                          * Where We Work
                          * How to Apply
                        * Innovation Challenges
                          * Ocean Plastic Challenge
                        * Support Our Work
                

![](/static/images/logos/nglogo-stacked-white.min.6f3b65fe2af6.svg)

National Geographic Headquarters  
1145 17th Street NW  
Washington, D.C. 20036

###### ABOUT

                
                                      * National Geographic Society
                      * National Geographic Partners
                      * News and Impact
                      * Contact
                

###### EXPLORE

                
                                      * Our Explorers
                      * Our Projects
                      * Resources for Educators
                      * Museum and Events
                      * Technology and Innovation
                

###### JOIN US

                
                                      * Ways to Give
                      * Apply for a Grant
                      * Careers
                

Donate Get Updates

###### Connect

###### Connect

National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2019
National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.  
Privacy Policy | Sustainability Policy | Terms of Service | Code of Ethics

## Resource Library | Video

# Ocean Currents and Climate

Scientists across the globe are trying to figure out why the ocean is becoming
more violent and what, if anything, can be done about it. Ocean currents,
including the ocean conveyor belt, play a key role in determining how the
ocean distributes heat energy throughout the planet, thereby regulating and
stabilizing climate patterns.

Grades

6 - 12, Higher Ed

Subjects

Earth Science, Oceanography

Contents

1 Video

This lists the logos of programs or partners of NG Education which have
provided or contributed the content on this page. **Partner** ![National

Geographic Television and Film

](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/party-logo/NGT_Small.jpg)

                
                                      * __ Twitter
                      * __ Facebook
                      * __ Pinterest
                      * __ Google Classroom
                      * __ Email
                      * __ Print
                

Background Info Questions Fast Facts Explore More Vocabulary

Mass flows of water, or currents, are essential to understanding how heat
energy moves between the Earth's water bodies, landmasses, and atmosphere. The
ocean covers 71 percent of the planet and holds 97 percent of its water,
making the ocean a key factor in the storage and transfer of heat energy
across the globe. The movement of this heat through local and global ocean
currents affects the regulation of local weather conditions and temperature
extremes, stabilization of global climate patterns, cycling of gases, and
delivery of nutrients and larva to marine ecosystems.

Ocean currents are located at the ocean surface and in deep water below 300
meters (984 feet). They can move water horizontally and vertically and occur
on both local and global scales. The ocean has an interconnected current, or
circulation, system powered by wind, tides, the Earth's rotation (Coriolis
effect), the sun (solar energy), and water density differences. The topography
and shape of ocean basins and nearby landmasses also influence ocean currents.
These forces and physical characteristics affect the size, shape, speed, and
direction of ocean currents.

Surface ocean currents can occur on local and global scales and are typically
wind-driven, resulting in both horizontal and vertical water movement.
Horizontal surface currents that are local and typically short term include
rip currents, longshore currents, and tidal currents. In upwelling currents,
vertical water movement and mixing brings cold, nutrient-rich water toward the
surface while pushing warmer, less dense water downward, where it condenses
and sinks. This creates a cycle of upwelling and downwelling. Prevailing
winds, ocean surface currents, and the associated mixing influence the
physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of the ocean, as well as
global climate.

Deep ocean currents are density-driven and differ from surface currents in
scale, speed, and energy. Water density is affected by the temperature,
salinity (saltiness), and depth of the water. The colder and saltier the ocean
water, the denser it is. The greater the density differences between different
layers in the water column, the greater the mixing and circulation. Density
differences in ocean water contribute to a global-scale circulation system,
also called the global conveyor belt.

The global conveyor belt includes both surface and deep ocean currents that
circulate the globe in a 1,000-year cycle. The global conveyor belt's
circulation is the result of two simultaneous processes: warm surface currents
carrying less dense water away from the Equator toward the poles, and cold
deep ocean currents carrying denser water away from the poles toward the
Equator. The ocean's global circulation system plays a key role in
distributing heat energy, regulating weather and climate, and cycling vital
nutrients and gases.

                
                                      1. Density differences in ocean water drive the global conveyor belt. This global circulation system is also called thermohaline circulation. When broken down into its root words, what does "thermohaline" mean?
                

Answer

* * *

**Thermo means temperature** and **haline means salinity** (salt content).

                
                                      2. The global conveyor belt carries water and heat energy across the globe. What is the difference in how the conveyor belt moves water in the tropics compared to the Arctic?
                

Answer

* * *

**In the Tropics** , **water warms and becomes less dense** , so **it rises
toward the surface**. **In the Arctic** , **water cools and becomes more
dense** , so **it sinks toward the depths**.

                
                                      3. What forces are responsible for tidal currents and are they predictable?
                

Answer

* * *

Tidal currents are primarily driven by the **gravitational interaction of the
sun** , **moon** , **and Earth**. They are also **influenced by coastal
topography**. Tidal currents are the only type of currents that change
regularly and can be easily predicted.

                
                                      * The volume of water transported by the global conveyor belt is equal to 100 Amazon Rivers or 16 times the flow of all the world’s rivers combined.
                      * It would take a single water molecule approximately 1,000 years to complete one full cycle of the global conveyor belt. In that time, the water molecule would travel through the waters of all the major ocean basins: Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Southern, and Arctic.
                      * Climate change leading to increases in ocean temperatures, evaporation of seawater, and glacial and sea ice melting could create an influx of warm freshwater onto the ocean surface. This would further block the formation of sea ice and disrupt the sinking of denser cold, salty water. These events could slow or even stop the ocean conveyor belt, which would result in global climate changes that could include drastic decreases in Europe’s temperatures due to a disruption of the Gulf Stream.
                

Books

                
                                      * National Geographic Environmental Literacy Teacher Guide Series: One Ocean, Chapter One—Ocean Currents
                

Instructional Content

                
                                      * National Geographic Education: The Geography of Ocean Currents
                

Websites

                
                                      * National Geographic: Alien Deep 
                      * National Geographic: Ocean Conveyor Belt—Thermohaline Circulation 
                      * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Education Resources—Ocean Currents 
                      * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Ocean Service Education—The Ocean’s Role in Weather and Climate
                

**climate**

Noun

all weather conditions for a given location over a period of time.

**Coriolis effect**

Noun

the result of Earth's rotation on weather patterns and ocean currents. The
Coriolis effect makes storms swirl clockwise in the Southern hemisphere and
counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere.

**current**

Noun

steady, predictable flow of fluid within a larger body of that fluid.

**density**

Noun

number of things of one kind in a given area.

**ocean circulation**

Noun

worldwide movement of water (currents) in the ocean.

**ocean conveyor belt**

Noun

system in which water moves between the cold depths and warm surface in oceans
throughout the world. Also called thermohaline circulation.

**rip current**

Noun

a strong flow of water running from the shore to the open ocean, sea, or lake.

**salinity**

Noun

saltiness.

**solar energy**

Noun

radiation from the sun.

**thermohaline circulation**

Noun

ocean conveyor belt system in which water moves between the cold depths and
warm surface in oceans throughout the world.

**topography**

Noun

the shape of the surface features of an area.

**upwelling**

Noun

process in which cold, nutrient-rich water from the bottom of an ocean basin
or lake is brought to the surface due to atmospheric effects such as the
Coriolis force or wind.

**weather**

Noun

state of the atmosphere, including temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind,
humidity, precipitation, and cloudiness.

Credits

* * *

#### Media Credits

The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media
asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page
that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or
group credited.

#### Writer

Angela M. Cowan, Education Specialist and Curriculum Designer

#### Editors

Jeannie Evers, Emdash Editing  
Julie Brown, National Geographic Society

#### Producers

Katy Andres  
Winn Brewer, National Geographic Education  
Julie Brown, National Geographic Society  
Alison Michel, National Geographic Society

#### Last Updated

March 21, 2013

User Permissions

* * *

For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you
have questions about licensing content on this page, please contact
ngimagecollection@natgeo.com for more information and to obtain a license. If
you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project
or classroom presentation, please visit our FAQ page.

#### Media

Some media assets (videos, photos, audio recordings and PDFs) can be
downloaded and used outside the National Geographic website according to the
Terms of Service. If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears
in the lower right hand corner
(![download](/static/images/download.15b252b7df6f.png)) of the media viewer.
If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media.

#### Text

Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of
Service.

#### Interactives

Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our
website. You cannot download interactives.

### Funder

![National Science

Foundation](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/acknowledge/logos/NSF-

Logo-NEW-crop1.jpg)

This material is based in part upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. DRL-1114251. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation.

##### Related Resources

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/315/1e1/3151e1d5-0177-4238-bcc9-8ffd67f15e42_c133-0-856-495_r380x260.jpg?2335ada326d2c78b3a4b256ee7a36984f3d24a54)
                

###### Ocean Currents

Ocean currents are the continuous, predictable, directional movement of
seawater driven by gravity, wind (Coriolis Effect), and water density. Ocean
water moves in two directions: horizontally and vertically. Horizontal
movements are referred to as currents, while vertical changes are called
upwellings or downwellings. This abiotic system is responsible for the
transfer of heat, variations in biodiversity, and Earth's climate system.
Explore how ocean currents are interconnected with other systems with these
resources.

View Collection

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/211/619/9f3459ca-bacd-4c3c-b47a-640279e576b3_c15-0-1184-800_r380x260.jpg?85ccd21e8ab2e480f59e16e47542117acd3a6d40)
                

###### Regional Climate

The weather you encounter day to day depends on where you live. Places around
the Equator experience warm weather all year round, but experience alternate
periods of rainy and dry seasons. Places near lakes may experience more snow
in the winter, whereas places on continental plains may be more prone to hail,
thunderstorms, and tornados in the summer. The different kinds of weather you
might experience in these regions are caused by moving patterns in the Earth's
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, unequal heating of the Earth, and the
rotation of the Earth on its tilted axis. Learn more about regional climates
with this curated resource collection.

View Collection

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/000/269/26929_c0-33-990-710_r380x260.jpg?a4634f83764a0027786d006d630ddd9181e4bc5c)
                

###### Climate

Climate describes the average weather conditions of a particular place over a
30 year period . All places on earth have their own climates. Some climates
are small in scale, like the climate of a local region or the microclimates
within an ecosystem, and some are much larger, such as the climates of entire
continents, or the world's oceans. Different from weather events, which are
short-term and temporary phenomenon, climates are usually steady and
predictable, and shape how organisms and human civilizations evolve and adapt
in any given region. However, climates are not always permanent, and can
change drastically due to human activity. Explore the world's climates and how
they affect local regions and the planet with this curated collection of
resources.

View Collection

##### Related Resources

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/315/1e1/3151e1d5-0177-4238-bcc9-8ffd67f15e42_c133-0-856-495_r380x260.jpg?2335ada326d2c78b3a4b256ee7a36984f3d24a54)
                

###### Ocean Currents

Ocean currents are the continuous, predictable, directional movement of
seawater driven by gravity, wind (Coriolis Effect), and water density. Ocean
water moves in two directions: horizontally and vertically. Horizontal
movements are referred to as currents, while vertical changes are called
upwellings or downwellings. This abiotic system is responsible for the
transfer of heat, variations in biodiversity, and Earth's climate system.
Explore how ocean currents are interconnected with other systems with these
resources.

View Collection

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/211/619/9f3459ca-bacd-4c3c-b47a-640279e576b3_c15-0-1184-800_r380x260.jpg?85ccd21e8ab2e480f59e16e47542117acd3a6d40)
                

###### Regional Climate

The weather you encounter day to day depends on where you live. Places around
the Equator experience warm weather all year round, but experience alternate
periods of rainy and dry seasons. Places near lakes may experience more snow
in the winter, whereas places on continental plains may be more prone to hail,
thunderstorms, and tornados in the summer. The different kinds of weather you
might experience in these regions are caused by moving patterns in the Earth's
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, unequal heating of the Earth, and the
rotation of the Earth on its tilted axis. Learn more about regional climates
with this curated resource collection.

View Collection

                
                                      * ![](https://media.nationalgeographic.org/assets/photos/000/269/26929_c0-33-990-710_r380x260.jpg?a4634f83764a0027786d006d630ddd9181e4bc5c)
                

###### Climate

Climate describes the average weather conditions of a particular place over a
30 year period . All places on earth have their own climates. Some climates
are small in scale, like the climate of a local region or the microclimates
within an ecosystem, and some are much larger, such as the climates of entire
continents, or the world's oceans. Different from weather events, which are
short-term and temporary phenomenon, climates are usually steady and
predictable, and shape how organisms and human civilizations evolve and adapt
in any given region. However, climates are not always permanent, and can
change drastically due to human activity. Explore the world's climates and how
they affect local regions and the planet with this curated collection of
resources.

View Collection

X

![](/static/images/logos/nglogo-stacked-white.min.6f3b65fe2af6.svg)

National Geographic Headquarters  
1145 17th Street NW  
Washington, D.C. 20036

###### ABOUT

                
                                      * National Geographic Society
                      * National Geographic Partners
                      * News and Impact
                      * Contact
                

###### EXPLORE

                
                                      * Our Explorers
                      * Our Projects
                      * Resources for Educators
                      * Museum and Events
                      * Technology and Innovation
                

###### JOIN US

                
                                      * Ways to Give
                      * Apply for a Grant
                      * Careers
                

Donate Get Updates

###### Connect

###### Connect

National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2019
National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.  
Privacy Policy | Sustainability Policy | Terms of Service | Code of Ethics

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

