

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Wind Turbines

Wind Energy

Turbines

Sustainable Technology

Alternative Energy

Energy (physics)

# How many turbines would be needed to replace a power station? A large coal-

fired power station produces 2000 mw of electrical energy. A wind turbine with
33m blades can produce 300 kw.

UpdateCancel

ankqrdvhBC ObOyOJ QZzFHVoRrQJmngLOfeb zczSDozZyfCe WEbLVPmViBpHiYrJAearsZ

The must-play city building game of the year.

Develop and advance an empire through historical ages and into the future.

PGlAFSIaaLryjMwve cMNEFenoCwQ heJlaMkHtIG
OYBfIQaomOCsjrARegpeToNhfJeVmNCFPpvoieJdrFEAecztZKsiTjM.IcINMmJovaMjvmopN

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Answer Wiki

4 Answers

![Aaron Dahlen](https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-307921979-100-xzonfprnmtoxvqhvyoluitywzckvenzv.jpeg)

Aaron Dahlen, Retired - Military (2018-present)

Updated 10w ago

Updated 10w ago * Author has 1k answers and 1m answer views

Hello, this is the dispatcher, I’d like to order 1.5 GW of power next month
with a 0.5 GW spinning reserve. Can you do it?

**Coal:** Sure, not a problem, give me a few hours notice to ramp the plant to
capacity.

**Wind:** Seriously! I haven’t a clue. Why are you even asking, I can’t
control the weather…

* * *

Sorry, you can’t compare wind to coal. They are different monsters. Coal is
Dispatchable generation - Wikipedia and can be called upon when needed. Don’t
underestimate the importance of a dispatchable source. Without this ability
the ship of state is in serious trouble. We can not fail.

Wind is great when it is available. However, for every GW of wind we install,
there will be a GW of dispatchable generation to back it up.

* * *

The simple answer to your question is 6670 wind turbines with 2 GW of natural
gas backup. There is no such thing as a wind and solar farm, we only have
solar and wind **and** gas farms.

If we added storage, the number of wind turbines would be increased as an
inverse function of the capacity factor. Assuming a 40% capacity factor, we
now need:

[math]6670 * \dfrac{1}{0.4} = 16,675 \ turbines[/math]

That assumes the capacity factor is representative of a typical day. It isn’t.
Instead, it’s an average over a long period of time. In reality, there will be
consecutive days with no wind. When the wind finally returns we will need to
provide power to the load and recharge the storage. The number of turbines is
now a function of the number of days required to recharge the storage. The
answer is region specific and depends on the aggregate mix of available
generation.

Needless to say, it’s a big number. A really big expensive number. Today, we
can purchase storage for about $250/kWh.[1] A battery to store 2 days of
energy at 2 GW continuous would set you back 24 Billion dollars. Storage
doesn’t stand a chance against natural gas.

For a glimpse of the future see: Are all non-conventional sources of energy
clean?

Regards,

APDahlen

P.S. 300 kW is a bit small for a modern turbine. See: Vestas | Turbines

Footnotes

[1] Levelized Cost of Storage 2017

820 views * View 7 Upvoters

pzZrgPRkAoammcCOgoHDntwpMebJdFrmCI PEboyUCXXi
vOXOkDOouiFjnWcNAlCkbvCDUIylufhBHcneovkWvGNvmoDppL

Why should I use DuckDuckGo instead of Google?

![Gabriel Weinberg](https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-1325-100-yulrktvuoxawtlesqjzeqxuxffigkpbc.jpeg)

Gabriel Weinberg, CEO & Founder at DuckDuckGo.com (2008-present)

Updated 34w ago

**#1 — Google tracks you. We don’t.**

You share your most intimate secrets with your search engine without even
thinking: medical, financial and personal issues, along with all the day to
day things that make you, well, you. All of that personal information should
be private, but on Google i...

(Continue Reading)

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

                
                                      * How many times must a 1 MW wind turbine rotate to produce 1 MW in just an hour?
                
                      * What is the number of wind turbines and/or solar panels required to generate the same amount of power as the average sized coal fired power st...
                
                      * How many wind turbines would it take to replace a nuclear power plant?
                
                      * How much power does a 1.5kW rated wind turbine produce in a month?
                
                      * How much MW does a wind turbine produce?
                

View more

### Related Questions

                
                                      * Why is wind turbine a reaction turbine?
                
                      * What is generated from a 2 MW Wind turbine?
                
                      * How many wind turbines would be needed to power 800 homes? (see details)
                
                      * What is the energy that a 1.5 MW turbine will produce in an hour?
                
                      * How efficient is a vertical axis wind turbine in comparison to the three blade wind turbine?
                
                      * How much power can a wind turbine produce?
                
                      * Why is 3 the optimal number of blades on a wind turbine instead of say 5 or more?
                
                      * How many wind turbines or solar panels are required to produce the equivalent power of an average coal fired power station? Is this form of re...
                
                      * Does a large wind turbine produce more energy than a smaller one rotating at same speed?
                
                      * Does a 1.5KW wind turbine produce that much power annually or monthly or is it the power produced per second?
                

### Related Questions

                
                                      * How many times must a 1 MW wind turbine rotate to produce 1 MW in just an hour?
                
                      * What is the number of wind turbines and/or solar panels required to generate the same amount of power as the average sized coal fired power st...
                
                      * How many wind turbines would it take to replace a nuclear power plant?
                
                      * How much power does a 1.5kW rated wind turbine produce in a month?
                
                      * How much MW does a wind turbine produce?
                
                      * Why is wind turbine a reaction turbine?
                
                      * What is generated from a 2 MW Wind turbine?
                
                      * How many wind turbines would be needed to power 800 homes? (see details)
                
                      * What is the energy that a 1.5 MW turbine will produce in an hour?
                
                      * How efficient is a vertical axis wind turbine in comparison to the three blade wind turbine?
                

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

