

# Immanuel Velikovsky

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Immanuel Velikovsky

* * *

![Immanuel

Velikovsky.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e4/Immanuel_Velikovsky.jpg/220px-

Immanuel_Velikovsky.jpg)

Immanuel Velikovsky at the 1974 American Association for the Advancement of
Science Conference in San Francisco

Born| (1895-06-10)10 June 1895

Vitebsk, Russian Empire (in present-day Belarus)

Died| 17 November 1979(1979-11-17) (aged 84)

Princeton, New Jersey

Alma mater| Moscow State University

**Immanuel Velikovsky** (/ ˌvɛliˈkɒfski/; Russian: Иммануи́л Велико́вский,
IPA: [ɪmənʊˈil vʲɪlʲɪˈkofskʲɪj]; 10 June [O.S. 29 May] 1895 - 17 November
1979) was a Russian independent scholar who wrote a number of books
reinterpreting the events of ancient history, in particular the US bestseller
_Worlds in Collision_ published in 1950.[1] Earlier, he had played a role in
the founding of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel, and was a
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst. Velikovsky's work is frequently cited as a
canonical example of pseudoscience and has been used as an example of the
demarcation problem.[2]

His books use comparative mythology and ancient literary sources (including
the Old Testament) to argue that Earth suffered catastrophic close contacts
with other planets (principally Venus and Mars) in ancient history. In
positioning Velikovsky among catastrophists including Hans Bellamy, Ignatius
Donnelly, and Johann Gottlieb Radlof,[3] the British astronomers Victor Clube
and Bill Napier noted "... Velikovsky is not so much the first of the new
catastrophists ...; he is the last in a line of traditional catastrophists
going back to mediaeval times and probably earlier."[4] Velikovsky argued that
electromagnetic effects play an important role in celestial mechanics. He also
proposed a revised chronology for ancient Egypt, Greece, Israel, and other
cultures of the ancient Near East. The revised chronology aimed at explaining
the so-called "dark age" of the eastern Mediterranean (c. 1100–750 BC) and
reconciling biblical history with mainstream archaeology and Egyptian
chronology.

In general, Velikovsky's theories have been ignored or vigorously rejected by
the academic community.[5] Nonetheless, his books often sold well and gained
an enthusiastic support in lay circles, often fuelled by claims of unfair
treatment for Velikovsky by orthodox academia.[6][7][8][9] The controversy
surrounding his work and its reception is often referred to as "the Velikovsky
affair".[10][11][12]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Childhood and early education
                      * 2 Hebrew University of Jerusalem
                      * 3 Career as a psychiatrist
                      * 4 Emigration to the US and a career as an author
                      * 5 Posthumous administration of literary estate
                      * 6 Ideas
                      * 7 Revised chronology
                      * 8 Reception
                        * 8.1 Velikovskyism
                        * 8.2 Criticism
                      * 9 "The Velikovsky Affair"
                      * 10 Bibliography
                      * 11 References and sources
                      * 12 External links
                

## Childhood and early education[edit]

Immanuel Velikovsky was born in 1895 to a prosperous Jewish family in Vitebsk,
Russia (now in Belarus). The son of Shimon (Simon Yehiel) Velikovsky
(1859–1937) and Beila Grodensky, he learned several languages as a child and
was sent away to study at the Medvednikov Gymnasium in Moscow, where he
performed well in Russian and mathematics. He graduated with a gold medal in
1913. Velikovsky then traveled in Europe and visited Palestine before briefly
studying medicine at Montpellier in France and taking premedical courses at
the University of Edinburgh. He returned to Russia before the outbreak of
World War I, enrolled in the University of Moscow, and received a medical
degree in 1921.

## Hebrew University of Jerusalem[edit]

Upon taking his medical degree, Velikovsky left Russia for Berlin. With the
financial support of his father, Velikovsky edited and published two volumes
of scientific papers translated into Hebrew. The volumes were titled _Scripta
Universitatis Atque Bibliothecae Hierosolymitanarum_ ("Writings of the
Jerusalem University  & Library"). He enlisted Albert Einstein to prepare the
volume dealing with mathematics and physics. This project was a cornerstone in
the formation of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, as the fledgling
university was able to donate copies of the _Scripta_ to the libraries of
other academic institutions in exchange for complimentary copies of
publications from those institutions.

In 1923, Velikovsky married Elisheva Kramer, a young violinist.

## Career as a psychiatrist[edit]

Velikovsky lived in what was then the British Mandate of Palestine from 1924
to 1939, practising medicine in the fields of general practice, psychiatry,
and psychoanalysis which he had studied under Sigmund Freud's pupil Wilhelm
Stekel in Vienna. During this time, he had about a dozen papers published in
medical and psychoanalytic journals. He was also published in Freud's _Imago_
, including a precocious analysis of Freud's own dreams.[13]

## Emigration to the US and a career as an author[edit]

In 1939, with the prospect of war looming, Velikovsky travelled with his
family to New York City, intending to spend a sabbatical year researching for
his book _Oedipus and Akhenaton._ The book was inspired by Freud's _Moses and
Monotheism_ and explored the possibility that Pharaoh Akhenaton was the
legendary Oedipus. Freud had argued that Akhenaton, the supposedly
monotheistic Egyptian pharaoh, was the source of the religious principles that
Moses taught to the people of Israel in the desert. Freud's claim (and that of
others before him) was based in part on the resemblance of Psalm 104 in the
Bible to the Great Hymn to the Aten, an Egyptian hymn discovered on the wall
of the tomb of Akhenaten's courtier, Ay, in Akhenaten's city of Akhetaten. To
disprove Freud's claim and to prove the Exodus as such, Velikovsky sought
evidence for the Exodus in Egyptian documents. One such document was the
Ipuwer Papyrus, which he felt reported events similar to several of the
Biblical plagues. Since conventional Egyptology dated the Ipuwer Papyrus much
earlier than either the Biblical date for the Exodus (ca. 1500—1450 BCE) or
the Exodus date accepted by many of those who accepted the conventional
chronology of Egypt (ca. 1250 BCE), Velikovsky had to revise the conventional
chronology.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/39/Dr.Emmanuel_Velikovsky_1947_passport.jpg/220px-

Dr.Emmanuel_Velikovsky_1947_passport.jpg)

Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky 1947 passport photo.

Within weeks of his arrival in the United States, World War II began.
Launching on a tangent from his original book project, Velikovsky began to
develop the radical catastrophist cosmology and revised chronology theories
for which he would become notorious. For the remainder of the Second World
War, now as a permanent resident of New York City, he continued to research
and write about his ideas, searching for a means to disseminate them to
academia and the public. He privately published two small _Scripta Academica_
pamphlets summarising his theories in 1945 ( _Theses for the Reconstruction of
Ancient History_ and _Cosmos Without Gravitation_ ). He mailed copies of the
latter to academic libraries and scientists, including Harvard astronomer
Harlow Shapley in 1947.

In 1950, after eight publishing houses rejected the _Worlds in Collision_
manuscript,[14] it was finally published by Macmillan, which had a large
presence in the academic textbook market. Even before its appearance, the book
was enveloped by furious controversy, when _Harper's Magazine_ published a
highly positive feature on it, as did _Reader's Digest_ , with what would
today be called a creationist slant. This came to the attention of Shapley,
who opposed the publication of the work, having been made familiar with
Velikovsky's claims through the pamphlet Velikovsky had given him. Shapley
threatened to organise a textbook boycott of Macmillan for its publication of
_Worlds in Collision_ , and within two months the book was transferred to
Doubleday. It was by then a bestseller in the United States. In 1952,
Doubleday published the first installment in Velikovsky's revised chronology,
_Ages in Chaos_ , followed by the _Earth in Upheaval_ (a geological volume) in
1955. In November 1952, Velikovsky moved from Manhattan to Princeton, New
Jersey.

For most of the 1950s and early 1960s, Velikovsky was _persona non grata_ on
college and university campuses. After this period, he began to receive more
requests to speak. He lectured, frequently to record crowds, at universities
across North America. In 1972, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation aired a
one-hour television special featuring Velikovsky and his work, and this was
followed by a thirty-minute documentary by the BBC in 1973.

During the remainder of the 1970s, Velikovsky devoted a great deal of his time
and energy to rebutting his critics in academia, and he continued to tour
North America and Europe to deliver lectures on his ideas. By that time, the
elderly Velikovsky suffered from diabetes and intermittent depression, which
his daughter said may have been exacerbated by the academic establishment's
continuing rejection of his work.[15][ _third-party source needed_ ] He died
in 1979.

## Posthumous administration of literary estate[edit]

For many years, Velikovsky's estate was controlled by his two daughters,
Shulamit Velikovsky Kogan (b. 1925), and Ruth Ruhama Velikovsky Sharon (b.
1926),[16] who generally resisted the publication of any further material.[
_citation needed_ ] (Exceptions include the biography _ABA — the Glory and the
Torment: The Life of Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky_ , issued in 1995 and greeted
with rather dubious reviews;[17][18][19] and a Hebrew translation of another
_Ages in Chaos_ volume, _The Dark Age of Greece_ , which was published in
Israel.) A volume of Velikovsky's discussions and correspondence with Albert
Einstein appeared in Hebrew in Israel, translated and edited by his daughter
Shulamit Velikovsky Kogan. In the late 1990s, a large portion of Velikovsky's
unpublished book manuscripts, essays and correspondence became available at
the Velikovsky Archive website.[20] In 2005, Velikovsky's daughter Ruth Sharon
presented his entire archive to Princeton University Library.[21]

## Ideas[edit]

Notwithstanding Velikovsky's dozen or so publications in medical and
psychoanalytic journals in the 1920s and 1930s,[22] the work for which he
became well known was developed by him during the early 1940s, whilst living
in New York City. He summarised his core ideas in an affidavit in November
1942,[23] and in two privately published _Scripta Academica_ pamphlets
entitled _Theses for the Reconstruction of Ancient History_ (1945) and _Cosmos
without Gravitation_ (1946).[24]

Rather than have his ideas dismissed wholesale because of potential flaws in
any one area, Velikovsky then chose to publish them as a series of book
volumes, aimed at a lay audience, dealing separately with his proposals on
ancient history, and with areas more relevant to the physical sciences.
Velikovsky was a passionate Zionist,[25][26] and this did steer the focus of
his work, although its scope was considerably more far-reaching than this. The
entire body of work could be said to stem from an attempt to solve the
following problem: that to Velikovsky there appeared to be insufficient
correlation in the written or archaeological records between Biblical history
and what was known of the history of the area, in particular, Egypt.[27]

Velikovsky searched for common mention of events within literary records, and
in the Ipuwer Papyrus he believed he had found a contemporary Egyptian account
of the Plagues of Egypt. Moreover, he interpreted both accounts as
descriptions of a great natural catastrophe. Velikovsky attempted to
investigate the physical cause of these events, and extrapolated backwards and
forwards in history from this point, cross-comparing written and mythical
records from cultures on every inhabited continent, using them to attempt
synchronisms of the historical records, yielding what he believed to be
further periodic natural catastrophes that can be global in scale.[ _citation
needed_ ]

He arrived at a body of radical inter-disciplinary ideas, which might be
summarised as:[ _citation needed_ ]

                
                                      * Planet Earth has suffered natural catastrophes on a global scale, both before and during humankind's recorded history.
                      * There is evidence for these catastrophes in the geological record (here Velikovsky was advocating Catastrophist ideas as opposed to the prevailing Uniformitarian notions) and archeological record. The extinction of many species had occurred catastrophically, not by gradual Darwinian means.
                      * The catastrophes that occurred within the memory of humankind are recorded in the myths, legends and written history of all ancient cultures and civilisations. Velikovsky pointed to alleged concordances in the accounts of many cultures, and proposed that they referred to the same real events. For instance, the memory of a flood is recorded in the Hebrew Bible, in the Greek legend of Deucalion, and in the Manu legend of India. Velikovsky put forward the psychoanalytic idea of "Cultural Amnesia" as a mechanism whereby these literal records came to be regarded as mere myths and legends.
                      * The causes of these natural catastrophes were close encounters between the Earth and other bodies within the solar system — not least what are now the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, and Mars, these bodies having moved upon different orbits within human memory.
                      * To explain the fact that these changes to the configuration of the solar system violate several well-understood laws of physics, Velikovsky invented a role for electromagnetic forces in counteracting gravity and orbital mechanics.
                

Some of Velikovsky's specific postulated catastrophes included:[ _citation
needed_ ]

                
                                      * A tentative suggestion that Earth had once been a satellite of a "proto-Saturn" body, before its current solar orbit.
                      * That the Deluge (Noah's Flood) had been caused by proto-Saturn's entering a nova state, and ejecting much of its mass into space.
                      * A suggestion that the planet Mercury was involved in the Tower of Babel catastrophe.
                      * Jupiter had been the prime mover in the catastrophe that saw the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.
                      * Periodic close contacts with a "cometary Venus" (which had been ejected from Jupiter) had caused the Exodus events (c. 1500 BCE) and Joshua's subsequent "sun standing still" (Joshua 10:12–13) incident.
                      * Periodic close contacts with Mars had caused havoc in the 8th and 7th centuries BCE.
                

As noted above, Velikovsky had conceived the broad sweep of this material by
the early 1940s. However, within his lifetime, whilst he continued to
research, expand and lecture upon the details of his ideas, he released only
selected portions of his work to the public in book form:[ _citation needed_ ]

                
                                      * _Worlds in Collision_ (1950) discussed the literary and mythical records of the "Venus" and "Mars" catastrophes
                      * Portions of his _Revised Chronology_ were published as _Ages in Chaos_ (1952), _Peoples of the Sea_ (1977) and _Rameses II and His Time_ (1978) (The related monograph _Oedipus and Akhenaten_ , 1960, posited the thesis that pharaoh Akhenaten was the prototype for the Greek mythic figure Oedipus.)
                      * _Earth in Upheaval_ (1955) dealt with geological evidence for global natural catastrophes.
                

Velikovsky's ideas on his earlier Saturn/Mercury/Jupiter events were never
published, and the available archived manuscripts are much less developed.[
_citation needed_ ]

Of all the strands of his work, Velikovsky published least on his belief that
electromagnetism plays a role in orbital mechanics. Although he appears to
have retreated from the propositions in his 1946 monograph _Cosmos without
Gravitation_ , no such retreat is apparent in _Stargazers and
Gravediggers_.[28] _Cosmos without Gravitation_ , which Velikovsky placed in
university libraries and sent to scientists, is a probable catalyst for the
hostile response of astronomers and physicists to his later claims about
astronomy.[29] However, other Velikovskian enthusiasts such as Ralph Juergens
(dec.), Earl Milton (dec.), Wal Thornhill, and Donald E. Scott have claimed
that stars are powered not by internal nuclear fusion, but by galactic-scale
electrical discharge currents. Such ideas do not find support in the
conventional literature and are rejected as pseudoscience by the scientific
community.[30][31][32]

## Revised chronology[edit]

Main article: Ages in Chaos

Velikovsky argued that the conventional chronology of the Near East and
classical world, based upon Egyptian Sothic dating and the king lists of
Manetho, was wholly flawed. This was the reason for the apparent absence of
correlation between the Biblical account and those of neighbouring cultures,
and also the cause of the enigmatic "Dark Ages" in Greece and elsewhere.
Velikovsky shifted several chronologies and dynasties from the Egyptian Old
Kingdom to Ptolemaic times by centuries (a scheme he called the _Revised
Chronology_ ), placing The Exodus contemporary with the fall of the Middle
Kingdom of Egypt. He proposed numerous other synchronisms stretching up to the
time of Alexander the Great. He argued that these eliminate phantom "Dark
Ages", and vindicate the biblical accounts of history and those recorded by
Herodotus.

These ideas were first put forward briefly in his _Theses for the
Reconstruction of Ancient History_ , but _Ages in Chaos_ was his first full-
length work on the subject. This was followed by _Oedipus and Akhenaton_ ,
_Peoples of the Sea_ and _Rameses II and His Time_ , and two further works
that were unpublished at the time of his death but that are now available
online at the Velikovsky Archive: _The Assyrian Conquest_ and _The Dark Ages
of Greece_.

Though rejected by mainstream historians, these ideas have been developed by
other historians such as David Rohl and Peter James, who have also attempted
their own revised chronologies.

## Reception[edit]

### Velikovskyism[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/3/3f/Leroy_vel.jpg/256px-

Leroy_vel.jpg)

C. Leroy Ellenberger with Immanuel Velikovsky at Seaside Heights, New Jersey,
in 1978.

Velikovsky inspired numerous followers during the 1960s and 1970s. Alfred de
Grazia dedicated a 1963 issue of his journal, _American Behavioral Scientist_
, to Velikovsky, which was published in an expanded version as a book, _The
Velikovsky Affair — Scientism Versus Science_ , in 1966. _The Skeptical
Inquirer_ , in a review of a later book by de Grazia, _Cosmic Heretics_
(1984), suggests that de Grazia's efforts may be responsible for Velikovsky's
continuing notability during the 1970s.[33]

The Society for Interdisciplinary Studies (SIS) was "formed in 1974 in
response to the growing interest in the works of modern catastrophists,
notably the highly controversial Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky". The Institute for
the Study of Interdisciplinary Sciences (ISIS) is a 1985 spinoff from the SIS
founded under the directorship of David Rohl, who had come to reject
Velikovsky's Revised Chronology in favour of his own "New Chronology".

_Kronos: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Synthesis_ was founded in 1975
explicitly "to deal with Velikovsky's work". Ten issues of _Pensée: Immanuel
Velikovsky Reconsidered_ appeared from 1972 to 1975. The controversy
surrounding Velikovsky peaked in the mid 1970s and public interest declined in
the 1980s and, by 1984, erstwhile Velikovskyist C. Leroy Ellenberger had
become a vocal critic of Velikovskian catastrophism. Some Velikovskyist
publications and authors such as David Talbott remain active into the 2000s.

### Criticism[edit]

Velikovsky's ideas have been rejected by mainstream academia (often
vociferously so) and his work is generally regarded as erroneous in all its
detailed conclusions. Moreover, scholars view his unorthodox methodology (for
example, using comparative mythology to derive scenarios in celestial
mechanics) as an unacceptable way to arrive at conclusions. Stephen Jay
Gould[34] offered a synopsis of the mainstream response to Velikovsky,
writing, "Velikovsky is neither crank nor charlatan--although, to state my
opinion and to quote one of my colleagues, he is at least gloriously wrong ...
Velikovsky would rebuild the science of celestial mechanics to save the
literal accuracy of ancient legends."

Velikovsky's bestselling, and as a consequence most criticized, book is
_Worlds in Collision_. Astronomer Harlow Shapley, along with others such as
Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, were highly critical of Macmillan's decision to
publish the work. The fundamental criticism against this book from the
astronomy community was that its celestial mechanics were physically
impossible, requiring planetary orbits that do not conform with the laws of
conservation of energy and conservation of angular momentum. [ _citation
needed_ ]

Velikovsky relates in his book _Stargazers & Gravediggers_ how he tried to
protect himself from criticism of his celestial mechanics by removing the
original appendix on the subject from _Worlds in Collision_ , hoping that the
merit of his ideas would be evaluated on the basis of his comparative
mythology and use of literary sources alone. However, this strategy did not
protect him: the appendix was an expanded version of the _Cosmos Without
Gravitation_ monograph, which he had already distributed to Shapley and others
in the late 1940s --and they had regarded the physics within it as absurd.[
_citation needed_ ]

By 1974, the controversy surrounding Velikovsky's work had permeated US
society to the point where the American Association for the Advancement of
Science felt obliged to address the situation, as they had previously done in
relation to UFOs, and devoted a scientific session to Velikovsky featuring
(among others) Velikovsky himself and Professor Carl Sagan. Sagan gave a
critique of Velikovsky's ideas (the book version of Sagan's critique is much
longer than that presented in the talk; see below). His criticisms are
available in _Scientists Confront Velikovsky_ [35] and as a corrected and
revised version in the book _Broca's Brain: Reflections on the Romance of
Science_.[36] Sagan's arguments were aimed at a popular audience and he did
not remain to debate Velikovsky in person, facts that were used by
Velikovsky's followers to attempt to discredit his analysis.[37] Sagan
rebutted these charges and further attacked Velikovsky's ideas in his PBS
television series _Cosmos_ , though not without reprimanding scientists who
had attempted to suppress Velikovsky's ideas.[ _original research?_ ]

It was not until the 1980s that a very detailed critique of _Worlds in
Collision_ was made in terms of its use of mythical and literary sources when
Bob Forrest published a highly critical examination of them (see below).
Earlier in 1974, James Fitton published a brief critique of Velikovsky's
interpretation of myth (ignored by Velikovsky and his defenders) whose
indictment began: "In at least three important ways Velikovsky's use of
mythology is unsound. The first of these is his proclivity to treat all myths
as having independent value; the second is the tendency to treat only such
material as is consistent with his thesis; and the third is his very
unsystematic method."[38] A short analysis of the position of arguments in the
late 20th century is given by Dr Velikovsky's ex-associate, and _Kronos_
editor, C. Leroy Ellenberger, in his _A Lesson from Velikovsky_.[39]

More recently, the absence of supporting material in ice-core studies (such as
the Greenland Dye-3 and Vostok cores) has removed any basis for the
proposition of a global catastrophe of the proposed dimension within the later
Holocene period. However, tree-ring expert Mike Baillie would give credit to
Velikovsky after disallowing the impossible aspects of _Worlds in Collision_ :
"However, I would not disagree with _all_ aspects of Velikovsky's work.
Velikovsky was almost certainly correct in his assertion that ancient texts
hold clues to catastrophic events in the relatively recent past, within the
span of human civilization, which involve the effects of comets, meteorites
and cometary dust ... But fundamentally, Velikovsky did not understand
anything about comets ... He did not know about the hazard posed by relatively
small objects ... This failure to recognize the power of comets and asteroids
means that it is reasonable to go back to Velikovsky and delete all the
physically impossible text about Venus and Mars passing close to the earth ...
In other words, we can get down to his main thesis, which is that the Earth
experienced dramatic events from heavenly bodies particularly in the second
millennium BC."[40]

Velikovsky's revised chronology has been rejected by nearly all mainstream
historians and Egyptologists. It was claimed, starting with early reviewers,
that Velikovsky's usage of material for proof is often very
selective.[41][42][43] In 1965 the leading cuneiformist Abraham Sachs, in a
forum at Brown University, discredited Velikovsky's use of Mesopotamian
cuneiform sources.[44] Velikovsky was never able to refute Sachs' attack.[45]
In 1978, following the much-postponed publication of further volumes in
Velikovsky's _Ages in Chaos_ series, the United Kingdom-based Society for
Interdisciplinary Studies organised a conference in Glasgow specifically to
debate the revised chronology.[46] The ultimate conclusion of this work, by
scholars including Peter James, John Bimson, Geoffrey Gammonn, and David Rohl,
was that the Revised Chronology was untenable.[47] The SIS has continued to
publish updates of this ongoing discussion, in particular the work of
historian Emmet Sweeney.[48]

While James credits Velikovsky with "point[ing] the way to a solution by
challenging Egyptian chronology", he severely criticised the contents of
Velikovsky's chronology as "disastrously extreme", producing "a rash of new
problems far more severe than those it hoped to solve" and claiming that
"Velikovsky understood little of archaeology and nothing of stratigraphy."[49]

Bauer accuses Velikovsky of dogmatically asserting interpretations which are
at best possible, and gives several examples from _Ages in Chaos_.[50]

## "The Velikovsky Affair"[edit]

Such was the hostility directed against Velikovsky from some quarters
(particularly the original campaign led by Harlow Shapley), that some
commentators have made an analysis of the conflict itself. Among these was a
study by _American Behavioral Scientist_ magazine, eventually published in
book form as _The Velikovsky Affair — Scientism Versus Science._ [51] This
framed the discussion in terms of how academic disciplines reacted to ideas
from workers from outside their field, claiming that there was an academic
aversion to permitting people to cross inter-disciplinary boundaries. More
recently, James Gilbert, professor of history at the University of Maryland,
challenged this traditional version with an account that focused on the
intellectual rivalry between Velikovsky's ally Horace Kallen and Harlow
Shapley.[52] Earlier, Henry Bauer had challenged the view that the Velikovsky
Affair illustrated the resistance of scientists to new ideas by pointing out
"the nature and validity of Velikovsky's claims must be considered before one
decides that the Affair can illuminate the reception of new ideas in science
..."[53] and, on the same basis, Keith Dixon contended that the treatment of
the case by sociologists was an example of a broader unhealthy tendency in
sociology to explain all opinions as ideologically motivated without
considering their possible rational basis.[54]

The scientific press, in general, denied Velikovsky a forum to rebut his
critics. Velikovsky claimed that this made him a "suppressed genius", and he
likened himself to the 16th century heretical friar Giordano Bruno, who was
burnt at the stake for his beliefs.[55][56][57]

The controversy created by Velikovsky's publications may have helped revive
the catastrophist movement in the second half of the 20th century; however, it
is also held by some working in the field that progress has actually been
retarded by the negative aspects of the so-called Velikovsky Affair.[58][59]

## Bibliography[edit]

                
                                      * _Worlds in Collision_ (1950) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-11-4) The Macmillan Company
                      * _Worlds in Collision_ (1950) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-11-4) Doubleday
                      * _Ages in Chaos_ (1952) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-13-8) Doubleday
                      * _Earth In Upheaval_ (1955) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-12-1) Doubleday
                      * _Oedipus and Akhnaton_ (1960) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-18-3) Doubleday
                      * _Peoples of the Sea_ (1977) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-15-2) Doubleday
                      * _Ramses II and His Time_ (1978) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-14-5) Doubleday
                      * _Mankind in Amnesia_ (1982) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-16-9) Doubleday
                      * _Stargazers and Gravediggers_ (1983) (new edition: ISBN 978-1-906833-17-6) William Morrow
                      * _The Dark Age of Greece_ Published in Israel[60]
                

## References and sources[edit]

References

                
                                      1. **^** Princeton University press release, July 29, 2005 Archived August 22, 2008, at the Wayback Machine (quoted on website of Dr. Ruth Velikovsky Sharon)
                      2. **^** Gordin, Michael D. (2012). _The Pseudoscience Wars: Immanuel Velikovsky and the Birth of the Modern Fringe_. Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-30442-6.
                      3. **^** "Johann Gottlieb Radlof — The Velikovsky Encyclopedia". Velikovsky.info. Retrieved  2010-06-03.
                      4. **^** Clube, S. V. M. and Bill Napier 1984. Velikovskians In Collision. _Quadrant_ (Sydney). Jan.-Feb., pp. 33–34; reprinted in _Kronos_ vol. IX, no. 3, 1984. pp. 44–49.
                      5. **^** Trevor Palmer, _Perilous Planet Earth: Catastrophes and Catastrophism through the Ages_ , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-81928-8. pp. 116–119.
                      6. **^** Morrison, David (2001). Velikovsky at Fifty: Cultures in Collision on the Fringes of Science. _Skeptic_ , **9** (1), 62–76; reprinted in Shermer, Michael (editor) (2002). The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience, Santa Barbara, Calif. ISBN 1-57607-653-9. 473–488.
                      7. **^** Cohen, Daniel (1967). Myths of the Space Age, Dodd Mead. LCCN 67-25108. Chap. VIII, Immanuel Velikovsky — the Man Who Challenged the World, pp. 172–94.
                      8. **^** Gordon, Theodore J. (1966). Ideas in Conflict, St. Martin's Press. LCCN 66-23261. Chap. 2, The Miracles of Exodus, pp. 18–48.
                      9. **^** Fair, Charles (1974). The New Nonsense: The End of the Rational Consensus, Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-671-21822-0. Chap. viii, Speaking of Flying Objects ..., pp. 139–86.
                      10. **^** Bauer, Henry H. (1992). The Velikovsky Affair _Aeon_ , **2** (6), 75–84. Homestead.com This article, a comprehensive overview, originally appeared in Dec. 1988 La Recherche, pp. 1448–55.
                      11. **^** Bauer, Henry H. (1996). Velikovsky, Immanuel, in Gordon Stein (editor), _The Encyclopedia of the Paranormal_. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-021-5. pp. 781–788.
                      12. **^** Grove, J. W. (1989). In Defence of Science: Science, technology, and politics in modern society, University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-8020-2634-6. Chap. 5, Pseudo-science, pp. 120–50; adapted from Grove, J. W. (1985). Rationality at Risk: Science against Pseudoscience. _Minerva_ , **23** (2), 216-40.
                      13. **^** Velikovsky, I. "The Dreams Freud Dreamed" _Psychoanalytic Review_ Vol. 28 pp. 487–511 (October, 1941), Varchive.org
                      14. **^** Velikovsky, Immanuel (1983). _Stargazers and Gravediggers_ , William Morrow & Co. ISBN 0-688-01545-X. p. 63.
                      15. **^** Sharon, Ruth Velikovsky: "Aba: The Glory and the Torment. The Life of Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky" McGraw Hill, 1995
                      16. **^** Duane Vorhees, "The Early Years: Part Two", _Aeon_ III:1 (Nov 1992). See also the Web site of Ruth Velikovsky Sharon Archived 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine
                      17. **^** Vorhees, Duane (1996). _Aeon_ , **4** (2), 107-11.
                      18. **^** Ellenberger, Leroy (1996). _Journal of Scientific Exploration_ , **10** (4), 561-9., UGA.edu
                      19. **^** Moore, Brian (1997). _Chronology & Catastrophism Review_ **1997** (2), 51.
                      20. **^** The Immanuel Velikovsky Archive
                      21. **^** Princeton University Library Archived 2006-05-12 at the Wayback Machine Current listing (less detail): Immanuel Velikovsky Papers
                      22. **^** See Varchive.org for a list
                      23. **^** Velikovsky, Immanuel (1942). Affidavit, November 23.
                      24. **^** Collected at Varchive.com
                      25. **^** Velikovsky penned a weekly political column under the moniker "Observer" in the _New York Post_ November 25, 1947– June 23, 1949, Varchive.org
                      26. **^** Sieff, M "Velikovsky and his Heroes" _Society for Interdisciplinary Studies Review_ Vol. V, issue 4 (1984)
                      27. **^** Vorhees, Duane. (1990). The "Jewish Science" of Immanuel Velikovsky: Culture and Biography as Ideational Determinants. Dissertation, Bowling Green State University.
                      28. **^** Velikovsky, Immanuel 1983. _Stargazers and Gravediggers_. William Morrow and Co. ISBN 0-688-01545-X. Footnote, p. 165, indicates no retreat and states "Gravitation is an electromagnetic phenomenon."
                      29. **^** Bauer, Henry H. 1984. _Beyond Velikovsky: The History of a Public Controversy_. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-01104-X. p. 233.
                      30. **^** Ellenberger, C. Leroy 1985. sec. "Electric Stars" in "Still Facing Many Problems (Part II)", _Kronos_ **X** (3), pp. 15–23.
                      31. **^** Thompson, Tim 2001. "On the 'Electric Sun' Hypothesis". Thompson is a physicist retired from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
                      32. **^** Bridgman, W. T. 2008. "The Electric Sky, Short-Circuited" Archived 2009-09-19 at the Wayback Machine. Bridgman is an astrophysicist at NASA-Goddard Spaceflight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland.
                      33. **^** Bauer, Henry H. (1985), "Inside the Velikovsky Affair" (PDF), _Skeptical Inquirer_ , **9** (3): 284–288.
                      34. **^** Gould, Stephen Jay, _Velikovsky in Collision_
                      35. **^** Sagan, Carl (1977). An Analysis of _Worlds in Collision_ , in Goldsmith, Donald (editor) (1977). _Scientists Confront Velikovsky_. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-0961-6. pp. 41–104.
                      36. **^** Here is an example of the reworking of the text between 1977 and 1979: "My own position is that even if twenty percent of the legendary concordances which Velikovsky produces are real, there is something important to be explained ... Likewise, we should not be surprised if a few elements of a few legends are coincidentally identical. But I do not believe that all of the concordances which Velikovsky produces can be explained away in this manner" (1977, pp. 48–50), compared with "My own position is that if even 20 percent of the legendary concordances that Velikovsky produces are real, there is something important to be explained ... Likewise, we should not be surprised if a few elements of a few legends are coincidentally identical. But I believe that _all_ of the concordances Velikovsky produces can be explained away in this manner" (1979, pp. 86–88).
                      37. **^** Ginenthal, Charles (1995). Carl Sagan & Immanuel Velikovsky. New Falcon Publications, Tempe Arizona
                      38. **^** Fitton, James (1974). Velikovsky Mythistoricus. _Chiron_ , **I** (1 &2), 29–36; excerpts at UGA.edu
                      39. **^** _A Lesson from Velikovsky_
                      40. **^** Baillie, Mike (1999). _Exodus to Arthur: Catastrophic Encounters with Comets_ , B.T. Batsford Ltd.; London. ISBN 0-7134-8352-0. Chap. 12, Velikovsky Revisited, pp. 166–180 (170–172).
                      41. **^** Albright, William 1952. _New York Herald Tribune Book Review_ April 20. Retelling the Near East's Ancient History. p. 6.
                      42. **^** Kaempffert, Waldemar, "Solomon, the Queen of Sheba, and the Egypt of Exodus" (abstract with subscriber access to full PDF), _New York Times Book Review_ p. 23, April 20, 1952. Digital link retrieved 2015-07-18.
                      43. **^** Stiebing, Jr., William H. 1984. Cosmic Catastrophism, Chap. III, in _Ancient Astronauts, Cosmic Collisions_ Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-260-2. pp. 57–80.
                      44. **^** Transcript in _Aeon_ 1992, Vol.3 No.1, pp. 103–5. Also "Address of Abraham Sachs at Brown University, 3/15/65"; provided by Leroy Ellenberger via _abob.libs.uga.edu_. Retrieved 2016-03-05.
                      45. **^** Ellenberger, Leroy 1992. _Aeon_ **3** (1), section "Bonanza from Brown" in "Of Lessons, Legacies, and Litmus Tests: A Velikovsky Potpourri (Part One)", pp. 88–90. "Velikovsky confronted a panel of four professors [at Brown University on March 15, 1965]: Leon N. Cooper (physics), Bruno J Giletti (geology), Charles Smiley (astronomy) and Abraham J. Sachs (history of mathematics) [who was substituting for Otto Neugebauer ], moderated by Henry Kučera (linguistics). In the event, Velikovsky debated the first three handily. He was stunned by Sachs whose address was both a rhetorical and substantive _tour de force_. Velikovsky's rebuttal began: 'Dr. Sachs threw so many accusations in that Philippic of his that I am at a difficulty to answer; but I invite Dr. Sachs to spend the hour and a half tomorrow at the meeting [at Diman House], and every one of you too, and point by point each of his statements will be proven wrong.' Unfortunately, Sachs did not show up the next day and Velikovsky did not even mention Sachs [according to the tape recording of the proceedings in the possession of Warner B. Sizemore who loaned it to Ellenberger March 31, 1979]. Curiously, Velikovsky's file for the Brown trip contains typed rebuttals to all the panelists _except_ Sachs, for whom only partial, penciled notes exist—but later that year Velikovsky would reply to Kim J. Masters, a Princeton sophomore, within a week in _The Daily Princetonian_ (Nov. 15, 1965) over a criticism of _Oedipus and Akhnaton_. Velikovsky's rebuttal to Masters was scathing, running the gamut from haggling over details to _ad hominems_.
                      46. **^** "Ages in Chaos?'-Proceedings of the Residential Weekend Conference, Glasgow, 7th–9th April 1978" _Society for Interdisciplinary Studies Review_ Vol. VI, issue 1/2/3 84pp (1982)
                      47. **^** Bimson, "Finding the Limits of Chronological Revision" in "Proceedings of the SIS Conference: Ages Still in Chaos" _Chronology & Catastrophism Review_ 2003
                      48. **^** For example: "Chronology and Catastrophism Review (C&CR)" back issues (Jan 1976–2015); "Ages Still in Chaos" (13–15 Sep 2002); "A couple of sites on a revised chronology" (4 Sep 2010); found via an 'Emmet Sweeney' search at Society for Interdisciplinary Studies website; this is just a sampling of Velikovsky (and Sweeney) links there. Retrieved 2016-03-05.
                      49. **^** James, Peter, Preface from _Centuries of Darkness_
                      50. **^** Bauer _Beyond Velikovsky_ pages 158–60
                      51. **^** [1]
                      52. **^** Gilbert, James (1997). Redeeming Culture: American Religion in an Age of Science, University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-29320-3. Chap. 8, Two Men of Science, pp. 170–97.
                      53. **^** Bauer, Henry (1984). "Velikovsky and Social Studies of Science". _4S Review_. Sage Publications, Inc. **2** (4): 2–8. ISSN 0738-0526. JSTOR 690283 - via JSTOR.
                      54. **^** Dixon, Keith (1980). _The Sociology of Belief: Fallacy and Foundation_. Routledge  & Kegan Paul, London. pp. 73–76. ISBN 0-7100-0445-1
                      55. **^** Velikovsky, I. _The Acceptance of Correct Ideas in Science_ , Varchive.org
                      56. **^** Velikovsky, I _My Challenge to Conventional Views in Science_ , presented at the AAAS 1974 conference, Varchive.org
                      57. **^** Velikovsky, I _Claude Schaeffer_ , Varchive.org
                      58. **^** Steel, Duncan (1995). _Rogue Asteroids and Doomsday Comets_ , John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-30824-2. p. 155.
                      59. **^** Morrison, David (2001). Velikovsky at Fifty: Cultures in Collision on the Fringes of Science. _Skeptic_ , **9** (1), 62–76; reprinted in Shermer, Michael (editor) (2002). The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience, Santa Barbara, Calif. ISBN 1-57607-653-9. 473–488. Morrison quotes several scientists who embrace the latter view, including Walter Alvarez, David Raup, Richard Muller, Jay Melosh, Peter Ward, and Don Yeomans. This survey confirms the hunch expressed by Morrison and Clark R. Chapman [ _clarification needed_ ] in Chapter 13 "Catastrophism Gone Wild: The Case of Immanuel Velikovsky" in _Cosmic Catastrophes_ (1989), pp. 183–96.
                      60. **^** Available on-line in the Velikovsky archive
                

Sources

                
                                      * Abell, George O. (1981). Scientists and Velikovsky, in _Paranormal Borderlands of Science_ , edited by Kendrick Frazier, Prometheus Books.
                      * Allan, D.S. and J.B. Delair (1995). _When The Earth Nearly Died_. Gateway Books, UK. published in US as _Cataclysm_ by Bear  & Co, 1997. A précis is here. (When the Earth Nearly Died Knowledge.co.uk)
                      * Bauer, Henry H. (1980). Passions and Purposes: A Perspective, _Skeptical Inquirer_ , Vol 5, #1, Fall 1980, 28–31. Reprinted in _Paranormal Borderlands of Science_ , edited by Kendrick Frazier, Prometheus Books.
                      * Bauer, Henry H. (1984, paperback ed. 1999). _Beyond Velikovsky. The History of a Public Controversy_. University of Illinois, Urbana.
                      * Bauer, Henry H. (1995). Velikovsky's place in the history of science: A lesson on the strengths and limitations of science. _Skeptic_ **3** (4), 52–56. Homestead.com
                      * Carroll, Robert Todd (2003). _The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions_ , John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-27242-6. Pages 396–401.
                      * Alfred de Grazia, Ralph E. Juergens, Stecchini L.C. (Eds.) (1978). _The Velikovsky Affair — Scientism versus Science_. 2ed., Metron Publications, Princeton, New Jersey. Also online.
                      * Alfred de Grazia, _Cosmic Heretics_ 2nd edition (2013), ISBN 978-1-60377-084-2
                      * Dolby, R. G. A. (1975). What Can We Usefully Learn from the Velikovsky Affair. _Social Studies of Science_ **5** , 165-75; revised as On Schools of Thought, _S.I.S. Review_ 1976; **I** (3), 26–30.
                      * Forrest, Bob (1981). _Velikovsky's Sources_. In six volumes, with Notes and Index Volume. Privately published by the author, Manchester.
                      * Forrest, Robert (1983). Venus and Velikovsky: The Original Sources, _Skeptical Inquirer_ , Vol 8, #2, Winter 1983–1984, 154–164.
                      * Forrest, Bob (1987). _Guide to Velikovsky's Sources_. Stonehenge Viewpoint, Santa Barbara.
                      * Frazier, Kendrick (1980). The Distortions Continue, _Skeptical Inquirer_ , Vol 5, #1, Fall 1980, 32–38. Reprinted in _Paranormal Borderlands of Science_ , edited by Kendrick Frazier, Prometheus Books.
                      * Gardner, Martin (1957). _Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science_ , chapter 3, Dover ISBN 0-486-20394-8
                      * Ginenthal, Charles (1990). _Carl Sagan and Immanuel Velikovsky_. Ivy Press, New York (ISBN 0-9639759-0-0)
                      * Ginenthal, Charles (1996). _Stephen Jay Gould and Immanuel Velikovsky_ , Ivy Press Books.
                      * Goldsmith, Donald, (Ed.) (1977) _Scientists Confront Velikovsky_. Norton. Proceedings of a symposium at the 1974 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
                      * Gordin, Michael D. (2012). _The Pseudoscience Wars: Immanuel Velikovsky and the Birth of the Modern Fringe_. Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-30442-6.
                      * Greenberg, Lewis M. (1986), _Scientists Confront Scientists Who Confront Velikovsky_ (2nd printing ed.), Glassboro, N.J.: Kronos Press, ISBN 978-0-917994-06-7. This book is _Kronos_ IV:2, (1978) with a different cover. (see also _Scientists Confront Scientists Who Confront Velikovsky_)
                      * Marriott, David (2004) _The Velikovsky Inheritance_ , Vanguard Press, 2006, ISBN 1-84386-121-6, ISBN 978-1-84386-121-8.
                      * Miller, Alice (1977). _Index to the Works of Immanuel Velikovsky_. Glassboro State College, Glassboro. ISBN 0-917994-07-8
                      * Oberg, James (1980). Ideas in Collision, _Skeptical Inquirer_ , Vol 5, #1, Fall 1980, 20–27. Reprinted in _Paranormal Borderlands of Science_ , edited by Kendrick Frazier, Prometheus Books.
                      * Payne-Gaposchkin, Cecilia (1952). _Worlds in Collision_ , in _Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society_ , vol 96, Oct. 15, 1952.
                      * Pensée. 1972–1975. _Immanuel Velikovsky Reconsidered. I – X_. Student Academic Freedon Forum, Portland.
                      * Ransom, C.J. (1976) _The Age of Velikovsky_. Delta, New York. ISBN 0-440-50323-X
                      * Plait, Philip (2002). _Bad Astronomy: Misconceptions and Misuses Revealed, from Astrology to the Moon Landing "Hoax"_ , John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-40976-6. Chapter 18.
                      * Rohl, David (1996) _A Test of Time_. Arrow Books. ISBN 0-09-941656-5, ISBN 978-0-09-941656-2
                      * Sagan, Carl, (1979) _Broca's Brain_. Random House. Reissued 1986 by Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-33689-5. Reprinted as chapter 15 of _Science and the Paranormal: Probing the Existence of the Supernatural_ , edited by George O. Abell and Barry Singer, Scribners, 1981. Chapter 7 in _Broca's Brain_ , "Venus and Dr. Velikovsky", is a corrected and slightly revised version of "An Analysis of _Worlds in Collision_ ," which originally appeared in _Scientists Confront Velikovsky_.
                      * Schadewald, Robert (2008). _Worlds of Their Own — A Brief History of Misguided Ideas: Creationism, Flat-Earthism, Energy Scams, and the Velikovsky Affair_, _Xlibris_ , ISBN 978-1-4363-0435-1, Part I.[ _self-published source_ ]
                      * Sharon, Ruth Velikovsky (2010): _ABA - The Glory and the Torment: The Life of Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky_ , Paradigma (new revised edition). ISBN 978-1-906833-20-6
                      * Sharon, Ruth Velikovsky (2010): _Immanuel Velikovsky - The Truth Behind the Torment_ , Paradigma (new revised edition). ISBN 978-1-906833-21-3
                      * Editors of Pensée. (1976) _Velikovsky Reconsidered_. Doubleday, New York. ISBN 0-385-03118-1
                

## External links[edit]

**Velikovsky works available online**

                
                                      * The Velikovsky Archive — an online collection of works, including unpublished manuscripts, audio recordings of lectures, and a video of the 1972 CBC documentary
                

**Sites about Velikovsky**

                
                                      * The Velikovsky Encyclopedia
                      * www.velikovsky.org
                      * Shade Tree Physics - Velikovsky Pages
                      * Works by or about Immanuel Velikovsky in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
                

**Organizations sympathetic to Velikovsky's work**

                
                                      * Aeon: Journal of Myth and Science
                      * Kronos: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Synthesis
                      * Society for Interdisciplinary Studies
                      * An Answer to Sachs Explaining Velikovsky's attitude
                      * Kronia Group (last archived March 5, 2010 by Internet Archive)
                      * The Velikovskian, A Journal of Myth, History and Science (last archived August 14, 2014 by Internet Archive)
                

**Critiques of Velikovsky**

                
                                      * Jerry Pournelle's commentaries on Sagan's arguments at the AAAS meeting
                      * _Velikovsky in Collision_ — Stephen Jay Gould
                      * Ellenberger, Leroy (1995), "An Antidote to Velikovskian Delusions", _Skeptic_ , **3** (4) , retrieved 2007-07-19 (Linked on-line copy has some additions by Ellenberger to the article as originally published.)
                      * _A lesson from Velikovsky_ — Leroy Ellenberger
                      * "Top Ten Reasons Why Velikovsky is Wrong About Worlds in Collision" — Leroy Ellenberger
                      * Mewhinney, Sean (1986), "El-Arish Revisited", _Kronos_ , **XI** (2): 41–61
                      * Abraham Sachs' address at Brown University 1965 on cuneiform sources
                

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                
                                      * BIBSYS: 90232106
                      * BNE: XX1475952
                      * BNF: cb12644388b (data)
                      * GND: 118626450
                      * ISNI: 0000 0001 0915 8523
                      * LCCN: n50020314
                      * LNB: 000172542
                      * NDL: 00459633
                      * NKC: jn19990008758
                      * SNAC: w63r1m96
                      * SUDOC: 074241214
                      * VIAF: 73974190
                      * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 73974190
                

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Immanuel_Velikovsky&oldid=898358819"

Categories:

                
                                      * Moscow State University alumni
                      * American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent
                      * American psychiatrists
                      * American Zionists
                      * Belarusian Jews
                      * Catastrophism
                      * Esoteric anthropogenesis
                      * Jewish American writers
                      * Mythographers
                      * People from Seaside Heights, New Jersey
                      * People from Vitebsk
                      * Proponents of alternative chronologies
                      * Pseudohistorians
                      * Pseudoastronomers
                      * Russian psychiatrists
                      * 1895 births
                      * 1979 deaths
                      * 20th-century American writers
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Webarchive template wayback links
                      * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2018
                      * Infobox person using alma mater
                      * Articles with hCards
                      * Articles containing Russian-language text
                      * All articles lacking reliable references
                      * Articles lacking reliable references from September 2011
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011
                      * All articles that may contain original research
                      * Articles that may contain original research from October 2018
                      * All articles with self-published sources
                      * Articles with self-published sources from December 2017
                      * Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with LNB identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Български
                      * Čeština
                      * Deutsch
                      * Español
                      * Français
                      * Hrvatski
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Íslenska
                      * Italiano
                      * עברית
                      * Nederlands
                      * 日本語
                      * Norsk
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Русский
                      * Српски / srpski
                      * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                      * Suomi
                      * Svenska
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 23 May 2019, at 01:25 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

