

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

                
                                      * Cart 0
                      * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
                      * |Stay Informed
                

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

                
                                      * The Sciences
                      * Mind
                      * Health
                      * Tech
                      * Sustainability
                      * Education
                      * Video
                      * Podcasts
                      * Blogs
                      * Publications
                      * Subscribe
                      * Current Issue
                      * Cart0
                      * Sign In
                      * Stay Informed
                
                      * Share
                      * Latest
                
                      *           *           *           * Environment
                

# Like Oceans, Freshwater Is Also Acidifying

Rising CO2 in lakes and reservoirs may harm animals that live in those
ecosystems

                
                                      * By Erica Gies on January 11, 2018
                      * أعرض هذا باللغة العربية
                
                      * Share on Facebook
                
                      * Share on Twitter
                
                      * Share on Reddit
                
                      * Share on LinkedIn
                
                      * Share via
                
                      * Print
                

![Like Oceans, Freshwater Is Also

Acidifying](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/7B5B1FA4-C85F-4CCC-

BB0A576BCCEF64BC_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&FD1B0018-580E-45E0-8259C19BA7FF3784)

Credit: Christian Zappel _Getty Images_

Advertisement

Scientists have known for some time the ocean is acidifying because of climate
change. The seas' absorption of human-generated carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere is well documented, along with the harm it is causing ocean
creatures like shellfish.

But what about freshwater? Is it also soaking up atmospheric carbon? A new
paper published today in _Current Biology_ presents some of the first evidence
that the answer may be yes, but perhaps not the same way as occurs in the
ocean.

In the new study researchers reported a significant increase of CO2 and a
correlating pH decrease of about 0.3 in four reservoirs in Germany over 35
years. They analyzed data collected from 1981 to 2015 by the local Ruhr region
agency **** that monitors drinking water, and were able to document the rising
carbon dioxide levels over time by factoring in changes in temperature, water
density, pH, ion species distribution and total inorganic content.

A crucial reason why the study of freshwater acidification has lagged until
now is because determining how atmospheric carbon affects these ecosystems
requires complex modeling, and is much less clear than that occurring in
oceans, according **** to study author Linda Weiss, an aquatic ecologist at
Ruhr University Bochum in Germany. In oceans CO2 from the atmosphere dissolves
into seawater's surface, forming carbonic acid. Freshwater such as lakes,
though, receive various sources of carbon dioxide from decomposing organic and
inorganic matter swept into them, which makes it hard for scientists to
distinguish between the direct effects of rising atmospheric CO2 and these
other elements.

Carbon dioxide levels in lakes are often high and vary widely from lake to
lake based on factors such as the type of nearby ecosystem, land use such as
agriculture, sizes of the lake and watershed, amount of precipitation, and
because some types of soils and rocks absorb more CO2 than others. Levels of
CO2 also shift seasonally, changing as leaves drop in fall and ice forms in
winter or as animals go through their life cycles, and even daily, rising at
night due to temperature changes and algae's inability to photosynthesize at
night. All of this makes it harder to discern long-term trends. The data set
Weiss used was unusual in that it monitored these myriad factors over the
35-year period, allowing the researchers to conclude the increase in CO2 they
saw in the reservoirs was indeed due to increased carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere.

The primary way freshwater ecosystems absorb CO2 created by humans burning
fossil fuels is likely different than what happens in oceans. In lakes and
reservoirs the extra atmospheric CO2 feeds the surrounding vegetation and the
rising global temperature lengthens the growing season. As plants in and
around the lake grow larger and/or proliferate, the amount of organic carbon
available when they die and the rate at which they break down in soil
increases. Precipitation then washes it into lakes and other freshwater
systems.

Although some lakes can also absorb CO2 at their surfaces similar to the way
oceans do, the increases in these other sources of organic and inorganic
carbon are likely the dominant factor, says Scott Higgins, a research
scientist at the International Institute for Sustainable Development's
Experimental Lakes Area, a natural laboratory of 58 small lakes in Ontario. In
fact, some lakes have more CO2 than the atmosphere, so they release CO2 from
the water into the air, he says.

For their study, Weiss and her team also documented the impacts of higher CO2
levels on freshwater crustaceans at the bottom of the food web--specifically,
two species of _Daphnia_ , also known as water fleas. Multiple studies have
shown increased CO2 makes it more difficult for ocean animals to form shells
as well as dulls their senses, making them more vulnerable to predators. A few
studies have shown similar impacts on freshwater species in the lab. But
_Daphnias,_ Weiss 's critters **** of interest, had not been studied.

When _Daphnias_ sense predators, they raise a helmet and deploy spikes, called
"neckteeth," to protect themselves. To test how rising CO2 might affect their
defense mechanism, Weiss exposed stock _Daphnias_ in the lab to levels of CO 2
ranging from just above the maximum level seen in global freshwater to about
60 percent more than that maximum, to mimic a worst-case scenario. The
researchers found that when exposed to higher CO2 levels, the critters were
less able to sense predators and deploy their defenses.

Weiss says she used lab animals because they are well studied: "We know what
they do or what they're supposed to do." But Higgins notes that could create
misleading results: The animals Weiss tested had never been exposed to such
high CO2 concentrations before. That is likely different than the experiences
of wild animals, who have to adapt to the regularly changing carbon dioxide
levels of lakes and reservoirs from season to season and throughout the day.
"Over time, lakes are experiencing quite variable CO2 concentrations, and all
the biota that live in them are, too," he says. Although still unknown, it may
be that living in such complex water chemistry will ultimately help freshwater
plants and animals adapt to the planet's rising CO2 levels.

![](/themes/responsive/images/global/rightsPermsIcon.png) Rights & Permissions

### ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

![](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/3A86D6C3-DA7B-4B40-8D8F420CA9D7AFF9_small.jpg)

#### Erica Gies

Erica Gies writes about science and the environment from Victoria, British
Columbia, and San Francisco. Her work appears in the _New York Times_ , the
_Guardian_ , the _Economist_ , and elsewhere.

Credit: Nick Higgins

#### Recent Articles

                
                                      * Do Dams Increase Water Use?
                      * Slaking the World's Thirst with Seawater Dumps Toxic Brine in Oceans
                      * Sponge Cities Can Limit Urban Floods and Droughts
                

## Read This Next

![Ocean Acidification from CO<sub>2</sub> Is Happening Faster Than

Thought](/public/resources/icon__SA-logo-placeholder--

rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

Sustainability

### Ocean Acidification from CO2 Is Happening Faster Than Thought

February 1, 2009 — Charles Q. Choi

![The Dangers of Ocean Acidification](/public/resources/icon__SA-logo-

placeholder--rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

The Sciences

### The Dangers of Ocean Acidification

March 1, 2006 — Scott C. Doney

![Watch Ocean Acidification in Real Time](/public/resources/icon__SA-logo-

placeholder--rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

Sustainability

### Watch Ocean Acidification in Real Time

February 18, 2015 — Brian Kahn and Climate Central

![Pink Salmon Struggle as Freshwater Becomes

Acidic](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D7411802-9C7B-4B0E-92BC5E2A8F8DD3CC_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Sustainability

### Pink Salmon Struggle as Freshwater Becomes Acidic

June 30, 2015 — Niina Heikkinen and ClimateWire

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

                
                                      * instagram
                      * soundcloud
                      * youtube
                      * twitter
                      * facebook
                      * rss
                

Scientific american arabic

العربية

                
                                      * Store
                      * About
                      * Press Room
                
                      * FAQs
                      * Contact Us
                      * Site Map
                
                      * Advertise
                      * SA Custom Media
                      * Terms of Use
                
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Use of Cookies
                      * International Editions
                

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

