

> **_Early Modern Homo sapiens_**

>

> **  
> ** All people today are classified as **_Homo sapiens_**. Our species of
humans first began to evolve nearly 200,000 years ago in association with
technologies not unlike those of the early Neandertals. It is now clear that
early _Homo sapiens_ , or **modern humans** , did not come after the
Neandertals but were their contemporaries. However, it is likely that both
modern humans and Neandertals descended from _Homo heidelbergensis_.

>

> Compared to the Neandertals and other late archaic humans, modern humans
generally have more delicate skeletons. Their skulls are more rounded and
their brow ridges generally protrude much less. They rarely have the occipital
buns found on the back of Neandertal skulls. They also have relatively high
foreheads, smaller faces, and pointed chins.

>

> ![photo of a Neandertal and a modern human skull shown together for

comparison with differences in foreheads, brow ridges, and chins

highlihgted](images/modern_human_and_Neandertal_skulls.gif)

>

> * * *

>

> Neandertal | modern _Homo sapiens _

>

> The first fossils of early modern humans to be identified were found in 1868
at the 27,000-23,000 year old Cro-Magnon rock shelter site near the village of
Les Eyzies ![click this icon to hear the preceding term

pronounced](images/horn.gif) in southwestern France. They were subsequently
named the **Cro-Magnon** ![click this icon to hear the preceding term

pronounced](images/horn.gif) people. The y were very similar in appearance to
modern Europeans. Males were 5 feet 4 inches to 6 feet tall (1.6-1.8 m.) That
was 4-12 inches (10-31 cm.) taller than Neandertals. Their skeletons and
musculature generally were less massive than the Neandertals. The Cro-Magnon
had broad, small faces with pointed chins and high foreheads. Their cranial
capacities were up to 1590 cm3, which is relatively large even for people
today.

>

> **Origins of Modern Humans**

>

> Current data suggest that modern humans evolved from archaic humans
primarily in East Africa. A 195,000 year old fossil from the Omo 1 site in
Ethiopia shows the beginnings of the skull changes that we associate with
modern people, including a rounded skull case and possibly a projecting chin.
A 160,000 year old skull from the Herto site in the Middle Awash area of
Ethiopia also seems to be at the early stages of this transition. It had the
rounded skull case but retained the large brow ridges of archaic humans.
Somewhat more advanced transitional forms have been found at Laetoli in
Tanzania dating to about 120,000 years ago. By 115,000 years ago, early modern
humans had expanded their range to South Africa and into Southwest Asia
(Israel) shortly after 100,000 years ago. There is no reliable evidence of
modern humans elsewhere in the Old World until 60,000-40,000 years ago, during
a short temperate period in the midst of the last ice age.

>

> ## **Important Early Modern _Homo sapiens_ Sites**

>

> ![](images/map_of_early_modern_Homo_sapiens_sites.gif) |

>

> | | **Date of Fossil  
>  (years ago)**  
>  ---|---  
>  |

>

> * * *

>

> **_East Africa_ :** |  
>  Herto, Middle Awash | 160,000-154,000  
>  Omo 1 | 195,000  
>  Laetoli | 120,000  
>  **_South Africa_ :** |  
>  Border Cave | 115,000-90,000  
>  Klasies River Mouth | 90,000  
>  **_Israel_ :** |  
>  Skhul and Qafzeh | 92,000-90,000  
>  **_Australia_ :** |  
>  Lake Mungo | 60,000-46,000  
>  _Asia_ : |  
>  Annamite Mountains (Laos) | 63,000  
>  Ordos (Mongolia) | 40,000-20,000 ?  
>  Liujiang (China) | 139,000-111,000 ?  
>  Zhirendong (China) | 100,000 ?  
>  Zhoukoudian upper cave  
>  (China) | 27,000  
>  **_Europe_ :** |  
>  Peştera cu Oase (Romania) | 36,000-34,000  
>  Combe Capelle (France) | 35,000-30,000  
>  Mladeč and Předmost  
>  (Czech Republic) | 35,000-25,000  
>  Cro-Magnon (France) | 27,000-23,000

>

> * * *

>

> Note: Artifactual evidence indicates that modern **humans** were in Europe
by at least 40,000 and possibly as  
>  early as 46,000 years ago. Dating of the earliest modern human fossils in
Asia is less secure, but it is likely  
>  that they were present there by at least 60,000 years ago and possibly
100,000 years ago.

>

> It would seem from these dates that the location of initial modern _Homo
sapiens_ evolution and the direction of their dispersion from that area is
obvious. That is not the case. Since the early 1980's, there have been two
leading contradictory models that attempt to explain modern human __ evolution
--the replacement model and the regional continuity model.

>

> The **replacement model** of Christopher Stringer and Peter Andrews proposes
that modern humans evolved from archaic humans 200,000-150,000 years ago only
in Africa and then some of them migrated into the rest of the Old World
replacing all of the Neandertals and other late archaic humans beginning
around 60,000-40,000 years ago or somewhat earlier. If this interpretation of
the fossil record is correct, all people today share a relatively modern
African ancestry. All other lines of humans that had descended from _Homo
erectus_ presumably became extinct. From this view, the regional anatomical
differences that we now see among humans are recent developments--evolving
mostly in the last 40,000 years. This hypothesis is also referred to as the
"out of Africa", "Noah's ark", and "African replacement" model.

>

> The **regional continuity** **model** (or multiregional evolution model)
advocated by Milford Wolpoff proposes that modern humans evolved more or less
simultaneously in all major regions of the Old World from local archaic
humans. For example, modern Chinese are seen as having evolved from Chinese
archaic humans and ultimately from Chinese _Homo erectus_. This would mean
that the Chinese and some other peoples in the Old World have great antiquity
in place. Supporters of this model believe that the ultimate common ancestor
of all modern people was an early _Homo erectus_ in Africa who lived at least
1.8 million years ago. It is further suggested that since then there was
sufficient gene flow between Europe, Africa, and Asia to prevent long-term
reproductive isolation and the subsequent evolution of distinct regional
species. It is argued that intermittent contact between people of these
distant areas would have kept the human line a single species at any one time.
However, regional varieties, or subspecies, of humans are expected to have
existed.

>

> ![graphic illustrations of the replacement and the regional continuity

models](images/models_of_Hss_evolution.gif)

>

> **Replacement Model Arguments**

>

> There are two sources of evidence supporting the replacement model--the
fossil record and DNA. So far, the earliest finds of modern _Homo sapiens_
skeletons come from Africa. They date to nearly 200,000 years ago on that
continent. They appear in Southwest Asia around 100,000 years ago and
elsewhere in the Old World by 60,000-40,000 years ago. Unless modern human
remains dating to 200,000 years ago or earlier are found in Europe or East
Asia, it would seem that the replacement model better explains the fossil data
for those regions. However, the DNA data supporting a replacement are more
problematical.

>

> Beginning in the 1980's, Rebecca Cann, at the University of California,
argued that the geographic region in which modern people have lived the
longest should have the greatest amount of genetic diversity today. Through
comparisons of mitochondrial DNA sequences from living people throughout the
world, she concluded that Africa has the greatest genetic diversity and,
therefore, must be the homeland of all modern humans. Assuming a specific,
constant rate of mutation, she further concluded that the common ancestor of
modern people was a woman living about 200,000 years ago in Africa. This
supposed predecessor was dubbed "mitochondrial Eve" ![click this icon to hear

the preceding term pronounced](images/horn.gif). More recent genetic research
at the University of Chicago and Yale University lends support to the
replacement model. It has shown that variations in the DNA of the Y chromosome
and chromosome 12 also have the greatest diversity among Africans today. John
Relethford and other critics of the replacement model have pointed out that
Africa could have had the greatest diversity in DNA simply because there were
more people living there during the last several hundred thousand years. This
would leave open the possibility that Africa was not necessarily the only
homeland of modern humans.

>

> Critics of the genetic argument for the replacement model also point out
that the rate of mutation used for the "molecular clock" is not necessarily
constant, which makes the 200,000 year date for "mitochondrial Eve"
unreliable. The rate of inheritable mutations for a species or a population
can vary due to a number of factors including generation time, the efficiency
of DNA repair within cells, ambient temperature, and varying amounts of
natural environmental mutagens. In addition, some kinds of DNA molecules are
known to be more subject to mutation than others, resulting in faster mutation
rates. This seems to be the case with the Y chromosome in human males.

>

> Further criticism of the genetic argument for the replacement model has come
from geneticists at Oxford University. They found that the human betaglobin
gene is widely distributed in Asia but not in Africa. Since this gene is
thought to have originated more than 200,000 years ago, it undercuts the claim
that an African population of modern _Homo sapiens_ replaced East Asian
archaic __ humans less than 60,000 years ago.

>

> * * *

>

> **Regional Continuity Model Arguments**

>

> Fossil evidence also is used to support the regional continuity model. Its
advocates claim that there has been a continuity of some anatomical traits
from archaic humans to modern humans in Europe and Asia. In other words, the
Asian and European physical characteristics have antiquity in these regions
going back over 100,000 years. They point to the fact that many Europeans have
relatively heavy brow ridges and a high angle of their noses reminiscent of
Neandertals. Similarly, it is claimed that some Chinese facial characteristics
can be seen in an Asian archaic human fossil from Jinniushan dating to 200,000
years ago. Like _Homo erectus_ , East Asians today commonly have shovel-shaped
incisors while Africans and Europeans rarely do. This supports the contention
of direct genetic links between Asian _Homo erectus_ and modern Asians. Alan
Thorne of the Australian National University believes that Australian
aborigines ![click this icon to hear the preceding

term pronounced](images/horn.gif) share key skeletal and dental traits with
pre-modern people who inhabited Indonesia at least 100,000 years ago. The
implication is that there was no replacement by modern humans from Africa
60,000-40,000 years ago. However, the evidence does not rule out gene flow
from African populations to Europe and Asia at that time and before. David
Frayer, of the University of Kansas, believes that a number of European
fossils from the last 50,000 years have characteristics that are the result of
archaic and modern humans interbreeding.

>

> **Assimilation Model**

>

> It is apparent that both the complete replacement and the regional
continuity models have difficulty accounting for all of the fossil and genetic
data. What has emerged is a new hypothesis known as the **assimilation** (or
partial replacement) **model**. It takes a middle ground and incorporates both
of the old models. Gunter Brauer, of the University of Hamburg in Germany,
proposes that the first modern humans did evolve in Africa, but when they
migrated into other regions they did not simply replace existing human
populations. Rather, they interbred to a limited degree with late archaic
humans resulting in hybrid populations. In Europe, for instance, the first
modern humans appear in the archaeological record rather suddenly around
45-40,000 years ago. The abruptness of the appearance of these Cro- Magnon
people could be explained by their migrating into the region from Africa via
an eastern Mediterranean coastal route. They apparently shared Europe with
Neandertals for another 12,000 years or more. During this long time period, it
is argued that interbreeding occurred and that the partially hybridized
predominantly Cro-Magnon population ultimately became modern Europeans. In
2003, a discovery was made in a Romanian cave named Peştera cu Oase that
supports this hypothesis. It was a partial skeleton of a 15-16 year old male
_Homo sapiens_ who lived about 30,000 years ago or a bit earlier. He had a mix
of old and new anatomical features. The skull had characteristics of both
modern and archaic humans. This could be explained as the result of
interbreeding with Neandertals according to Erik Trinkaus of Washington
University in St. Louis. **Alan Templeton, also of Washington University,
reported that a computer-based analysis of 10 different human DNA sequences
indicates that there has been interbreeding between people living in Asia,
Europe, and Africa for at least 600,000 years. This is consistent with the
hypothesis that humans expanded again and again out of Africa and that these
emigrants interbred with existing populations in Asia and Europe. It is also
possible that migrations were not only in one direction--people could have
migrated into Africa as well. If interbreeding occurred, it may have been a
rare event. This is supported by the fact that most skeletons of Neandertals
and Cro-Magnon people do not show hybrid characteristics.**

>

> ![click this icon in order to see the following

video](http://anthro.palomar.edu/evolve/images/vidcam.gif) Becoming Human:
Part 3--biological and cultural evolution of Homo heidelbergensis,  
>  Neandertals, and modern humans. This link takes you to another web page. To  
>  return here, you must click the "back" button on your browser program.  
>  (length = 51 mins, 32 secs)

>

> * * *

>

> ![click this icon in order to see the following

video](http://anthro.palomar.edu/evolve/images/vidcam.gif) Svante Paabo: DNA
Clues to Our Inner Neandertal--the latest genetic information on the  
>  relationship between Neandertals and modern humans. This link takes you to
another  
>  web page. To return here, you must click the "back" button on your browser
program.  
>  (length = 17 mins, 2 secs)

>

> It would be a mistake to assume that from the time modern _Homo sapiens_
began migrating out of Africa that all people in that continent were modern
humans. The video below presents evidence of pockets of archaic humans
surviving in West Africa until at least 13,000 years ago.

>

> ![click this icon in order to see the following

video](http://anthro.palomar.edu/evolve/images/vidcam.gif) Skull points to a
more complex human evolution in Africa--Chris Stringer describes a
problematical  
>  human skull from Nigeria. This link takes you to a BBC website. Select the
video at the top of the  
>  article. To return here, you must click the "back" button on your browser
program.  
>  (length = 1 min, 45 secs)

>

> * * *

>

> **Expansion Out of the Old World**

>

> _Homo sapiens_ began migrating into the lower latitudes of East Asia by at
least 70,000 years ago. Along the way, some of them interbred with archaic
humans, including both Neandertals and Denisovans. Genetic markers from these
archaic human populations are found in the gene pool of some Southern Chinese,
New Guinean, and other Micronesian Island populations today. _Homo sapiens_
from Southeast Asia travelled to Australia by 46,000 years ago and possibly as
early as 60,000 years ago. Because Australia was not connected to Southeast
Asia by land, it is probable that these first Australian Aborigines arrived by
simple boats or rafts. Modern humans reached the Japanese Islands by 30,000
years ago or somewhat earlier. Around 35,000-30,000 years ago, _Homo sapiens_
big game hunters moved into Northeastern Siberia. Some of them migrated into
North America via the **Bering Plain** , or **Beringia** ![click this icon to
hear the preceding term pronounced](images/horn.gif) , by 20,000-15,000 years
ago. Some _Homo sapiens_ may have reached the Americas a bit earlier than
this, but the evidence is still considered questionable by most
paleoanthropologists. The Bering Plain intercontinental land connection
appeared between Siberia and Alaska as a result of sea levels dropping up to
450 feet (137 m.) during the final major cold period of the last ice age.
Until that time, all human evolution had occurred in the Old World.

>

> A consequence of human migrations into new regions of the world has been the
extinction of many animal species indigenous to those areas. By 11,000 years
ago, human hunters in the New World apparently had played a part in the
extermination of 135 species of mammals, including 3/4 of the larger ones
(mammoths, mastodons, giant sloths, etc.). Most of these extinctions
apparently occurred within a few hundred years. It is likely that the rapidly
changing climate at the end of the last ice age was a contributing factor.
However, the addition of human hunters with spears to the existing top
predators (mostly saber-toothed cats, lions, and dire-wolves) very likely
disrupted the equilibrium between large herbivores and their predators. As a
consequence there was a major ecosystem disruption resulting in the rapid
decline of both non-human carnivores and their prey. Humans were very likely
the trigger that set off this "trophic cascade". Unlike most other major
predators, people survived by switching their food quest to smaller animals
and plants.

>

> Following the arrival of aboriginal people in Australia and Polynesians in
New Zealand there were similar dramatic animal extinctions. In both of these
cases humans apparently were directly responsible for wiping out easily hunted
species. Large vulnerable marsupials were the main victims in Australia.
Within 5,000 years following the arrival of humans, approximately 90% of the
marsupial species larger than a domesticated cat had become extinct there. In
New Zealand, it was mostly large flightless birds that were driven to
extinction by human hunters following their arrival in the 10th-13th centuries
A.D.

>

> It is sobering to realize that the rate of animal and plant extinction has
once again accelerated dramatically. During the last century and a half, the
explosion in our global human population and our rapid technological
development has allowed us to move into and over-exploit most areas of our
planet including the oceans. That exploitation has usually involved cutting
down forests, changing the courses of rivers, pushing wild animals and plants
out of farm and urban areas, polluting wetlands with pesticides and other man-
made chemicals, and industrial-scale hunting of large land animals, whales,
and fish. During the early 19th century, there were at least 40,000,000 bison
roaming the Great Plains of North America. By the end of that century, there
were only a few hundred remaining. They had been hunted to near extinction
with guns. The same fate came to the African elephant and rhinoceros during
the 20th century. Likewise, commercial fishermen have depleted one species of
fish after another during the last half century. Governments have had to step
in to try to stem the tide of these human population effects on other species.
However, they have been only marginally successful. The World Conservation
Union conservatively estimates that 7,266 animal species and 8,323 plant and
lichen species are now at risk of extinction primarily due to human caused
habitat degradation. The endangered list includes 1/3 of all amphibian
species, nearly 1/2 of the turtles and tortoises, 1/4 of the mammals, 1/5 of
the sharks and rays, and 1/8 of the birds. This list does not include the many
millions of species that are still unknown to science. It is likely that most
of them will become extinct before they can be described and studied.

>

> **People Today**

>

> Are we genetically different from our _Homo sapiens_ ancestors who lived
10-20,000 years ago? The answer is almost certainly yes. In fact, it is very
likely that the rate of evolution for our species has continuously accelerated
since the end of the last ice age, roughly 10,000 years ago. This is mostly
due to the fact that our human population has explosively grown and moved into
new kinds of environments, including cities, where we have been subject to new
natural selection pressures. For instance, our larger and denser populations
have made it far easier for contagious diseases, such as tuberculosis, small
pox, the plague, and influenza to rapidly spread through communities and wreak
havoc. This has exerted strong selection for individuals who were fortunate to
have immune systems that allowed them to survive. There also has been a marked
change in diet for most people since the end of the last ice age. It is now
less varied and predominantly vegetarian around the globe with a heavy
dependence on foods made from cereal grains. It is likely that the human
species has been able to adapt to these and other new environmental pressures
because it has acquired a steadily greater genetic diversity. A larger
population naturally has more mutations adding variation to its gene pool
simply because there are more people. This happens even if the mutation rate
per person remains the same. However, the mutation rate may have actually
increased because we have been exposed to new kinds of man-made environmental
pollution that can cause additional mutations.

>

> It is not clear what all of the consequences of the environmental and
behavioral changes for humans have been. However, it does appear that the
average human body size has become somewhat shorter over the last 10,000
years, and we have acquired widespread immunity to the more severe effects of
some diseases such as measles and influenza.

>

> Finally, can we say what direction human evolution will take in the future?
This is a fascinating question to consider but impossible to answer because of
innumerable unknown factors. Though, it is certain that we will continue to
evolve until we reach the point of extinction.

>

> * * *

>

> **_NEWS:_** _ **** Maanasa Raghavan **et al. reported on November 20, 2013
(** __ **http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/21/science/two-surprises-in-dna- of-
boy-found-buried-in-siberia.html?pagewanted=1 &_r=1**_ _ **and**
__**http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12736.html**
__ **) that a 24,000 year old child skeleton from** __Malta near Lake Baikal
in eastern Siberia shared major DNA markers with Western Europeans and 1/4 of
living Native American. A 17,000 year old adult skeleton from Siberia also had
genetic markers indicating European origin. **This indicates** __ **that ice
age Homo sapiens from Europe migrated much farther beyond that continent than
commonly believed.**_ _ It also implies that the New World native populations
owe their ancestry not only to East Asians but to Europeans as well_ _ **.  
>  ** _ ****

>

> **Previous Topic** |

>

> **Return to Menu** |

>

> **Practice Quiz** |

>

> **Next Topic**  
>  ---|---|---|---

>

> * * *

Copyright 1999-2013 by Dennis O'Neil. All rights reserved.  
illustration credits

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

