

Your Account

![](/images/clean/banner.gif) ![Skip to main content](/1-pix.gif) ![Skip to

navigation](/1-pix.gif)

CLEAN > Teaching Climate and Energy > Teaching Climate > 6. Humans Affect
Climate

Share

# Human activities are impacting the climate system.

## Climate Literacy Principle 6

> Jump down to: Teaching these ideas Find activities

Watch a recording of the CLEAN  
webinar featuring this Principle »

### Teaching about the human impacts on climate is supported by five key

concepts:

Teaching this principle is supported by five key concepts: a. The overwhelming
consensus of scientific studies on climate indicates that most of the observed
increase in global average temperatures since the latter part of the 20th
century is very likely due to human activities, primarily from increases in
greenhouse gas concentrations resulting from the burning of fossil fuels.

![show](/images/twiddle-right.gif)There are 4 more fundamental concepts. See
them all...

![hide](/images/twiddle-down.gif)Hide

b. Emissions from the widespread burning of fossil fuels since the start of
the Industrial Revolution have increased the concentration of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere. Because these gases can remain in the atmosphere for
hundreds of years before being removed by natural processes, their warming
influence is projected to persist into the next century.

c. Human activities have affected the land, oceans, and atmosphere, and these
changes have altered global climate patterns. Burning fossil fuels, releasing
chemicals into the atmosphere, reducing the amount of forest cover, and the
rapid expansion of farming, development, and industrial activities are
releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and changing the balance of the
climate system.

d. Growing evidence shows that changes in many physical and biological systems
are linked to human caused global warming. Some changes resulting from human
activities have decreased the capacity of the environment to support various
species and have substantially reduced ecosystem biodiversity and ecological
resilience.

e. Scientists and economists predict that there will be both positive and
negative impacts from global climate change. If warming exceeds 2 to 3°C (3.6
to 5.4°F) over the next century, the consequences of the negative impacts are
likely to be much greater than the consequences of the positive impacts.

### These key ideas relate to the causes and effects of human-induced climate

change.

The potential for human activities to increase the temperature of the Earth
through greenhouse gas emissions has been described and calculated for over a
century. Volumes of scientific research across multiple scientific disciplines
agree that humans are warming the climate, and the 2013 IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report states, _" Human influence on the climate system is clear. This is
evident from the increasing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere,
positive radiative forcing, observed warming, and understanding of the climate
system."_ (From the IPCC AR5, FAQ brochure)

There is overwhelming evidence that human activities, especially burning
fossil fuels, are leading to increased levels of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, which in turn amplify the natural
greenhouse effect, causing the temperature of the Earth's atmosphere, ocean,
and land surface to increase. That greenhouse gases "trap" infrared heat is
well established through laboratory experiments going back to the mid 1850s
when Sir John Tyndall first measured the effect.

The well-documented trend of increasing of CO2 in the atmosphere is caused by
the burning of fossil fuels and massive land cover changes. The "smoking gun"
that shows clearly that human activities are responsible for recent increases
in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is provided by carbon isotopes (carbon
atoms of different atomic weight). These isotopes allow scientists to
"fingerprint" the source of the carbon dioxide molecules, which reveal that
the increased CO2 in the atmosphere is caused by fossil fuel burning (see
references).

##

The human causes of climate change are some of the most important concepts to
teach

![Oil pump

jack](https://d32ogoqmya1dw8.cloudfront.net/images/cismi/environscience/oilrig_324.jpg)

×

Hide Caption

Oil pump jack![\[reuse info\]](/images/information_16.png)

Due to the basic physics of heat-trapping gases and an exponential rise in
population and energy consumption, humans have become a force of nature.
Clearly, this is a topic with enormous political, socio-economic and emotional
dimensions, but the scientific results show clearly that:

                
                                      * Human activities, particularly the combustion of fossil fuels, are altering the climate system.
                      * Human-driven changes in land use and land cover such as deforestation, urbanization, and shifts in vegetation patterns also alter the climate, resulting in changes to the reflectivity of the Earth surface (albedo), emissions from burning forests, urban heat island effects and changes in the natural water cycle.
                      * Because the primary cause of recent global climate change is human, the solutions are also within the human domain.
                      * Because we understand the causes of climate change, that paves the way for effective solutions to be developed and deployed. (Learn more about teaching about solutions.)
                

## Helping students understand these ideas

![Deforestation](https://d32ogoqmya1dw8.cloudfront.net/images/eslabs/carbon/deforestation.jpg)

×

Hide Caption

Deforestation in Mexico. Credit: Jamie Dwyer![\[creative

commons\]](/images/creativecommons_16.png)

**Provenance:** Jamie Dwyer wikicommons  
**Reuse:** This item is offered under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/ You may reuse this item for non-commercial purposes as long as you
provide attribution and offer any derivative works under a similar license.

The human impact on climate change is the most frequently misunderstood aspect
of climate science. Some sectors of the public continue to debate whether
these ideas can be true, despite the well-established science. There are
several possible reasons why students may resist the conclusion that humans
are altering the climate. This concept may be uncomfortable to students due to
feelings of guilt, political resistance, or genuine lack of scientific
understanding. Furthermore, projections of the effects of climate change on
our society can frighten, overwhelm, or discourage students. This can result
in denial or resistance to learning. Furthermore, even if a student possesses
a firm grasp of this topic, it is nearly certain that at some point this
knowledge will be challenged outside of class. Building a solid and careful
scientific argument is essential.

Educators are encouraged to introduce this topic with generous scaffolding
that establishes the foundations of the process of science, the underlying
principles of climate science, and a reliance on the robust scientific
research that supports this conclusion. Several strategies are presented on
this page about Teaching Controversial Environmental Issues which emphasizes
the affective and emotional aspects of student learning.

It may be tempting to have a debate about this topic, but that may not be the
most effective way to characterize it. A debate suggests that there are two
credible, opposing viewpoints, when in fact the scientific community is
virtually unanimous about the human causes of climate change. Secondly,
debating a topic can reinforce misconceptions and cause unnecessary
controversy in the classroom. That said, careful discussion of diverse
viewpoints is absolutely essential. Role playing can be one way to represent
broad perspectives, while maintaining scientific accuracy.

##

Bringing these ideas into your classroom

![Carbon

Emissions](https://d32ogoqmya1dw8.cloudfront.net/images/clean/literacy/carbon_emissions_456.png)

×

Hide Caption

Carbon emissions have risen from about 2.5 gigatons per year in the late 1950s
to 9 gigatons per year in the early 2000s. This graph shows a breakdown of
carbon emissions by their source. Source: Data from Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. ![\[creative commons\]](/images/creativecommons_16.png)

**Provenance:** Wikipedia Commons-
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Global_Carbon_Emissions.svg  
**Reuse:** This item is offered under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/ You may reuse this item for non-commercial purposes as long as you
provide attribution and offer any derivative works under a similar license.

Even though this topic can be a sensitive one, it is also an essential facet
to understanding climate change. Educators are urged not to shy away from the
human role in shaping the climate, but instead to approach it in a deliberate
manner, with pacing and framing intentionally designed to help your students
understand the science and reconcile the meaning.

                
                                      * When possible, use data-driven explanations.
                      * Avoid assigning blame or judgement. As atmospheric scientist Scott Denning puts it, CO2 traps heat "because of its molecular structure, not because capitalism is evil. It's just bad luck!" (Scott Denning Research Group, ppt for Engaging Hostile Audiences)
                      * Weave solutions into the discussion every step of the way. This prevents feelings of hopelessness and also shows the scientific and technical responses that are needed to curb the worst effects of climate change.
                      * Foster a classroom environment where all perspectives are welcome. Invite students to voice their doubts, fears, or uncertainties. (Learn more about creating a validating classroom environment.)
                

##

Teaching materials from the CLEAN collection

**Middle school**

                
                                      * Using the Very, Very Simple Climate Model in the Classroom helps students learn about the connection between CO 2 emissions, CO2 concentration, and average global temperatures.
                      * NASA's Deforestation in the Amazon and World of Change animations shows deforestation in Brazil. Loss of productive forests is another contributor to human-caused climate change.
                      * Climate Change Basics video offers a simple and easy-to-understand overview of climate change and its causes.
                

**H** **igh school**

                
                                      * Students can learn about the Keeling Curve and its famous data with this graphing exercise: Mauna Loa CO2 Collection Data.
                      * Heating it Up: The Chemistry of the Greenhouse Effect is a sequence of activities that help students learn why greenhouse gases trap heat.
                      * Climate scientist Richard Alley summarizes the case for human-caused climate change in this video segment, It's Us.
                      * The National Academies of Science offers a series of short videos describing the evidence for climate change. Increased Emissions and How Much Warming? are both relevant to human-caused climate changes.
                

### Related Pedagogic Methods:

                
                                      * - Teaching the Process of Science
                      * - Teaching with Data
                      * - Role Playing Exercises
                      * - Teaching Controversial Environmental Issues
                

**College**

                
                                      * The activity Global Climate Change: The Effects of Global Warming examines trends in carbon dioxide emissions and considers the human influences on atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations **.**
                      * Using a mass balance model to understand carbon dioxide and its connection to global warming allows exploration of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide and carbon emissions.
                      * Students can explore data-driven questions about economies, populations, energy, and emissions with Gapminder: Unveiling the beauty of statistics for a fact based world view.
                      * Mann and Ramsdorf on IPCC 2013 features well-known climate scientists discussing public perceptions of climate science.
                      * Because this particular fact of climate change is often misunderstood, activities such as Is That True? and Effectively Engaging with Climate Skeptics can help students navigate misinformation.
                

## Find activities and visuals for teaching this topic

Search by grade level: middle school high school intro college upper college
search all grade levels

### References

> 2014 National Climate Assessment Report summarizes the impacts of climate
change on the United States, now and in the future. The report can be explored
by region and uses clear, simple messages to streamline the findings.

>

> 2013 IPCC Summary for Policymakers steps through the causes, effects, and
impacts of climate change. See also the FAQ brochure (pdf) which is less
technical.

>

> And older, but still accurate IPCC document from 2007 also addresses this
question: How do Human Activities Contribute to Climate Change and How do They
Compare with Natural Influences?

>

> How do we know that recent CO2 increases are due to human activities? - a
scientific summary from RealClimate.org

>

> The human fingerprint in coral - This page from the Skeptical Science
website provides clear answers to common questions and misunderstandings about
climate change.

>

> Solar Variability & Global Climate Change - This summary from the Standford
Solar Center describes the relationship between sunspots, solar irradiance and
climate change

>

> New statistical analysis confirms human role in climate change - A summary
of physics research that uses a simple, statistical approach to understand
causes of climate change.

>

> Causes of Climate Change - This NASA web page describes the greenhouse
effect, the role of human activity and the evidence that changes in solar
irradiance are not related to recent temperature increases.

>

> Global Warming's Six Americas - This ongoing project tracks Americans'
opinions and beliefs about climate change. This approach identifies six unique
audiences within the American public that each responds to the issue in their
own distinct way. This is a great way to learn about the possible audiences
among your student population.

>

> Examining the Scientific Consensus on Climate Change, P. Doran, M.
Zimmerman. EOS, Transactions American Geophysical Union, 2009, vol. 90, no. 3,
p. 22, 200. This article compares the consensus views of scientists and the
general public on climate change.

« Previous Page Next Page »

                
                                      * CLEAN
                        * Climate and Energy Educational Resources
                        * Teaching Climate and Energy
                          * Teaching Climate
                
                            * 1. The Sun Provides Energy
                            * 2. Climate is Complex
                            * 3. Climate and Life
                            * 4. Climate is Variable
                            * 5. Understanding Climate
                            * 6. Humans Affect Climate
                            * 7. Climate Change has Consequences
                            * GP. Humans can Take Action
                            * Climate Literacy Quiz
                
                          * Teaching Energy
                          * Tools for Educators
                        * CLEAN Network
                        * Get Involved
                        * About this Project
                

![](/images/facebook.gif)

![](/images/clean/twitter_follow_logo.png)

![instagram](/images/clean/instagram_button.png)

![National Science Foundation http://nsf.gov](/images/serc/nsf_small.gif)
![NOAA](/images/earthlabs/noaalogo.gif) ![Department of

Energy](/images/clean/doe_logo.png) ![TERC](/images/eet/terc_small.gif)
![CIRES](/images/ccl/organizations/cires_logo.jpg)
![SERC](/images/serc/sercatcarleton_logo.gif)

CLEAN is funded by grants from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NA12OAR4310143, NA12OAR4310142), the National Science
Foundation (DUE-0938051, DUE-0938020, DUE-0937941) and the Department of
Energy. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Science Foundation.

About this Site Report a Problem/Feedback

Shortcut: https://cleanet.org/49599 | Last Modified: March 25, 2019

Accessibility | Privacy | Terms of Use

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

