

# Socioeconomic mobility in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Social and economic class mobility

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/53/Going_up_or_down_advertisement.jpg/370px-

Going_up_or_down_advertisement.jpg)

Illustration from a 1916 advertisement for a vocational school in the back of
a US magazine. Education has been seen as a key to socioeconomic mobility, and
the advertisement appealed to Americans' belief in the possibility of self-
betterment as well as threatening the consequences of downward mobility in the
great income inequality existing during the Industrial Revolution.

**Socioeconomic mobility in the United States** refers to the upward or
downward movement of Americans from one social class or economic level to
another,[1] through job changes, inheritance, marriage, connections, tax
changes, innovation, illegal activities, hard work, lobbying, luck, health
changes or other factors.

This vertical mobility can be the change in socioeconomic status between
parents and children ("inter-generational"); or over the course of a lifetime
("intra-generational").

Socioeconomic mobility typically refers to "relative mobility", the chance
that an individual American's income or social status will rise or fall in
comparison to other Americans,[2] but can also refer to "absolute" mobility,
based on changes in living standards in America.

In recent years, several studies have found that vertical intergenerational
mobility is lower in the US than in some European countries.[3] US social
mobility has either remained unchanged or decreased since the
1970s.[4][5][6][7] A study conducted by the Pew Charitable Trusts found that
the bottom quintile is 57% likely to experience upward mobility and only 7% to
experience downward mobility.[8]

A study published in 2008 showed that economic mobility in the U.S. increased
from 1950 to 1980, but has declined sharply since 1980.[9]

A 2013 Brookings Institution study found income inequality was increasing and
becoming more permanent, sharply reducing social mobility.[10]

A large academic study released in 2014 found US mobility overall has not
changed appreciably in the last 25 years (for children born between 1971 and
1996), but a variety of up and down mobility changes were found in several
different parts of the country. On average, American children entering the
labor market today have the same chances of moving up in the income
distribution (relative to their parents) as children born in the
1970s.[11][12]

However, because US income inequalities have increased substantially, the
consequences of the "birth lottery"—the parents to whom a child is born—are
larger today than in the past. US wealth is increasingly concentrated in the
top 10% of American families, so children of the remaining 90% are more likely
to be born at lower starting incomes today than the same children in the past.
Even if they are equally mobile and climb the same distance up the US
socioeconomic ladder as children born 25 years earlier, the bottom 90% of the
ladder is worth less now, so they gain less income value from their climb ...
especially when compared to the top 10%.[11][12]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Popular perception
                      * 2 Intergenerational mobility
                        * 2.1 Current state
                        * 2.2 Famous historical cases
                        * 2.3 Comparisons with other countries
                        * 2.4 Absolute mobility
                      * 3 Intragenerational mobility
                      * 4 Causes and issues
                        * 4.1 Education
                        * 4.2 Poverty
                        * 4.3 Gender and race
                        * 4.4 Immigration
                        * 4.5 Impact of incarceration
                        * 4.6 Tax expenditures
                        * 4.7 Other factors
                      * 5 History of study
                      * 6 See also
                      * 7 References
                      * 8 External links
                

## Popular perception[edit]

Many Americans strongly believe the U.S. is a "Land of Opportunity" that
offers every child an equal chance at social and economic mobility. That
Americans rise from humble origins to riches, has been called a "civil
religion",[3] "the bedrock upon which the American story has been
anchored",[13] and part of the American identity (the American Dream[14]) This
theme is celebrated in the lives of famous Americans such as Benjamin Franklin
and Henry Ford,[3] and in popular culture (from the books of Horatio Alger and
Norman Vincent Peale to the song "Movin' on Up"[15]).

_**The American Dream Report**_ , a study of the Economic Mobility Project,
found that Americans surveyed were more likely than citizens of other
countries to agree with statements like:

                
                                      * "People get rewarded for intelligence and skill",
                      * "People get rewarded for their efforts";
                

and less likely to agree with statements like:

                
                                      * "Coming from a wealthy family is 'essential' or 'very important' to getting ahead,"
                      * "Income differences in my country are too large" or
                      * "It is the responsibility of government to reduce differences in income."[16]
                

In the US only 32% of respondents agreed with the statement that forces beyond
their personal control determine their success. In contrast, a majority of
European respondents agreed with this view in every country but three
(Britain, the Czech Republic and Slovakia).[4] The Brookings Institution found
Americans surveyed had the highest belief in meritocracy—69% agreed with the
statement "people are rewarded for intelligence and skill"—among 27 nations
surveyed.[17]

Another report found such beliefs to have gotten stronger over the last few
decades.[18]

## Intergenerational mobility[edit]

### Current state[edit]

The correlation between parents' income and their children's income in the
United States is estimated between .4 and .6.[ _citation needed_ ]

If a parent's income had no effect on a child's opportunity for future upward
mobility, approximately 20% of poor children who started in the bottom
quintile (in the bottom 20% of the US range of incomes) would remain there as
poor adults. At the other end of income spectrum, if children were born into
wealthy families in the top 20%, only 20% would stay in that top income
category if their mobility opportunities were equal to every other child's in
the country.

But long-term income statistics show this isn't happening. Mobility
opportunities are different for poor and wealthy children in the US. Parental
incomes and parental choices of home locations while raising children appear
to be major factors in that difference. According to a 2012 Pew Economic
Mobility Project study[19] 43% of children born into the bottom quintile
(bottom 20%) remain in that bottom quintile as adults. Similarly, 40% of
children raised in the top quintile (top 20%) will remain there as adults.
Looking at larger moves, only 4% of those raised in the bottom quintile moved
up to the top quintile as adults. Around twice as many (8%) of children born
into the top quintile fell to the bottom.[19] 37% of children born into the
top quintile will fall below the middle. These findings have led researchers
to conclude that "opportunity structures create and determine future
generations' chances for success. Hence, our lot in life is at least partially
determined by where we grow up, and this is partially determined by where our
parents grew up, and so on."[20]

Economic mobility may be affected by factors such as geographic location,
education,[21] genetics,[22] culture, race, sex, and interactions among
these,[23] as well as family wealth.[24]

### Famous historical cases[edit]

Famous instances of great economic and social mobility include Benjamin
Franklin and Henry Ford,[3] Additional popular examples of upward social
mobility between generations in America include Abraham Lincoln and Bill
Clinton, who were born into working-class families yet achieved high political
office in adult life. Andrew Carnegie, arrived in the U.S. as a poor immigrant
and rose to become a steel tycoon, perhaps the wealthiest man in America, and
its leading philanthropist.

### Comparisons with other countries[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c7/Intergenerational_mobility_graph-1.jpg/450px-

Intergenerational_mobility_graph-1.jpg)

Intergenerational income elasticities for nine developed countries

Several large studies of mobility in developed countries in recent years have
found the US among the lowest in mobility.[3][18] One study (“Do Poor Children
Become Poor Adults?")[18][16][25] found that of nine developed countries, the
United States and United Kingdom had the lowest intergenerational vertical
social mobility with about half of the advantages of having a parent with a
high income passed on to the next generation. The four countries with the
lowest "intergenerational income elasticity", i.e. the highest social
mobility, were Denmark, Norway, Finland, and Canada with less than 20% of
advantages of having a high income parent passed on to their children. (see
graph)[18] Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz contends that
"Scandinavian countries changed their education systems, social policies and
legal frameworks to create societies where there is a higher degree of
mobility. That made their countries more into the land of opportunity that
America once was."[26]

“ | If Americans want to live the American dream, they should go to Denmark. |
”  
---|---|---  
— Richard G. Wilkinson at a 2011 TED conference on economic inequality.[27]

According to journalist Jason DeParle

> At least five large studies in recent years have found the United States to
be less mobile than comparable nations. A project led by Markus Jantti, an
economist at a Swedish university, found that 42 percent of American men
raised in the bottom fifth of incomes stay there as adults. That shows a level
of persistent disadvantage much higher than in Denmark (25 percent) and
Britain (30 percent)—a country famous for its class constraints.[28]
Meanwhile, just 8 percent of American men at the bottom rose to the top fifth.
That compares with 12 percent of the British and 14 percent of the Danes.
Despite frequent references to the United States as a classless society, about
62 percent of Americans (male and female) raised in the top fifth of incomes
stay in the top two-fifths, according to research by the Economic Mobility
Project of the Pew Charitable Trusts. Similarly, 65 percent born in the bottom
fifth stay in the bottom two-fifths.[3][29]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/80/The_Great_Gatsby_Curve.png/450px-

The_Great_Gatsby_Curve.png)

Intergenerational immobility versus economic inequality.

In 2012, a graph plotting the relationship between income inequality and
intergenerational social mobility in the United States and twelve other
developed countries—dubbed "The Great Gatsby Curve"[30]—showed "a clear
negative relationship" between inequality and social mobility.[31][32]
Countries with low levels of inequality such as Denmark, Norway and Finland
had some of the greatest mobility, while the two countries with the high level
of inequality—Chile and Brazil—had some of the lowest mobility. The curve was
introduced in a speech by chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers Alan
Krueger,[31] and the President's Economic Report to Congress.[33]

Philip Alston, the United Nations special rapporteur on extreme poverty and
human rights, asserted in a 2017 report on an investigation of extreme poverty
in the United States that "The American Dream is rapidly becoming the American
Illusion since the US now has the lowest rate of social mobility of any of the
rich countries."[34]

### Absolute mobility[edit]

Even though mobility has gone down, most Americans still have more income than
their parents. A 2007 study "Economic Mobility Project: Across Generations",
using Panel Study of Income Dynamics, found 67% of Americans who were children
in 1968 had higher levels of real family income in 1995–2002 than their
parents had in 1967–1971[35] (although most of this growth in total family
income can be attributed to the increasing number of women who work since male
earnings have stayed relatively stable throughout this time[35]) As to whether
this figure is higher or lower than other countries is difficult to say as
this type of measure has not been done for other countries.[35]

## Intragenerational mobility[edit]

Another form of mobility—"intra-generational"—is the change in class and/or
income experienced by individuals during their lifetime. Intra-generational
mobility renders the meaning of "short-term" inequality ambiguous, since high
intra-generational mobility suggests that those who are currently less well-
off (for instance the young) will move up the class or income scale later in
life.

How strong Intra-generational mobility is in the US is disputed.[36]
Supporting relatively high levels of intragenerational mobility, Thomas A.
Garrett[37] reported on a US Treasury study of income mobility from 1996 to
2005. This found "There was considerable income mobility of individuals in the
U.S. economy during the 1996 through 2005 period as over half of taxpayers
moved to a different income quintile over this period"; 80 percent of
taxpayers had incomes in quintiles as high or higher in 2005 than they did in
1996, and 45 percent of taxpayers not in the highest income quintile moved up
at least one quintile.[38] Fewer than half (between 40–43%) "of those in the
top 1 percent in 1996 were still in the top 1 percent in 2005. Only about 25
percent of the individuals in the top 1/100th percent in 1996 remained in the
top 1/100th percent in 2005." The study reassured Americans "the opportunity
for upward mobility" in America despite their concern about the "long-term
trend of increasing income inequality in the U.S. economy" After-tax income of
the top 1% earners has grown by 176% percent from 1979 to 2007 while it grew
only 9% for the lowest 20%.

However others describe the data as reflecting less mobility. A 2007
inequality and mobility study found the pattern of annual and long-term
earnings inequality "very close", and the population at top income levels in
America "very stable" and had "not mitigated the dramatic increase in annual
earnings concentration since the 1970s."[39] A 2011 CBO study on "Trends in
the Distribution of Household Income Between 1979 and 2007" also found multi-
year household income distribution in America "only modestly" more equal than
annual income.

> Given the fairly substantial movement of households across income groups
over time, it might seem that income measured over a number of years should be
significantly more equally distributed than income measured over one year.
However, much of the movement of households involves changes in income that
are large enough to push households into different income groups but not large
enough to greatly affect the overall distribution of income. Multi-year income
measures also show the same pattern of increasing inequality over time as is
observed in annual measures.[40]

In other words, "many people who have incomes greater than $1 million one year
fall out of the category the next year—but that’s typically because their
income fell from, say, 1.05 million to 0.95 million, not because they went
back to being middle class."[40][41]

Economist Paul Krugman complains that conservatives have resorted to
"extraordinary series of attempts at statistical distortion" in claiming high
levels of mobility.

> Studies by the Urban Institute and the US Treasury have both found that
about half of the families who start in either the top or the bottom quintile
of the income distribution are still there after a decade, and that only 3 to
6 percent rise from bottom to top or fall from top to bottom.[36]

While in any given year, some of the people with low incomes will be "workers
on temporary layoff, small businessmen taking writeoffs, farmers hit by bad
weather"—the rise in their income in succeeding years is not the same
'mobility' as poor people rising to middle class or middle income rising to
wealth. It's the mobility of "the guy who works in the college bookstore and
has a real job by his early thirties." [36]

## Causes and issues[edit]

Explanations for the relatively low level of social mobility in the US include
the better access of affluent children to superior schools and preparation for
schools so important in an economy where pay is tilted toward educated
workers; high levels of immigration of unskilled laborers and low rate of
unionization, which leads to lower wages among the least skilled; public
health problems, like obesity and diabetes, which can limit education and
employment;[3] the sheer size of the income gap between the rich which makes
it harder to climb the proverbial income ladder when the rungs are farther
apart;[42] poverty, since those with low income have significantly lower rates
of mobility than middle and higher income individuals.[43] The factors which
affect social mobility vary across the United States as does social mobility
which in favored areas is much higher than in less favored areas.[44]

### Education[edit]

_Related:_ First-generation college students in the United States

Multiple reports have found that education promotes economic
mobility.[45][46][47] The report “Pursuing the American Dream: Economic
Mobility Across Generations” found that a four-year college degree promotes
upward mobility from the bottom and prevents downward mobility from the middle
and top. For instance, having a four-year college degree makes someone born
into the bottom quintile of income three times more likely to climb all the
way to the top as an adult.[45]

Wages and earnings correlate with education. A 2009 survey of young adults[48]
who worked full-time [49] throughout a full year,[50] found the median income
of whose without a high school diploma ($21,000) was below the poverty level
for a family of four ($22,050)[51] and less than half of what whose with a
bachelor's degree earned ($45,000).[52]

## Education and Income (2009)[52]

Educational Attainment | Young Adult  
Median Income  
Master's degree or higher | $60,000  
Bachelor's degree | $45,000  
High School Diploma  
(or equivalent) | $30,000  
No High School Diploma  
(or equivalent) | $21,000  
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education,  
National Center for Education Statistics. (2011). [52]

The difference has worsened since 1979 when the average college graduate made
38% more than the average high school graduate. By 2011 college graduates
averaged made 75% more income.[53] "Mobility" to the "class" of college
graduates has declined. Those born with parents who graduated from college
have far better odds of graduating from college than those born to high school
graduates.[54]

Some scholars (such as Isabel Sawhill) have complained about the effect of
education on mobility

> “At virtually every level, education in America tends to perpetuate rather
than compensate for existing inequalities. The reasons are threefold. First,
the K through 12 education system is simply not very strong and thus is not an
effective way to break the link between parental background and a child’s
eventual success. … Second, because K–12 education is financed largely at the
state and local level, resources devoted to education are closely linked with
where people live and with the property wealth of their neighbors. For this
and other reasons, poor children tend to go to poor schools and more
advantaged children to good schools. … Finally, access both to a quality
preschool experience and to higher education continues to depend quite
directly on family resources.”[55]

Others (Robert M. Hauser) have defended educational attainment as also freeing
"individuals from the constraints of their social origins."[56]

### Poverty[edit]

Comparing the US with one high-mobility state (Denmark), journalist Kevin Drum
concluded that lack of mobility for the poorest children in the United States
seems to be the primary reason for America's lag behind other developed
countries.[43] A study from the Economic Mobility Project found that growing
up in a high-poverty neighborhood increases Americans’ risk of experiencing
downward mobility and explains a sizable portion of the black-white downward
mobility gap. The report's analysis also showed that black children who
experience a reduction in their neighborhood's poverty rate have greater
economic success in adulthood than black children who experience poverty rates
that increase or are stable.[57]

### Gender and race[edit]

Reports analyzing the economic mobility of African-Americans compared to that
of whites have found stark differences. One report found that 53 percent of
blacks born in the bottom income quintile remain there as adults, while only
33 percent of whites do.[58] Research has also found that the children of
black middle-class families are more likely to fall out of the middle
class.[46]

Despite the increased presence of blacks and women in the work force over the
years, women and non-whites hold jobs with less rank, authority, opportunity
for advancement and pay than men and whites,[59][60] a "glass ceiling" being
said to prevent them from occupying more than a very small percentage in top
managerial positions.

One explanation for this is seen in the networks of genders and ethnic groups.
The more managers there are in an employees' immediate work environment, the
higher the employees chances of interacting and spending time with high
status/income employees, the more likely these employees are to be drawn on
for promotion.[61][62] As of the 1990s, the vast majority of all clerical and
office workers are women, but made up less than half of all managers. Less
than 15% of all managers were minorities, while roughly a quarter of all
clerical and office employees were. The networks of women and minorities are
simply not as strong as those of males and whites, putting them at a
disadvantage in status/income mobility.

For women, another explanation for this "glass ceiling" effect in the American
work force is the job-family trade off.[63] While both men and women feel that
a conflict exists between job and family, women with children, particularly
married women, are more likely to either temporarily leave the labor force or
cut back on employment by using flex time, working part-time or part of the
year.[64][65][66] Unfortunately, the outcome is lower mobility, since part-
time employment is usually lower paying employment, with less chance of
promotion into a higher status job or likelihood of a return to full-time
employment for at least a few years.

Taking a leave from the work force tends to decrease human capital when it
comes to finding a job.[67] Women are also more likely than men to take leave
from their jobs to care for others rather than themselves.[68][69][70] Knowing
this, employers are wary of hiring and promoting women in the work force.[
_citation needed_ ]

Others have pointed out that men have statistically been willing to accept job
conditions that women were not, such as working outside in extreme weather,
working where you can become physically dirty on a regular basis, working more
hours, etc. This is based on survey information, and shows that it is
difficult to make direct comparisons ('apples to apples').[71] Conservatives
also question the extent of gender discrimination arguing that competition
between firms would lead them to bid up wages of any group if they provided
the same or better value of work for less pay as employees.

### Immigration[edit]

According to economist George J. Borjas, most immigrants to the US are at "a
sizable earning disadvantage" compared to native-born workers, and the
earnings of different groups of immigrants vary widely. Borjas found that
intergenerational upward economic mobility averaging a 5% to 10% in increase
in income from the first to the second generation of immigrants although there
was wide variation among ethnic groups. Other research suggests that length of
time resided in the U.S. narrows the occupational gap between Hispanic
immigrants and non-Hispanic whites and U.S.-born Hispanic counterparts.[72]
Overcoming language barriers and adjusting to the new environment and culture
to American society creates barriers for new immigrants, and "there is
significant economic 'catching up' between the first and second generations"
(second generation being defined as child with at least one parent not born in
the United States). This intergenerational mobility includes poor as well as
middle income groups, although among the high income Borjas noted a regression
towards the mean or equalizing tendency in income/status, whereby children of
very successful immigrants tended to have lower, not higher, incomes/status
than their parents, becoming successful but not as successful.[73]

### Impact of incarceration[edit]

According to some researchers, America's high incarceration (imprisonment)
rate, and "War on Drugs" policies, have created an underclass with severely
limited social mobility. Within the United States the prison population has
been steadily increasing since the early 1970s and has now surpassed two
million, making it the highest per capita rate in the world. This boom has
been fueled to a large extent by the War on Drugs starting in the 1980s. In
addition to the mobility handicaps of imprisonment, this "war" has effectively
created a poor, immobile class by denying one of the most important tools for
social mobility—education—in a number of ways

                
                                      1. The drug war has combined with public school zero-tolerance policies to remove tens of thousands of adolescents from their public schools.
                      2. Denial of higher education funding has been adopted as an additional punishment for drug offenders.
                      3. The war on drugs siphons drug users out of society and into prison.[74]
                

The lack of education for convicted felons is compounded with difficulties in
finding employment. These two factors contribute towards a high recidivism
rate and downward social mobility.

### Tax expenditures[edit]

Tax expenditures, partial exemption of the poor from taxation through reliance
on progressive income taxes rather than sales taxes for revenue or tax rebates
such as the earned income tax credit loosely correlate with income mobility
with areas which tax the poor heavily such as the Deep South showing low
mobility.[75][76] The literature that supports this claim acknowledges that
nontrivial confounds are inherent to this line of inquiry, however.

### Other factors[edit]

Significant correlations have been found between intergenerational mobility
and economic inequality, economic and racial residential segregation, measures
of K-12 school quality (such as test scores and high school dropout rates),
social capital indices, and measures of family structure (such as the fraction
of single parents in an area)[77]

## History of study[edit]

Sociologists Blau and Duncan collected mobility data along with the U.S.
Bureau of the Census in 1962. The data included information on occupational
family backgrounds. In 1962, 56.8% of sons with fathers who had occupations in
upper nonmanual ended up with occupations in the same level. Only 1.2% of sons
with fathers who had farming occupations ended up in upper nonmanual
occupations. In 1973, these differences increased. 59.4% of sons with fathers
in upper nonmanual occupations achieved occupations of this same level and
0.9% of sons with fathers in farming occupations ended up in upper nonmanual
occupations. However, the occupational structure is more rigid towards the top
and bottom. Those in lower nonmanual occupations, and upper and lower manual
occupations were more likely to be vertically mobile. Upper nonmanual
occupations have the highest level of occupational inheritance.[78] In the
1980s studies found that only 20 percent of the income gap persisted between
generations in America, according to the Christian Science monitor. However,
by 2003 improvements in econometrics showed that poverty could endure over
several generations.[79]

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Income inequality in the United States
                      * First-generation college students in the United States
                

## References[edit]

**Notes**

                
                                      1. **^** Random House Unabridged Dictionary second edition.
                      2. **^** Glossary from politybooks.com
                      3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Harder for Americans to Rise From Lower Rungs | By JASON DePARLE | January 4, 2012]
                      4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ever higher society, ever harder to ascend Whatever happened to the belief that any American could get to the top? economist.com 29 December 2004
                      5. **^** Hungerford, Thomas L. (December 29, 2011). _Changes in the distribution of income among tax filers between 1996 and 2006: The role of labor income, capital income, and tax policy_ (PDF). Congressional Research Service.
                      6. **^** Hungerford, Thomas L. (March 2011). "How income mobility affects income inequality: US evidence in the 1980s and the 1990s". _Journal of Income Distribution_. Ad Libros Publications Inc. in association with York University, Canada. **16** (2): 83–103. Pdf.
                      7. **^** Bradbury, Katherine (October 20, 2011). _Trends in U.S. family income mobility, 1969–2006 (working paper no. 11-10_. Boston, Mass: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Pdf.
                      8. **^** Urahn, Susan K., et al. (July 2012) _Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility Across Generations_ Pew Charitable Trusts
                      9. **^** Aaronson, Daniel; Mazumder, Bhashkar (Winter 2008). "Intergenerational economic mobility in the United States, 1940 to 2000". _The Journal of Human Resources_. The Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee. **43** (1): 139–72. doi:10.1353/jhr.2008.0008.Pdf.
                      10. **^** Vasia Panousi; Ivan Vidangos; Shanti Ramnath; Jason DeBacker; Bradley Heim (Spring 2013). "Inequality Rising and Permanent Over Past Two Decades". _Brookings Papers on Economic Activity_. Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on April 8, 2013. Retrieved  March 23, 2013.
                      11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ LEONHARDT, DAVID (January 23, 2014). "Upward Mobility Has Not Declined, Study Says". _New York Times_. Retrieved  January 23, 2014.
                      12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chetty, Raj; Nathaniel Henderson; Patrick Kline; Emmanuel Saez; Nicholas Turner. "NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES, WHERE IS THE LAND OF OPPORTUNITY? THE GEOGRAPHY OF INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY IN THE UNITED STATES". _January 2014_. Equality of Opportunity Project. Retrieved  January 23, 2014.
                      13. **^** Economic Mobility: Is the American Dream Alive and Well? Archived 2012-05-03 at the Wayback Machine Economic Mobility Project| May 2007
                      14. **^** English grammar 4U online| "In general, the American Dream can be defined as being the opportunity and freedom for all citizens to achieve their goals and become rich and famous if only they work hard enough."
                      15. **^** the theme song of the 1975–85 TV sitcom _The Jeffersons_
                      16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Economic Mobility Project
                      17. **^** International Comparisons of Economic Mobility Julia Isaacs| brookings.edu, 2008
                      18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ CAP: _Understanding Mobility in America_ – April 26, 2006
                      19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Urhan, Susan. "Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility Across Generations" (PDF). Pew Charitable Trusts.
                      20. **^** Howell-Moroney, Michael (2008). "The Tiebout Hypothesis 50 Years Later". _Public Administration Review_. **68** : 101. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2007.00840.x.
                      21. **^** Johnson, Wendy; Brett, Caroline E.; Deary, Ian J. (January 1, 2010). "The pivotal role of education in the association between ability and social class attainment: A look across three generations". _Intelligence_. **38** (1): 55–65. doi:10.1016/j.intell.2009.11.008.
                      22. **^** Marioni, Riccardo E.; Davies, Gail; Hayward, Caroline; Liewald, Dave; Kerr, Shona M.; Campbell, Archie; Luciano, Michelle; Smith, Blair H.; Padmanabhan, Sandosh (May 1, 2014). "Molecular genetic contributions to socioeconomic status and intelligence". _Intelligence_. **44** (100): 26–32. doi:10.1016/j.intell.2014.02.006. PMC 4051988. PMID 24944428.
                      23. **^** Tucker-Drob, Elliot M.; Bates, Timothy C. (December 15, 2015). "Large Cross-National Differences in Gene × Socioeconomic Status Interaction on Intelligence". _Psychological Science_. **27** (2): 138–149. doi:10.1177/0956797615612727. ISSN 0956-7976. PMC 4749462. PMID 26671911.
                      24. **^** Tom Ashbrook (host), David Leonhardt (guest), Raj Chetty (guest), Isabel Sawhill (guest) (July 23, 2013). "Upward Mobility In America". _On Point_ (Radio broadcast). WBUR 90 FM.
                      25. **^** Corak, Miles. 2006. "Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons from a Cross Country Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility." Research on Economic Inequality, 13 no. 1:143–88.
                      26. **^** 'Scandinavian Dream' is true fix for America's income inequality. _CNN Money_ , June 3, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2015.
                      27. **^** Wilkinson, Richard (Oct 2011). How economic inequality harms societies (transcript). TED. (Quote featured on his personal profile on the TED website). Retrieved 12 December 2014.
                      28. **^** American Exceptionalism in a New Light: A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic Countries, the United Kingdom and the United States Markus Jäntti et al.| January 2006
                      29. **^** Economic mobilities of Families Across Generations Brookings Institution
                      30. **^** Income Inequality From Generation To Generation Robert Lenzner| forbes.com| 26.3.2012
                      31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Krugman, Paul (January 15, 2012) "The Great Gatsby Curve" _The New York Times_
                      32. **^** Berman, Yonatan (August 11, 2016) "The Great Gatsby Curve Revisited - Understanding the Relationship Between Inequality and Intergenerational Mobility" SSRN.com
                      33. **^** Economic Report of the President. Transmitted to Congress Archived 2012-09-06 at the Wayback Machine
                      34. **^** Pilkington, Ed (December 15, 2017). "Trump turning US into 'world champion of extreme inequality', UN envoy warns". _The Guardian_. Retrieved  December 16, 2017.
                      35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Economic Mobility of Families Across Generations. Julia B. Isaacs. 13 November 2007. Economic Mobility Project, Washington, D.C.
                      36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Krugman, Paul (December 19, 2001) "The Rich, the Right, and the Facts: Deconstructing the Income Distribution Debate" Prospect.org
                      37. **^** Thomas A. Garrett. U.S. Income Inequality: It’s Not So Bad. Inside the Vault. Spring 2010. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
                      38. **^** Income Mobility in the U.S. from 1996 to 2005. Report of the DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY. November 13, 2007. p. 4.
                      39. **^** Uncovering the American Dream: Inequality and Mobility in Social Security Earnings Data since 1937 Wojciech Kopczuk, Emmanuel Saez, Jae Song, September 15, 2007, Figure 4B
                      40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Congressional Budget Office: Trends in the Distribution of Household Income Between 1979 and 2007. October 2011.
                      41. **^** Krugman, Paul (November 3, 2011)"Millionaire For A Day" _The New York Times_
                      42. **^** Noah, Timothy (January 13, 2012) "White House: Here's Why You Have To Care About Inequality" _The New Republic_
                      43. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kevin Drum (5 January 2011). "Social Mobility in America: It's All About the Poor" motherjones.com
                      44. **^** Hendren, Nathaniel; Raj Chetty; Patrick Kline; Emmanuel Saez (July 2013). "Summary of Project Findings, July 2013" (Revised draft). equality-of-opportunity.org. "There are some areas in the U.S. where a child's chances of success do not depend heavily on his or her parents’ income."
                      45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility in the United States". Pew Charitable Trusts Economic Mobility Project. Retrieved  August 1, 2012.
                      46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Downward Mobility from the Middle Class: Waking Up from the American Dream". Pew Charitable Trusts Economic Mobility Project.
                      47. **^** "Promoting Economic Mobility by Increasing Postsecondary Education". Pew Charitable Trusts Economic Mobility Project.
                      48. **^** ages 25–34
                      49. **^** (35 or more hours per week)
                      50. **^** (50 or more weeks of employment)
                      51. **^** 2009 HHS POVERTY GUIDELINES US Department of Health and Human Services.
                      52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Fast Facts, The Condition of Education 2011 (NCES 2011–033), Indicator 17". National Center for Educational Statistics. Institute of Education Sciences. Retrieved  January 23, 2012.
                      53. **^** Federal Reserve chairman, Ben Bernanke cited by journalist David Brooks in The Wrong Inequality By DAVID BROOKS| nyt.com |31 October 2011.
                      54. **^** The Wrong Inequality By David Brooks| nyt.com |31 October 2011.
                      55. **^** 2006 Policy Brief of the Brookings Institution, Isabel Sawhill (2006:3)
                      56. **^** Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the United States, Measures, Differentials and Trends Robert M. Hauser| April 6, 2010
                      57. **^** "Neighborhoods and the Black-White Mobility Gap". Pew Charitable Trusts Economic Mobility Project.
                      58. **^** "Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility in the United States". Pew Charitable Trusts Economic Mobility Project.
                      59. **^** African American women are farther behind white women in jobs, says Center of American progress. Fact Finding Report of the Federal Glass Ceiling Commission, 1995
                      60. **^** _Women and men at work_ Reskin, B.,  & Padavic, I. (1994), Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press
                      61. **^** Men's and Women's Networks: A Study of Interaction Patterns and Influence in an Organization Academy of management Journal 28:2 Daniel J. Brass, 1985"
                      62. **^** Ibarra, Herminia (1992). "Homophily and Differential Returns: Sex Differences in Network Structure and Access in an Advertising Firm". _Administrative Science Quarterly_. **37** (3): 422–47. doi:10.2307/2393451. JSTOR 2393451.
                      63. **^** Data from the 1996 General Social Survey examined the trade-offs that women and men made as they attempted to balance their employment and family obligations, and the multiple ways that gender affects those trade-offs (Davis & Smith 1996)
                      64. **^** Carlisle, W. (1994). Sharing home responsibilities: Women in dual-career marriages. In C. W. Konek & S. L. Kitch (Eds.), Women and careers: Issues and challenges (pp. 141–52). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
                      65. **^** Estes, S. B.; Glass, J. L. (1996). "Job changes following childbirth: Are women trading compensation for family-responsive work conditions?". _Work and Occupations_. **23** (4): 405–36. doi:10.1177/0730888496023004005.
                      66. **^** Shelton, B. A. (1992). _Women, men and time: Gender differences in paid work, housework, and leisure._ New York: Greenwood.
                      67. **^** Jacobs, Sheila. "Trends in Women's Career Patterns and in Gender Occupational Mobility in Britain." Gender, Work, & Organization 6 (1999): 32–46. doi:10.1111/1468-0432.00067
                      68. **^** Gerstel, N. K. McGonagle, 1999. Job leaves and the limits of the family and medical leave act: the effects of gender, race and family. work and Occupations 26:510–34.
                      69. **^** Sandberg, J.C. (1999). The effects of family obligations and workplace resources on men's and women's use of family leaves. In T.L. Parcel (Ed.), Research in the sociology of work, Volume 7, (pp. 261–81). Stamford, CT: JAI Press.
                      70. **^** Sandberg, Joanne C., and Daniel B. Cornfield . 2000. Returning to work: The impact of gender, family, and work on terminating a family or medical leave. In T. L. Parcel&D.B. Cornfield (Eds.), Work & family: Research informing policy (pp. 161–84). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
                      71. **^** Gender and Rural Development Alexander von Humboldt| p. 127
                      72. **^** Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, _The Occupational Assimilation of Hispanics in the U.S._ , 2004
                      73. **^** George J. Borjas, _Making It In America: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population_ Fall 2006
                      74. **^** Blumenson, Eric; Eva S. Nilsen (2002-05-16). How to construct an underclass, or how the War on Drugs became a war on education (PDF). Drug Policy Forum of Massachusetts.
                      75. **^** Hendren, Nathaniel; Raj Chetty; Patrick Kline; Emmanuel Saez (July 2013). "The Economic Impacts of Tax Expenditures Evidence from Spatial Variation Across the U.S" (Revised draft). equality-of-opportunity.org. "We focus on intergenerational mobility because many tax expenditures are loosely motivated by the goal of expanding opportunities for upward income mobility for low-income families. For example, deductions for education and health costs, progressive federal tax deductions for state income taxes, and tax credits aimed at low-income families such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) all are targeted toward providing increased resources to low income families with children."
                      76. **^** David Leonhardt (July 22, 2013). "In Climbing Income Ladder, Location Matters: A study finds the odds of rising to another income level are notably low in certain cities, like Atlanta and Charlotte, and much higher in New York and Boston". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  July 22, 2013.
                      77. **^** Hendren, Nathaniel; Raj Chetty; Patrick Kline; Emmanuel Saez (July 2013). "Summary of Project Findings, July 2013" (Revised draft). equality-of-opportunity.org. "we found significant correlations between intergenerational mobility and income inequality, economic and racial residential segregation, measures of K-12 school quality (such as test scores and high school dropout rates), social capital indices, and measures of family structure (such as the fraction of single parents in an area)"
                      78. **^** Kerbo, Harold. "Social Stratification and Inequality" (1996) pp. 331–32 ISBN 0-07-034258-X
                      79. **^** Francis, David R."'Upward Mobility' In Real Decline, Studies Charge." _The Christian Science Monitor_. 27 Jan. 2003.
                

**Bibliography**

                
                                      * Goldthorpe, John H. 1987 _Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain_. New York: Oxford, Clarendon Press
                      * Jacobs, Eva E. (ed). "'Handbook of U.S. Labor Statistics: Employment, Earnings, Prices, Productivity, and other Labor Data.'" Lanham, MD. Bernam Press. 8th ed. 2005.
                      * Lareau, Annette. _Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life._ University of California Press, 2003.
                      * Levinson, Paul. "Cellphone". Routledge, New York, 2004
                      * Maume, David J. "'Glass Ceilings and Glass Escalators: Occupational Segregation and Race and Sex Differences in Managerial Promotions.'" Work and Occupations vol. 26. November 1999: 483–509.
                      * McGuire, Gail M. "'Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Networks: The Factors Affecting the Status of Employees’ Network Members.'" Work and Occupations vol. 27. November 2000: 500—23.
                      * Western, Bruce. Punishment and Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.
                

## External links[edit]

                
                                      * Jo Blanden; Paul Gregg; Stephen Machin (April 2005). "Intergenerational Mobility in Europe and North America" (PDF). The Sutton Trust.
                      * Boushey, Heather (2005). Horatio Alger is Dead, Center for Economic and Policy Research Economics Seminar Series.
                      * The New York Times offers a graphic about social mobility, overall trends, income elasticity and country by country. European nations such as Denmark and France are ahead of the US. [1]
                      * 2006 Social Mobility
                      * Eitzen, D S."Upward Mobility Through Sport?."| zmag.org| 26 September 2007.
                      * America's Disappearing Middle Class: Implications for Public Policy and Politics by Trevor Beltz, May, 2012
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                
                      * Social class
                

* * *
                
                                      * **Status**
                      * **Stratification**
                

| Theories|

                
                                      * Gilbert model
                      * Marxian
                      * Mudsill theory
                      * New class
                      * Spoon class theory
                      * Weberian (three-component)
                

---|---  
Related​ topics|

                
                                      * Caste
                      * Chattering classes
                      * Class conflict
                      * Class discrimination
                      * Classicide
                      * Classless society
                      * Euthenics
                      * _Nouveau riche_ / _Parvenu_
                      * Poverty
                      * Ranked society
                      * Snobbery
                      * Social cleansing
                      * Social exclusion
                      * Social mobility
                      * Social orphan
                      * Social position
                      * Social stigma
                      * Subaltern
                

|

By demographic

* * *

| By status|

                
                                      * Administrative detainee
                      * Alien
                        * illegal immigrant
                        * refugee
                      * Citizen
                        * dual or multiple
                        * native-born
                        * naturalized
                        * second-class
                      * Convicted
                      * Migrant worker
                      * Political prisoner
                      * Stateless
                

---|---  
By "collar"|

                
                                      * Blue
                      * Gold
                      * Green
                      * Grey
                      * New
                      * Pink
                      * White
                

By type|

| Ruling|

                
                                      * Aristocracy
                      * Hanseaten
                      * Patrician
                      * Political
                      * Royal family
                

---|---  
Intellectual|

                
                                      * Clergy
                      * Knowledge worker
                      * Professor
                

Warrior|

                
                                      * Harii
                      * Kshatriya
                      * Yadav
                      * Nair
                      * Chhetri
                      * Cossacks
                      * Hashashin
                      * Knight
                      * Vanniyar
                      * Samurai
                      * Cuāuh
                      * Ocēlōtl
                      * Spartiate
                

Upper|

                
                                      * Bourgeoisie
                      * Business magnate
                      * Elite
                      * Gentry
                      * Lord
                      * Nobility
                      * Old money
                      * Overclass
                      * Robber baron
                      * Russian oligarch
                      * Seigneur
                      * _Superclass_
                

Creative|

                
                                      * Bohemians
                

Middle|

                
                                      * Lower middle class
                      * Upper middle class
                      * Bourgeoisie
                      * Petite bourgeoisie
                

Working|

                
                                      * Working poor
                      * Proletariat
                      * Lumpenproletariat
                

Under|

                
                                      * Commoner
                      * Outcast
                      * Outlaw / Prisoner
                      * Peasant / Serf
                      * Plebeian
                      * Slave
                      * Untouchable
                

|

By country or region

* * *

| United States|

|

                
                                      * Affluence
                      * American Dream
                      * Conflict
                      * History
                      * Mobility
                

* * *

Classes|

                
                                      * Upper
                        * Black
                        * Donor
                        * Gentry
                      * Middle
                        * Black
                        * Mexican-American
                        * Upper Middle
                      * Lower
                      * Under
                

Income|

                
                                      * Household
                      * Inequality
                      * Personal
                      * Poverty
                

Standard of living|

                
                                      * Education
                      * Homelessness
                      * Home-ownership
                      * Wealth
                

Other regions​ or countries|

                
                                      * Africa
                      * Cambodia
                      * China
                      * Colombia
                      * Ecuador
                      * France
                      * Haiti
                      * India
                      * Iran
                      * Italy
                      * Nepal
                      * New Zealand
                      * Romania
                      * Sri Lanka
                      * Tibet
                      * United Kingdom
                      * United States
                

Historic|

                
                                      * Ancient Greece
                      * Ancient Rome
                      * Aztec
                      * Ottoman Empire
                      * Soviet Union
                      * Pre-industrial East Asia
                      * Pre-industrial Europe
                
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Life in the United States

* * *
                
                                      * Crime
                      * Culture
                      * Economic issues
                        * affluence
                        * eviction
                        * home-ownership
                        * household income
                        * income inequality
                        * labor unions
                        * middle class
                        * personal income
                        * poverty
                        * standard of living
                        * wealth
                      * Education (attainment)
                      * Family structure
                      * Health
                        * health care
                        * health insurance
                      * Holidays
                      * Homelessness
                      * Human rights
                      * Languages
                      * Passenger vehicle transport
                      * Political ideologies
                      * Race
                      * Religion
                      * Social class
                      * Society
                      * Sports
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Demographics of the United States

* * *

Demographic history

By economic  
and social|

                
                                      * Affluence
                      * Educational attainment
                      * Emigration
                      * Home-ownership
                      * Household income
                      * Immigration
                      * Income inequality
                      * Language
                      * LGBT
                      * Middle classes
                      * Personal income
                      * Poverty
                      * Social class
                      * Unemployment by state
                      * Wealth
                

By religion|

                
                                      * Baha'is
                      * Buddhists
                      * Christians
                        * Catholics
                        * Coptics
                        * Mormons
                        * Protestants
                      * Hindus
                      * Jains
                      * Jews
                      * Muslims
                        * Ahmadiyyas
                        * Five Percenters
                        * Moorish Scientists
                        * Nation of Islam
                        * Value Creators
                      * Neopagans
                      * Non-religious
                      * Rastafaris
                      * Scientologists
                      * Sikhs
                      * Zoroastrians
                

By continent  
and ethnicity|

| Africa|

                
                                      * African Americans
                        * African diaspora in the Americas
                          * Afro-Caribbean / West Indian Americans
                            * Bahamian Americans
                            * Belizean Americans
                            * Guyanese Americans
                            * Haitian Americans
                            * Jamaican Americans
                            * Trinidadian and Tobagonian Americans
                          * Black Hispanic and Latino Americans
                        * African immigrants to the United States
                          * Central Africans in the United States
                          * Horn Africans in the United States
                          * Southeast Africans in the United States
                          * Southern Africans in the United States
                          * West Africans in the United States
                      * North Africans in the United States
                        * Algerian Americans
                        * Berber Americans
                        * Egyptian Americans
                        * Moroccan Americans
                

---|---  
Asia|

                
                                      * Asian Americans
                        * Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans
                      * Central Asia 
                        * Mongolian Americans
                        * Uzbek Americans
                      * East Asia 
                        * Chinese Americans
                          * Hong Kong Americans
                          * Tibetan Americans
                          * Taiwanese Americans
                        * Japanese Americans
                        * Korean Americans
                      * South Asia 
                        * Bangladeshi Americans
                        * Bhutanese Americans
                        * Indian Americans
                        * Nepalese Americans
                        * Pakistani Americans
                        * Sri Lankan Americans
                      * Southeast Asia 
                        * Burmese Americans
                        * Cambodian Americans
                        * Filipino Americans
                        * Hmong Americans
                        * Indonesian Americans
                        * Laotian Americans
                        * Malaysian Americans
                        * Singaporean Americans
                        * Thai Americans
                        * Vietnamese Americans
                      * Romani Americans
                      * West Asia
                        * Afghan Americans
                        * Arab Americans
                        * Armenian Americans
                        * Assyrian Americans
                        * Azerbaijani Americans
                        * Chaldean Americans
                        * Emirati Americans
                        * Georgian Americans
                        * Iranian Americans
                        * Iraqi Americans
                        * Israeli Americans
                        * Jewish Americans
                        * Jordanian Americans
                        * Kazakh Americans
                        * Kurdish Americans
                        * Kuwaiti Americans
                        * Kyrgyz Americans
                        * Lebanese Americans
                        * Palestinian Americans
                        * Saudi Arabian Americans
                        * Syrian Americans
                        * Turkish Americans
                        * Yemeni Americans
                

Europe|

                
                                      * White Americans
                        * Albanian Americans
                        * British Americans
                          * English Americans
                          * Scottish Americans
                          * Welsh Americans
                        * Cypriot Americans
                        * French Americans
                        * German Americans
                        * Greek Americans
                        * Irish Americans
                        * Italian Americans
                        * Maltese Americans
                        * Polish Americans
                        * Portuguese Americans
                        * Romanian Americans
                        * Scandinavian Americans
                        * Slavic Americans
                        * Spanish Americans
                      * Non-Hispanic whites
                      * White Hispanic and Latino Americans
                

Oceania|

                
                                      * Pacific Islands Americans
                        * Chamorro Americans
                        * Native Hawaiians
                        * Samoan Americans
                        * Tongan Americans
                      * Americans of Euro Oceanic origin 
                        * Australian Americans
                        * New Zealand Americans
                

North America|

                
                                      * Native Americans and Alaska Natives
                      * Belizean Americans
                      * Canadian Americans
                      * Hispanic and Latino Americans
                        * Central America 
                          * Costa Rican Americans
                          * Guatemalan Americans
                          * Honduran Americans
                          * Nicaraguan Americans
                          * Panamanian Americans
                          * Salvadoran Americans
                        * Cuban Americans
                        * Dominican Americans
                        * Mexican Americans
                          * Chicanos
                        * Puerto Ricans (Stateside)
                

South America|

                
                                      * Argentine Americans
                      * Bolivian Americans
                      * Chilean Americans
                      * Colombian Americans
                      * Ecuadorian Americans
                      * Paraguayan Americans
                      * Peruvian Americans
                      * Uruguayan Americans
                      * Venezuelan Americans
                      * Brazilian Americans
                

Multiethnic|

                
                                      * Amerasian
                      * Melungeon
                
                      * People of the United States / Americans
                      * American ancestry
                      * Maps of American ancestries
                      * 2010 Census
                        * Race and ethnicity in the Census
                      * Race and ethnicity in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
                      * Racism
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

United States articles

* * *

History|

| By event|

                
                                      * Pre-Columbian era
                      * Colonial era
                        * Thirteen Colonies
                        * military history
                        * Continental Congress
                      * Declaration of Independence
                      * American Revolution
                        * War
                      * American frontier
                      * Confederation Period
                      * Drafting and ratification of Constitution
                        * Bill of Rights
                      * Federalist Era
                      * War of 1812
                      * Territorial acquisitions
                      * Territorial evolution
                      * Mexican–American War
                      * Civil War
                      * Reconstruction era
                      * Indian Wars
                      * Gilded Age
                      * Progressive Era
                      * Civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
                      * Spanish–American War
                      * Imperialism
                      * World War I
                      * Roaring Twenties
                      * Great Depression
                      * World War II
                        * home front
                        * Nazism in the United States
                      * American Century
                      * Cold War
                      * Korean War
                      * Space Race
                      * Feminist Movement
                      * Vietnam War
                      * Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
                      * War on Terror
                        * War in Afghanistan
                        * Iraq War
                      * Recent events (2008–present)
                

---|---  
By topic|

                
                                      * Outline of U.S. history
                      * Demographic
                      * Discoveries
                      * Economic
                        * debt ceiling
                      * Inventions
                        * before 1890
                        * 1890–1945
                        * 1946–1991
                        * after 1991
                      * Military
                      * Postal
                      * Technological and industrial
                

Geography|

|

                
                                      * Territory
                        * counties
                        * federal district
                        * federal enclaves
                        * Indian reservations
                        * insular zones
                        * minor outlying islands
                        * populated places
                        * states
                      * Earthquakes
                      * Extreme points
                      * Islands
                      * Mountains
                        * peaks
                        * ranges
                        * Appalachian
                        * Rocky
                      * National Park Service
                        * National Parks
                      * Regions
                        * East Coast
                        * West Coast
                        * Great Plains
                        * Gulf
                        * Mid-Atlantic
                        * Midwestern
                        * New England
                        * Pacific
                        * Central
                        * Eastern
                        * Northern
                        * Northeastern
                        * Northwestern
                        * Southern
                        * Southeastern
                        * Southwestern
                        * Western
                      * Longest rivers
                        * Arkansas
                        * Colorado
                        * Columbia
                        * Mississippi
                        * Missouri
                        * Red (South)
                        * Rio Grande
                        * Yukon
                      * Time
                      * Water supply and sanitation
                      * World Heritage Sites
                

* * *

Politics|

|

| Federal|

| Executive|

                
                                      * Cabinet
                      * Civil service
                      * Executive departments
                      * Executive Office
                      * Independent agencies
                      * Law enforcement
                      * President of the United States
                        * Powers
                      * Public policy
                

---|---  
Legislative|

                
                                      * House of Representatives
                        * current members
                        * Speaker
                      * Senate
                        * current members
                        * President pro tempore
                        * Vice President
                

Judicial|

                
                                      * Courts of appeals
                      * District courts
                      * Supreme Court
                

Law|

                
                                      * Bill of Rights
                        * civil liberties
                      * Code of Federal Regulations
                      * Constitution
                        * federalism
                        * preemption
                        * separation of powers
                        * civil rights
                      * Federal Reporter
                      * United States Code
                      * United States Reports
                

Intelligence|

                
                                      * Central Intelligence Agency
                      * Defense Intelligence Agency
                      * Federal Bureau of Investigation
                      * National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
                      * National Reconnaissance Office
                      * National Security Agency
                      * Office of the Director of National Intelligence
                

Uniformed|

                
                                      * Armed Forces
                        * Army
                        * Marine Corps
                        * Navy
                        * Air Force
                        * Coast Guard
                      * National Guard
                      * NOAA Corps
                      * Public Health Service Corps
                
                      * 51st state
                        * political status of Puerto Rico
                        * District of Columbia statehood movement
                      * Elections
                        * Electoral College
                      * Foreign relations
                        * Foreign policy
                      * Hawaiian sovereignty movement
                      * Ideologies
                        * anti-Americanism
                        * exceptionalism
                        * nationalism
                      * Local government
                      * Parties
                        * Democratic
                        * Republican
                        * Third parties
                      * Red states and blue states
                        * Purple America
                      * Scandals
                      * State government
                        * governor
                        * state legislature
                        * state court
                      * Uncle Sam
                      * Corruption
                

Economy|

|

                
                                      * By sector
                        * Agriculture
                        * Banking
                        * Communications
                        * Energy
                        * Insurance
                        * Manufacturing
                        * Mining
                        * Science and technology
                        * Tourism
                        * Trade
                        * Transportation
                        * by state
                      * Currency
                      * Exports
                      * Federal budget
                      * Federal Reserve System
                      * Financial position
                      * Labor unions
                      * Public debt
                      * Social welfare programs
                      * Taxation
                      * Unemployment
                      * Wall Street
                

* * *

Society|

|

| Culture|

                
                                      * Americana
                      * Architecture
                      * Cinema
                      * Cuisine
                      * Dance
                      * Demography
                      * Education
                      * Family structure
                      * Fashion
                      * Flag
                      * Folklore
                      * Languages
                        * American English
                        * Indigenous languages
                        * ASL
                          * Black American Sign Language
                        * HSL
                        * Plains Sign Talk
                        * Arabic
                        * Chinese
                        * French
                        * German
                        * Italian
                        * Russian
                        * Spanish
                      * Literature
                      * Media
                        * Journalism
                        * Internet
                        * Newspapers
                        * Radio
                        * Television
                      * Music
                      * Names
                      * National symbols
                      * People
                      * Philosophy
                      * Public holidays
                      * Religion
                      * Sexuality / Adolescent Sexuality
                      * Sports
                      * Theater
                      * Video games
                      * Visual art
                

---|---  
Social class|

                
                                      * Affluence
                      * American Dream
                      * Educational attainment
                      * Homelessness
                      * Home-ownership
                      * Household income
                      * Income inequality
                      * Middle class
                      * Personal income
                      * Poverty
                      * Professional and working class conflict
                      * Standard of living
                

Issues|

                
                                      * Ages of consent
                      * Capital punishment
                      * Crime
                        * incarceration
                      * Criticism of government
                      * Discrimination
                        * affirmative action
                        * antisemitism
                        * intersex rights
                        * Islamophobia
                        * LGBT rights
                        * racism
                        * same-sex marriage
                      * Drug policy
                      * Energy policy
                      * Environmental movement
                      * Gun politics
                      * Health care
                        * abortion
                        * health insurance
                        * hunger
                        * obesity
                        * smoking
                      * Human rights
                      * Immigration
                        * illegal
                      * International rankings
                      * National security
                        * Mass surveillance
                        * Terrorism
                      * Separation of church and state
                
                      * Outline
                      * Index
                
                      * Book
                      * Category
                      * Portal
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socioeconomic_mobility_in_the_United_States&oldid=897364733"

Categories:

                
                                      * Social class in the United States
                      * Economy of the United States
                      * Socio-economic mobility
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Webarchive template wayback links
                      * Use American English from March 2019
                      * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
                      * Articles with short description
                      * Use mdy dates from March 2019
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

Add links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 16 May 2019, at 15:08 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

