

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=934687673281436&ev=PageView

&noscript=1)

                
                                      * 0Shopping Cart
                

![Fuel Freedom Foundation](/wp-content/uploads/fff-logo-2.png)

                
                                      * Who We Are
                        * About Us
                        * Board of Advisors
                        * Executive Leadership
                        * Chairman's Council
                        * Privacy Policy
                      * The Latest
                        * Media Center
                        * Over a Barrel Blog
                      * Our Work
                        * Overview
                        * Policy Cafe
                          * Videos Cafe Explained
                          * Policy Cafe Infographics
                        * Fuels 101
                          * Fuel Types
                          * Check Your Car
                          * Find a Fueling Station
                          * Retailer Success Stories
                          * Car Tech
                        * Cars in 2050
                        * Initiatives
                          * Pump The Movie
                          * Research Partners
                          * Ending Energy Poverty
                        * Issue Impact Areas
                          * The Economy
                          * National Security
                          * The Environment
                          * Our World
                        * Knowledge Center
                          * Infographics
                          * White Papers and Other Research
                          * Talks & Presentations
                            * Talks
                            * Videos
                            * Webinars
                            * PowerPoints
                          * FAQs
                          * Glossary
                      * Donate
                      * **Menu**
                

**Blog - Latest News**

You are here: Home / Featured / Economy / Alternative fuels vs. oil: Which is
cheaper?

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/icons.jpg)

![Nathan

Taft](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bfbb22cf0aa7854cf0f21fc12f5789a1?s=81&d=blank&r=g)

# Alternative fuels vs. oil: Which is cheaper?

February 14, 2018/0 Comments/in Economy, Featured, Over a Barrel Blog ntaft
/by Nathan Taft

Something we hear a lot is "It'd be nice if America could use more alternative
fuels that are cleaner and American-made, but they're just not affordable
compared to oil." It's time to put that myth to bed.

Apologists for the oil industry would like us to think that the reason
alternative fuels haven't put them out of business already is because they
cost too much. However, a closer look at the cost of transportation fuels
shows that, far from being expensive, alternative fuels are actually cheaper
than oil-derived gasoline and diesel.

See for yourself, based on cost comparisons by the Department of Energy's
Alternative Fuels Data Center:

![alternative fuel](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/Cost-of-

Gas-VS-Alt-Fuel.jpg)

_Gasoline, diesel, and ethanol price is per gallon. As electricity and natural
gas are not liquids, their prices were determined using thegallon of gasoline
equivalent (GGE)_

Considering that the average American uses 656 gallons of gasoline a year,
these savings add up. Someone using any three of the most popular alternative
fuels—natural gas, ethanol (E85), and electricity—would be able to keep more
hard-earned dollars in their wallet.

Running on natural gas instead of gasoline, a person would save **$210** a
year. On ethanol, **$256**. [1] And on electricity, a whopping **$807** a
year. If you're currently using diesel, those numbers go even higher to
**$387** , **$433** , and **$984** , respectively. By sticking with oil-
derived gasoline and diesel, American drivers are missing out on hundreds of
dollars worth of savings.

![alternative fuel](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/cost-of-

fuel-over-one-year.jpg) All of this raises the question: If alternative fuels
are cheaper (and cleaner), why haven't they gained more widespread acceptance
in America? The answer is: Oil has a monopoly on our transportation sector,
generations in the making. Many people aren't aware there are alternative
fuels available (or that their car might already be able to run them). In many
cases, even if they know about alternative fuels, they simply don't have
access to other options.

That's why Fuel Freedom Foundation continues to fight for fuel choice. Because
if gasoline and diesel were forced to compete with cheaper, cleaner,
domestically-produced alternative fuels, our oil addiction would be a problem
of the past.

_**[1]** Due to ethanol 's lower energy content, savings could be slightly
smaller because drivers may have to fill up a few more times a year when
running on E85._

**Related posts:**

                
                                      * How much does a gallon of gas actually cost?
                      * Automakers shouldn’t stop at electrification
                      * ‘Cheaper, cleaner, American made’ message reaches across the aisle
                      * The 7 craziest things that caused oil prices to rise
                

**Tags:** Alternative Fuel, Alternative Fuels, diesel, Economy, Electricity,
Ethanol, Gallon of gas, Gasoline, natural gas, Oil, savings

##### Share this entry

                
                                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share on Google+
                      * Share on Pinterest
                      * Share on Linkedin
                      * Share on Tumblr
                      * Share on Vk
                      * Share on Reddit
                      * Share by Mail
                

##### You might also like

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-

content/uploads/shutterstock_131558621-298x300-180x180.jpg) **Outnumbered
100-to-1, Methanol Is Upbeat**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/mexico-oil-180x180.jpg)
**Oil prices could keep rising. Here's why**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-

content/uploads/shutterstock_225334873-180x180.jpg) **INTERVIEW-Genie Energy
eyes options to revive Israel oil plans**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/oil-well-

sunset2-180x180.jpg) **Oil dips to $45 as U.S. crude stockpiles show largest
jump on record**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/corn-child-180x180.jpg)
**New UN report shows food vs. fuel fallacy**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/VW-logo3-180x180.jpg)
**Jetta diesel owner: I shoulda bought the Volt**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/EVs-cost-180x180.jpg) **The
wealthiest households claim 90 percent of tax credits for buying electric
cars**

![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/Musk44-180x180.jpg)
**Tesla’s newest hire may be proof Elon Musk is ready to hear some hard truths
about batteries**

0 replies

### Leave a Reply

Want to join the discussion?  
Feel free to contribute!

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.

![CAPTCHA](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/plugins/si-captcha-for-

wordpress/captcha/securimage_show.php?si_sm_captcha=1&si_form_id=com&prefix=qhhNCEQii5WTAmEp)

![Refresh](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/plugins/si-captcha-for-

wordpress/captcha/images/refresh.png)

CAPTCHA Code *

**Our Mission:** Fuel Freedom Foundation is working to reduce the cost of
driving your existing car or truck by opening the market to cheaper, cleaner,
American-made fuel choices at the pump.

### About Us

Fuel Freedom is a non-profit with a simple mission: break America's oil
addiction by bringing competition to the U.S. transportation fuel market.

Learn more about us

### Subscribe

                
                                      * Join Our Mailing List*
                
                      * Zip Code*
                
                      * CAPTCHA
                
                      * Phone
                

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

![Fuel Freedom Logo](/wp-content/uploads/fff-logo.png)

### Contact Us

We'd like to hear from you. If you have any questions, ideas or feedback,
please send all inquiries to:  
[email protected]

(C) Copyright Fuel Freedom Foundation 2019. All Rights Reserved.

                
                                      * Sitemap
                      * Privacy Policy
                

Will GM or Tesla buyers lose electric-car tax credits first?
![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/Teslas-80x80.jpg)
![](https://www.fuelfreedom.org/wp-content/uploads/self-driving-

Audi-80x80.jpg) Self-driving cars use crazy amounts of power, and it's
becoming a pro...

Scroll to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

