

Skip to navigationSkip to content

                
                                      *           * Latest
                
                      * Obsessions
                

###### These are the core obsessions that drive our newsroom—defining topics

of seismic importance to the global economy.

                
                                      * Featured
                
                      *           * Emails
                

###### Our emails are made to shine in your inbox, with something fresh every

morning, afternoon, and weekend.

                
                                      * Editions
                

###### Quartz is a guide to the new global economy for people excited by

change.

                
                                        * #### Quartz Africa
                

The important stories of innovation across the continent’s wide-ranging
economies

                
                                        * #### Quartz India
                

In-depth coverage of the world’s largest democracy for India and its far-flung
diaspora

                
                                        * #### Quartzy
                

Lifestyle, culture, and living well in the new global economy

                
                                        * #### Quartz at Work
                

Management news, advice, and ideas for business leaders

                
                                        * #### Atlas
                

Create, share, and discover charts, using the same tools as the Quartz
newsroom

                
                                      * Become a member
                      * ![](https://cms.qz.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/rtr3oar0-e1487981729562.jpg?quality=75&strip=all&w=410&h=232)
                

Reuters/Lucy Nicholson

Still developing.

KIND OF ADVANCED

# The US has a lot of money, but it does not look like a developed country

By Annalisa MerelliMarch 10, 2017

The US is the world’s largest national economy, and the epitome of
industrialization. Because of its wealth, high standards of living, and
availability of world-class services, many Americans believe theirs to be one
of the better—or outright best—countries in the world to live.

Measuring wellbeing can be tricky: Seemingly objective standards, like income,
are affected by the availability of social services, which improve life even
for low-earners. Infant mortality, another common measure of wellbeing, can
actually be higher in countries where advanced healthcare technologies allow
premature babies to be born in the first place. Nonetheless, there are some
comparisons we can make: In 2015, the United Nations defined 17 goals for any
country claiming to achieve complete sustainable development. Those goals
range from ending poverty, to gender equality, to environmental preservation.

Quartz used those goals to compare the US development to that of other wealthy
nations, following the blueprint of a 2016 report by the Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). We found that the US performs
scores dismally in most areas—such as healthcare, education, and violence.

Below is a breakdown that shows how the US fares for 11 of the 17 goals. Since
the US ranks about average in water and sanitation, sustainable production and
consumption, ocean preservation, and landscape preservation, we didn’t
highlight those in the analysis. We also didn’t look into climate change, as
the sheer size and population of the US make it difficult to compare its
impact with other countries, and didn’t explore the last development goal,
global partnership, as it’s intended as an instrumental tool to implement
other goals.

The analysis proves that, while Americans may be doing relatively fine, “best
country to live in” is a serious stretch.

## Poverty

The US has the second-highest rate of poverty among rich countries (poverty
here measured by the percentage of people earning less than half the national
median income.)

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HkWmpmEIe.png)

According to a 2012 UNICEF study **,** 23.1% US kids live in poverty. Other
studies place the number a little lower, at about 20%, but both numbers are
much higher than in other advanced countries. For black and Hispanic American
children, the poverty rate is even higher, at 36% and 31%.

## Food security and nutrition

Food security is reflected in both access to food and diet quality. Obesity is
a primary indicator of poor diet, and although the US isn’t the fattest
country in the world (several Pacific island countries, as well as Qatar and
Egypt, precede it), it leads OECD countries in obesity.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_Bk-K7yaFl.png)

When it comes to food production, things aren’t quite as dramatic, though the
US soil’s level of fertility is below the OECD average. Although its
agricultural production remains one of the world’s largest, the country’s
output _growth_ was about 1% between 2003 and 2012—less than half of the OECD
average of 2.5%.

## Health

Americans spend nearly 17% of GDP on health care, with a yearly per capita
cost of over $9,400. That’s $1,600 more than the second-highest spender,
Luxembourg, and more than double the OECD average.

But while Americans spend enormously, they remain in relatively poor health.
The US has fewer physicians, hospital beds, and psychiatric care beds than
most other economically advanced countries, ranking towards the bottom in each
of these parameters. The US is also the only advanced economy in the world not
to have full health coverage of its population.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HyoRQYsYg.png)

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HJ43CFiFe.png)

Things aren’t better when it comes to mortality. Child mortality is higher in
the US than any other advanced economy, and adult Americans also live shorter
lives: Average US life expectancy is 78.8 years, nearly two years less than
the OECD average. For comparison, Japan has the longest life expectancy in the
OECD, at 83.7 years.

The US also stands out as one of the only countries in the world where
maternal mortality has _increased_ , rather than decreasing, over the past 15
years.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_rymrVcstx.png)

## Education

When it comes to education, US schools are mostly distinguished by their high
cost. The US is among the five countries spending the most (pdf, p. 10) on
education between pre-primary and secondary school. Plus, Americans spend far
more on higher education: The cost (direct and indirect) of a tertiary degree
in the US is around $110,000 for both men and women, against an OECD average
of $50,000 for men and $40,000 for women.

In the US, early childhood education is attended by fewer children (55% versus
an OECD average of 84% attendance), at an older age (four years old, versus
three years old), and can be administered by untrained professionals. Most
**** other high-income OECD countries have specific educator certification
requirements.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the US fares just about average among OECD countries
when it comes to basic literacy and problem solving skills. Advanced literacy
(pdf, p.15) in the US is below the OECD average. Basic numeracy in the US is
lower than in most other wealthy OECD nations.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HJkQrQEwe.png)

## Gender equality

Gender equality is a point where the US does relatively well. Unlike
previously analyzed indicators, the US doesn’t much differ from countries such
as the UK, Australia, or Austria. The US also reports a high level of
perceived safety by women walking home on their own. However, the share of US
women who experience violence in their lifetime is much higher than the OECD
average (though reporting violence in some countries may be discouraged).

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HJg8EWRKg.png)

US women’s political representation also leaves much to be desired, with less
than 20% of congressional seats occupied by women. Sweden, the OECD leader,
has nearly 45% in its national parliament, and the global average is nearly
27%. Female representation on the boards of publicly traded US companies is
also below OECD average. To top it off, the gender wage gap is also bigger in
the US.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_BypR1-aYl.png)

The US is also, with Lesotho, one of only two countries in the world that do
not mandate paid maternity leave.

![](https://cms.qz.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/countries-that-do-not-

mandate-paid-maternity-

leave_mapbuilder.png?w=450&h=253&crop=1&strip=all&quality=75)![](https://cms.qz.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/countries-that-do-not-mandate-paid-maternity-

leave_mapbuilder.png?w=450&h=253&crop=1&strip=all&quality=75)

## Energy

America excels in access to energy: 100% of the US population has access to
electricity. What it doesn’t excel at, however, is renewable electricity
sources: Only 12% of US energy output is renewable, far below the European,
world and OECD average.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_BJ-y9ZpKg.png)

## Employment

Despite the much-discussed need to bring jobs back to the US, there are plenty
of jobs in the country. Employment is one of the parameters in which the US
does better than many other advanced economies, with low unemployment, high
employment, and low share of youth who are neither working nor studying.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_BkrzfkRKl.png)

The US also does remarkably well in employing immigrants. At 5.8%,
unemployment among immigrants in the US is lower than among native-born
Americans, and one of the lowest among OECD countries.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_BJ3yd-AKx.png)

## Infrastructure

That the US needs better infrastructure is a bipartisan belief of late. As
Barack Obama did before him, Donald Trump has highlighted the dire state of
American transportation infrastructure, and promised massive investment in
that respect. Current US investment in infrastructure is only 75% of the
average OECD nation.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_ryyf1W0tx.png)

The US is also one of the countries with the highest number of deaths
resulting from car accidents.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_S1D9Rk0te.png)

## Inequality

The US has the highest income inequality of all rich countries. Income
inequality is calculated by the OECD combining several indexes, including a
ratio of the income of the highest 10% and of the lowest 10%.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_HkM8yE4Lg.png)

## Housing and urban development

Americans like their homes big—and they have them so. Each American has, on
average, 2.4 rooms to live in, while the average OECD citizen has 1.8.

Only Canadians, at 2.5, have more rooms per capita. But while Canadians spend
21% of disposable income on their many rooms, lucky Americans spend only 19%
on housing, on average.

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_H1zA8f0Kx.png)

## Peaceful living

Measuring a nation’s quality of life and development also includes intangible
measures, such as the incidence of violent crime and democratic participation.
In those aspects, the US fares pretty poorly: Deaths by assault are almost
five times as high in the US as the OECD average (with the exception of
Mexico).

The US also has one of the highest ratios of childhood death by injury (both
intentional and unintentional). This accounts for nearly half of all US
childrens’ deaths (pdf, p. 7, 8).

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_rJqvA40Kl.png)

When it comes to democratic institution, the US has one of the lowest turnouts
among high-income countries. (The US is one of the few countries where
eligible citizens aren’t automatically registered to vote.)

![Chart from TheAtlas.com](https://www.theatlas.com/i/atlas_H1IedBRYe.png)

**Correction:** An earlier version of the story featured a chart that showed
growth in GDP per person per hour, but mistakenly introduced as GDP per person
per hour.

US, health, education, environment, United Nations

LatestFeaturedObsessionsEmailsEditions

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

