

Natural History Museum ____ Menu

                
                                      * Visit
                

Open Visit secondary menu

Close Visit secondary menu

                
                                      * Natural History Museum at South Kensington
                      * Getting here
                      * What's on
                      * Exhibitions and events
                      * Explore the Museum
                      * Access
                      * Natural History Museum at Tring
                      * Getting here
                      * What's on
                      * Explore the Museum
                      * Facilities
                      * Discover
                

Open Discover secondary menu

Close Discover secondary menu

                
                                      * Oceans
                      * Human evolution
                      * Space
                      * Dinosaurs
                      * British wildlife
                      * Collections
                      * News
                      * Video
                      * Blog
                      * Take part
                      * Join and support
                      * Shop
                      * Schools
                      * Our science
                      * Search
                
                      * Hours and admission
                      * Become a Member
                
                      * Oceans
                      * Human evolution
                      * Space
                      * Dinosaurs
                      * British wildlife
                      * Collections
                      * News
                      * Video
                      * Blog
                
                      * Natural History Museum at South Kensington Natural History Museum at Tring
                      * Getting here
                      * What's on
                      * Exhibitions and events
                      * Explore the Museum
                      * Access
                
                      * DeWorm3
                      * About
                      * Who we are
                      * Objectives
                      * Research tool kit
                      * Publications
                      * News
                

* * *

##### Popular search terms:

                
                                      * British wildlife
                      * Wildlife Photographer of the Year
                      * Dinosaurs
                      * Space
                      * Museum of the Moon
                      * Dippy on Tour
                

![An artist's impression of a dinosaur scene from the Triassic

Period](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/dinosaurs/triassic-full-width.jpg)

Dinosaurs first appeared in the Triassic Period, around 245 million years ago

DINOSAURS

# When did dinosaurs live?

First published 21 May 2012

Last updated 5 June 2018

![Share on Facebook](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/facebook_icon.png)

![Share on Twitter](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/twitter_icon.png)

![Share by WhatsApp](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/whatsapp_icon.png)

![Share by email](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/email_icon.png)

Explore the age of the dinosaurs. Discover what the prehistoric world was like
and how it changed between when dinosaurs first appeared and the mass
extinction at the end of the Cretaceous Period. ****

Non-bird dinosaurs lived between about 245 and 66 million years ago, in a time
known as the Mesozoic Era. This was many millions of years before the first
modern humans, _Homo sapiens_ , appeared.

Scientists divide the Mesozoic Era into three periods: the Triassic, Jurassic
and Cretaceous. During this era, the land gradually split from one huge
continent into smaller ones. The associated changes in the climate and
vegetation affected how dinosaurs evolved.

## Triassic Period (252 to 201 million years ago)

All continents during the Triassic Period were part of a single land mass
called Pangaea. This meant that differences between animals or plants found in
different areas were minor.

The climate was relatively hot and dry, and much of the land was covered with
large deserts. Unlike today, there were no polar ice caps.

It was in this environment that the reptiles known as dinosaurs first evolved.
Reptiles tend to flourish in hot climates because their skin is less porous
than, for example, mammal skin, so it loses less water in the heat. Reptile
kidneys are also better at conserving water.

![A model of Coelophysis](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/dinosaurs/coelophysis-

two-column.jpg)

Coelophysis lived towards the end of the Triassic Period, as did these other
Late Triassic dinosaurs.

Toward the end of the Triassic, a series of earthquakes and massive volcanic
eruptions caused Pangaea to slowly begin to break into two. This was the birth
of the North Atlantic Ocean.

## Jurassic Period (201 to 145 million years ago)

At the end of the Triassic Period there was a mass extinction, the causes of
which are still hotly debated. Many large land animals were wiped out but the
dinosaurs survived, giving them the opportunity to evolve into a wide variety
of forms and increase in number.

![Artists impression of a dinosaur scene from the Jurassic

Period](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/dinosaurs/jurassic-scene-two-column.jpg)

Lush vegetation grew in the Jurassic Period, providing plenty of food for
plant-eating dinosaurs

The single land mass, Pangaea, split into two, creating Laurasia in the north
and Gondwana in the south. Despite this separation, similarities in their
fossil records show that there were some land connections between the two
continents early in the Jurassic. These regions became more distinct later in
the period.

Temperatures fell slightly, although it was still warmer than today due to
higher amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Rainfall increased as a
result of the large seas appearing between the land masses.

These changes allowed plants such as ferns and horsetails to grow over huge
areas. Some of this vegetation became the fossil fuels that we mine today.
Elsewhere there were forests of tall conifer trees such as sequoias and monkey
puzzles.

![Diplodocus

reconstruction](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/dinosaurs/diplodocus-two-

column.jpg)

The large sauropod dinosaur _Diplodocus_ lived in the Jurassic Period. Explore
other dinosaurs from the Late Jurassic.

The plentiful plant supply allowed the huge plant-eating sauropods - such as
_Apatosaurus_ , _Diplodocus_ and _Brachiosaurus_ - to evolve. These are some
of the largest animals to have ever walked the Earth. By the end of the
Jurassic their herds dominated the landscape. Sauropods became even larger in
the Cretaceous.

## Cretaceous Period (145 to 66 million years ago)

During the Cretaceous the land separated further into some of the continents
we recognise today, although in different positions. This meant that dinosaurs
evolved independently in different parts of the world, becoming more diverse.

![Artists impression of a dinosaur scene from the Cretaceous

Period](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/dinosaurs/cretaceous-scene-two-

column.jpg)

Can you spot the dinosaur in this Cretaceous environment? See more dinosaurs
that lived in the Late Cretaceous.

Other groups of organisms also diversified. The first snakes evolved during
this time, as well as the first flowering plants. Various insect groups
appeared, including bees, which helped increase the spread of flowering
plants. And mammals now included tree climbers, ground dwellers and even
predators of small dinosaurs.

## Did you know?

Sea levels rose and fell repeatedly during the Cretaceous Period. At the
highest point there were many shallow seas separating parts of the continents
we know today. For example, Europe was made up of many smaller islands. Thick
layers of sediment built up at the bottom of these seas as single-celled algae
died and their skeletons fell to the seabed.

This is how most of the chalk we use today was first formed. So much so, that
'Cretaceous' comes from the Latin word for chalk, 'creta'.

__

### Discover what killed the dinosaurs

__

![Share on Facebook](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/facebook_icon.png)

![Share on Twitter](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/twitter_icon.png)

![Share by WhatsApp](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/whatsapp_icon.png)

![Share by email](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/email_icon.png)

* * *
                
                                      * Evolution
                      * Feature
                      * Prehistoric
                      * Dinosaurs
                

![Jurassic dinosaur scene](/content/nhmwww/en/home/discover/when-did-

dinosaurs-

live/_jcr_content/article/ctapar/headertextimage_copy.img.320.low.jpg/1530562749957.jpg)

### Discover dinosaurs

Find out what Museum scientists are revealing about how dinosaurs looked,
lived and behaved.

### Dig up dino facts

__

![Top 5 dinosaurs in the Dino

Directory](/content/nhmwww/en/home/discover/when-did-dinosaurs-

live/_jcr_content/article/ctapar/headertextimage_1126.img.320.low.jpg/1530562711668.jpg)

### Dino Directory

Explore more than 300 dinosaurs by name, shape or when and where they lived.

![](/content/dam/nhmwww/Tring/exhibitions/british-dinosaurs-2019/British-

Dinos-hti-top-wide.jpg)

### British Dinosaurs

Come face-to-face with a _Baryonyx_ or measure up to an _Iguanodon_ in our
free family exhibition.

Opens 5 April at the Museum at Tring.

### Find out more

__

###

                
                                      * ![](/content/dam/nhmwww/take-part/dippy-on-tour/jurassic-giants/jurassic-sauropod-illustration-head-full-width.jpg.thumb.480.480.png)
                

DINOSAURS

Britain's biggest Jurassic dinosaurs

4 May 2018

What were the largest dinosaurs in Britain 200-145 million years ago? And why
were they so big?

                
                                      * ![](/content/dam/nhmwww/discover/jurassic-ocean/ammonite-full-width.jpg.thumb.480.480.png)
                

OCEANS

Life in the Jurassic ocean

3 November 2017

What was the ocean like when dinosaurs roamed the Earth?

                
                                      * ![Video](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/youtube_icon_thumbnail.png) ![](https://img.youtube.com/vi/9GVvtKK5sFw/mqdefault.jpg)
                

DINOSAURS

Why are birds the only surviving dinosaurs?

23 May 2018

Watch our animation to find out.

                
                                      * ![Video](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/png-icons/youtube_icon_thumbnail.png) ![](https://img.youtube.com/vi/La47Fk2bNa8/mqdefault.jpg)
                

DINOSAURS

Dinosaur world tour

22 June 2017

Find out about dinosaur discoveries from around the world with Museum expert
Prof Paul Barrett.

### Don't miss a thing

Get email updates about our news, science, exhibitions, events, products,
services and fundraising activities. You must be over the age of 13. Privacy
notice.

Sign up

Follow us on social media

![facebook icon](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/icons/facebook.png) ![twitter

icon](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/icons/twitter.png) ![you tube

icon](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/icons/youtube.png) ![instagram

icon](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/icons/instagram-logo-white.png) ![pinterest

icon](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/icons/pinterest.png)

![Natural History Museum logo](/etc/designs/nhmwww/img/nhm-logo-white.png)

                
                                      * The Natural History Museum
                      * Cromwell Road 
                      * London SW7 5BD
                      * Map
                      * Open daily 10.00-17.50
                      * Last entry 17.30
                      * Closed 24-26 December
                
                      * The Natural History
                

Museum at Tring

                
                                      * Akeman Street
                      * Tring 
                      * Hertfordshire HP23 6AP
                      * Map
                      * Open Monday - Saturday 
                      * 10.00-17.00
                      * Sunday 14.00-17.00
                      * Closed 24-26 December
                

#### Visit

What's on

Exhibitions and attractions

Galleries and Museum map

Access

#### Discover

Oceans

Human Evolution

Space

Dinosaurs

British wildlife

Collections

News

Video

Blog

#### For schools

Things to do

Essential visiting information

Teaching resources

#### Careers

Current vacancies

#### Join and support

Membership

Gift membership

Make a donation

Become a Patron

Corporate partnerships

#### Take part

Volunteer

Citizen science

Identify UK nature

Centre for UK Biodiversity

Wildlife Photographer  
of the Year competition

#### About us

News

Press office

Governance

Contact us

#### Online shop

#### Our science

Our work

Data

Collections

Departments and staff

Events and seminars

Courses and training

Library and Archives

#### Business services

Touring exhibitions

Consulting

Publishing

Film locations

NHM Images

Venue hire

Licensing

#### Legal

Privacy notice

Terms and conditions

Modern Slavery Statement

(C) The Trustees of The Natural History Museum, London

We use cookies and similar technologies to optimise your experience when using
this site and to help tailor our digital advertising on third party sites.
View our Cookie Policy and our new Privacy notice.

I accept __

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

