

200 years of climate science and policy

# The good, the bad,

and the ugly

### Navigating 200 years of climate

science and policy

The Spanish philosopher George Santayana wrote, “those who cannot remember the
past are condemned to repeat it.” When it comes to climate change, repeating
the past is a luxury we can’t afford. If partisan politics continues to derail
policy or if denial continues to win over science, it will mean irreversible
changes to our planet. Future generations will look at ours as the one that
didn’t have the courage to act, rather than the one that recognized the fierce
urgency of the moment and met it head on.

With this in mind, we’ve created a climate change timeline highlighting the
evolution of science, the intrusion of denial, and the sluggishness of policy
over the past 200 years. Let’s learn from the mistakes of the past, so we can
make tomorrow a brighter—but not hotter—future.

##### 1760

###### year in analysis

##### atmospheric co2 levels

##### 280.000(ppm)

##### global land-ocean temp

##### -0.08(°c)

This graph illustrates change in global temperature relative to 1951-1980
average temperatures.

#### Observable changes in the Earth

since the industrial revolution

While politicians have been busy debating the merits of climate science, the
physical symptoms of climate change have become increasingly apparent: since
the industrial revolution, sea level has grown by 0.9 inches, the atmospheric
concentration of carbon dioxide has risen to unprecedented levels, average
global temperatures have increased by about 1.0 degree Celsius and, to top it
off, the global population has jumped by nearly 600 percent; 15 of the 16
hottest years on record occurred in the 21st century, and 2016 is likely to be
the warmest year ever recorded. The graphs included in this timeline serve to
show how the Earth has changed over the past 200 years.

#### Atmospheric Co2 Levels

![](http://interactive.fusion.net/200-years-of-climate-science-and-

policy/images/co2.64bd5a5d.svg)

#### Global Land-Ocean Temp

![](http://interactive.fusion.net/200-years-of-climate-science-and-

policy/images/global-temp.af4a738b.svg)

(This graph illustrates change in global temperature relative to 1951-1980
average temperatures.)

#### Sea Level

![](http://interactive.fusion.net/200-years-of-climate-science-and-

policy/images/sea-level.d67e5236.svg)

#### Global Population

![](http://interactive.fusion.net/200-years-of-climate-science-and-

policy/images/global-population.4922d11d.svg)

###### Sources for Graphs:

###### Atmospheric CO2 levels:

Nasa: Ice-Core data adjusted for global mean; NOAA ESRL DATA: monthly mean
CO2.

###### Global Land Ocean Temp Index:

NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS). Credit: NASA/GISS

###### Sea Level Rise:

CSIRO, 2015; NOAA, 2015

###### Global Population:

United Nations Population Division

## 1760 - 1820

Burn, baby, burn: The industrial revolution spurs unprecedented levels of
agricultural and industrial production, initiating the relentless release of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.

          * info

> According to data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
in the 650,000 years leading up the industrial revolution, carbon dioxide
levels remained below 280 parts per million (ppm). As fossil fuel consumption
increased, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide grew, surpassing
the 400 ppm mark for the first time in recorded history in 2013.

Go back

1820: Atmospheric CO2 levels at 280 PPM

Science

## 1824

French mathematician Jean Baptist Joseph Fourier publishes a paper outlining
what will later be known as the **greenhouse effect**.

          * info

> Fourier theorized that if our planet was warmed solely by the effects of
incoming solar radiation, then it should be much cooler on Earth than it
actually is. This led him to conclude that the Earth’s atmosphere acts as a
sort of insulation, keeping us nice and toasty. For this discovery, Fourier is
credited as the father of the greenhouse effect, although he never used this
term himself.

Go back

Science

## 1859

British scientist John Tyndall discovers that some gases block infrared
radiation, concluding that **slight changes in atmospheric composition can
significantly alter the Earth’s surface temperature**.

          * info

> Importantly, while Tyndall thought that changing the composition of the
atmosphere could alter Earth’s climate, he didn’t believe that manmade
emissions would be large enough to have an impact on atmospheric composition.

Go back

Science

## 1896

Using pencil and paper calculations (because the calculator hadn’t been
invented yet) Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius derived that a **doubling in
atmospheric carbon dioxide would produce a warming effect between 2.5 and 4.0
degrees Celsius** , a predication that still seems pretty accurate today.

          * info

> Like Tyndall, Arrhenius largely rejected the idea that manmade emissions
would grow fast enough to translate to higher atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels. Clearly he humankind’s ability to tear down the rainforest and burn
everything on the planet. Moreover, Arrhenius welcomed the idea of warming,
writing that such changes “would allow our descendents…to live under a warmer
sky and in a less harsh environment than we were granted.”

Go back

1900: Global sea level rises over 1.0 inch

1910: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 300 PPM, matching the highest recorded
historical

Politics

## 1910-1930

Drill, baby, drill: **The opening of Texas and Persian Gulf oil fields**
inaugurates an era of cheap energy, with global crude oil production levels
going up nearly every year since.

          * info

> Since 1750, fossil fuel consumption and cement production combined have
released an estimated 370 billion metric tons of **carbon dioxide** into the
atmosphere.

Go back

1927: World population reaches 2.0 billion

1930: Global sea level rises over 2.0 inches

Science

## 1938

British engineer Guy Callendar **links rising carbon dioxide levels to
observable climate change**.

          * info

> Callendar believed that manmade emissions were already increasing the
atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide and leading to a warmer the
planet; this idea became known as the Callendar effect. Like Arrhenius,
Callendar celebrated this rise in carbon dioxide, writing “… in any case the
return of the deadly glaciers should be delayed indefinitely.”

Go back

1945: Global sea level rises over 3.0 inches

Politics

## 1945

Following the end of World War II, the United Nations is formed.

1950: Average global temperatures are about 0.1 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Politics

## 1955

Congress passes the Air Pollution Control Act, the first federal legislation
aiming to mitigate air pollution at its source.

          * info

> The act, which was the precursor to the Clean Air Act, provided $5 million
annually to the Public Health Service for “research and technical assistance
relating to air pollution control.”

Go back

Science

## 1956

Canadian physicist Gilbert Plass warns that the warming caused by **increased
carbon dioxide levels will likely result in negative consequences** for the
planet.

          * info

> Unlike Arrhenius and Callendar, Plass didn’t think the warming planet was a
good thing; Plass’ paper, entitled “The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climatic
Change,” concluded that **“the temperature rise may be so large in several
centuries that it will present a serious problem to future generations.”**

Go back

1957: Global sea level rises over 4.0 inches

Science

## 1957

Roger Revelle, the oceanographer famous for being Al Gore’s professor at
Harvard, **testifies before Congress on the dangers global warming**.

          * info

> Revelle testified that warming caused by carbon dioxide could turn parts of
California and Texas into “real deserts” and that the Soviet Union might
become a maritime power in the 21st century because of the melting Arctic.
Revelle’s major contribution to climate science was in calculating the rate at
which the world’s oceans absorb carbon dioxide; he demonstrated that because
of the alkalinity in seawater, the ocean could only absorb about one-tenth the
amount of carbon dioxide as was previously thought.

Go back

Politics

## 1957

1957 is declared the International Geophysical Year, marking the end of a
major information embargo between the East and the West; Sputnik is the first
satellite successfully launched into Space.

          * info

> Sputnik, which represented the first major step in the space race between
the United States and the USSR, lead to the creation of NASA, and ultimately
to a deeper understanding of the Earth’s atmosphere and climate system.

Go back

1960: World population reaches 3.0 billion

1962: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 320 PPM

Science

## 1962

**Rachel Carson publishes “Silent Spring”** , which is credited for inciting
the modern environmental movement.

          * info

> “Silent Spring”, first published as an article in the New Yorker, documented
the effect that synthetic pesticides have on wildlife, specifically birds. The
book inspired a movement that eventually led to a phase-out of many harmful
pesticides and, indirectly, to the creation of the Environmental Protection
Agency.

Go back

Politics

## 1965

President Johnson becomes the **first American president to mention climate
change in a speech to Congress.**

          * info

> In his speech entitled “Special Message to the Congress on Conservation and
Restoration of Natural Beauty,” Johnson stated: **“[t]his generation has
altered the composition of the atmosphere on a global scale through
radioactive materials and a steady increase in carbon dioxide from the burning
of fossil fuels.”**

Go back

Science

## 1965

The President’s Science Advisory Committee publishes a study that warns of the
dangers of rising carbon dioxide levels.

          * info

> The report, entitled “Restoring the Quality of Our Environment,” warns that
increased atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide could result in the
melting of the Antarctic ice cap, rising sea levels, warming of ocean waters,
and increased acidity of fresh waters. Strikingly, while the report details
the possible consequences of burning fossil fuels, it does not recommend
reducing emission levels.

Go back

Politics

## 1970

Under President Nixon the United States celebrates its **first Earth Day** ,
Congress passes the Clean Air Act, and the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) are both
created.

          * info

> The Clean Air Act created National Ambient Air Quality Standards, which were
the first set of federal regulations restricting carbon dioxide emission
levels.

Go back

1972: Global sea level rises over 5.0 inches

Politics

## 1972

**Congress passes the** Clean Water Act. The United Nations holds its first
conference on the environment in Stockholm, which leads to **the creation of
the** United Nations Environment Programme **(UNEP).**

          * info

> The conference called for **“Governments and peoples to exert common efforts
for the preservation and improvement of the human environment, for the benefit
of all the people and for their posterity.”** UNEP would ultimately lead to
the creation of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the
single most important source of climate change research.

Go back

Science

## 1972

The crew of the **Apollo 17 spacecraft takes the iconic** “Blue Marble”
**photograph** from 28,000 miles out in space, sparking awareness of the
Earth’s fragile nature.

          * info

> Astronauts have described viewing the planet from space as inducing a
perspective-altering experience, described as “the Overview Effect,” which
produces profound feelings of awe for the Earth and an understanding that all
planetary life is interconnected; the Blue Marble photograph induced a similar
effect on the public.

Go back

Science

## 1974

A number of scientific papers are published linking common chemicals (known as
CFCs) used in spray cans, air conditioners, and refrigerators to ozone
depletion.

          * info

> The most well-known of these studies, published in Nature, argued that if
the emissions rate was not reduced, the atmospheric concentration of CFCs
would likely increase 10 to 30 times the present level, with serious
implications for the integrity of the ozone layer.

Go back

1975: World population reaches 4.0 billion

1975: Average global temperatures are about 0.2 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Politics

## 1975

Congress heeds the advice of scientists and holds the **firsthearings on CFCs
and ozone depletion.**

          * info

> These hearings lead to the creation of an interagency research task force,
the Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere (IMOS), and to further
funding for research on CFCs. Reports from both IMOS and the National Academy
of Sciences are critical in the eventual phasing out of CFCs and the signing
of the Montreal Protocol.

Go back

Denial

## 1975

**The billion-dollar aerosol industry** creates a number of research
organizations to **challenge the science of ozone depletion** and defend their
products in the public sphere.

          * info

> One of these organizations, the Chemical Specialties Manufacturer’s
Association, arranged for Richard Scorer, a professor well known for research
on pollution, to tour around the United States and publicly denounce the
credibility of ozone depletion work. Scorer is quoted as referring to ozone-
depletion theory as “a science-fiction tale…a load of rubbish…utter nonsense.”
Eventually, the Los Angeles Times exposed Scorer’s connection to the industry,
calling him a “scientific hired gun.”

Go back

Politics

## 1977

**President Carter creates the Department of Energy** (DOE), which advocates
for climate change research.

          * info

> The resulting report from the DOE and JASON entitled “The Long Term Impact
of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide on Climate,” concluded that increased carbon
dioxide levels could lead to food scarcity and rising sea levels, seriously
threatening the global population. Conducting a review of the JASON report,
meteorologist Jule Charney came upon one of the harshest realities of climate
change: **“A wait-and-see policy may mean waiting until it is too late.”**

Go back

Science

## 1979

The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) releases a report on the **dangers of
rising carbon dioxide levels.**

          * info

> The report, entitled “Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment,”
states that the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere will lead to a
warmer planet, and the resulting “socioeconomic consequences may well be
significant.”

Go back

1980: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 340 PPM

Politics

## 1981

President Reagan initiates a period of reduced government spending, stalling
federally funded environmental programs.

          * info

> In line with Reaganomics, Reagan’s environmental appointees were nearly all
tasked with diminishing or dismantling the agencies they were put in charge
of.

Go back

Science

## 1981

Both the EPA and NAS release reports arguing for the importance of addressing
the problem of climate change.

          * info

> The EPA report called for addressing the climate change problem with “a
sense of urgency” while the NAS report stressed for the need for further
research on the subject. Faced with pressure to act on one of the two reports,
Reagan would eventually advocate for further research into climate change.

Go back

1986: Average global temperatures are about 0.4 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

1987: World population reaches 5.0 billion

Politics

## 1987

**The Montreal Protocol is signed,** which calls for an international phase-
out of ozone-depleting chemicals.

          * info

> It’s somewhat of a mystery why Reagan signed the treaty, seeing as it
doesn’t align very well with his political doctrine. It may have been that he
was convinced by the science, or he saw the protocol as an insurance policy
for the Earth (better safe than sorry), or Cold War politics motivated him to
curb warming. Whatever the reason, it was a smart move: without the Montreal
Protocol, the Earth would likely be much hotter and more volatile than it is
today.

Go back

Politics

## 1988

The UN General Assembly passes a resolution establishing the IPCC; Time
Magazine dubs the “Endangered Earth” the “Planet of the year”; George Herbert
Walker runs for president under the banner of the “environmental president”.

1989: Global sea level rises over 6.0 inches

Denial

## 1989

Using tactics similar to those used by the tobacco industry to deny the link
between smoking and cancer and by the aerosol industry to deny the link
between CFCs and ozone-depletion, **the fossil fuel industry createsa number
of organizations to publicly challenge the soundness of climate science.**

          * info

> The fossil fuel industry began recruiting a group of scientists in order to
convince journalists, politicians and the public “that the risk of global
warming is too uncertain to justify controls on greenhouse gases like carbon
dioxide that trap the sun's heat near Earth.” Denial tactics of this nature
are still very much in play today.

Go back

1990: Average global temperatures are about 0.5 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Politics

## 1992

The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) is presented at the Rio
de Janeiro Earth Summit; because of opposition from the United States, the
language of the **UNFCC is highly ambiguous and completely toothless.**

          * info

> The UNFCC was meant to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but the treaty
essentially said that countries should figure out how to reduce emissions
using other future treaties. Although the United States signs on, a Bush
policy advisor wrote **, “there is nothing in any of the language which
constitutes a commitment to any specific level of emissions at any time.”**

Go back

Denial

## 1992

Members of Congress are shown a film produced by the fossil fuel industry,
which demonstrates that increased carbon dioxide levels will be beneficial for
the planet.

          * info

> The film, called the Greening of Planet Earth, was highly successful in
convincing members of Congress that there was still no solid consensus among
the scientific community regarding climate change.

Go back

Politics

## 1993

**Congress rejects President Clinton’s proposed energy tax** , opting to tax
gasoline instead, which does little to reduce emission levels.

          * info

> Clinton’s failure to pass any major environmental legislation during his
presidency illustrates the difficulties in passing climate change policy.
Climate change isn’t just an environmental issue; it’s also a social and
economic issue, with few fast and easy solutions. While Clinton began his
presidency making bold promises on environmental reform, the United States
ended the decade without passing any significant green legislation.

Go back

1994: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 360 PPM

Science

## 1995

**The IPCC’ssecond report points to concrete evidence of manmade climate
change** , stating that warming will likely continue in the future with
potentially serious consequences. Over 1,500 scientists (including the
majority of living Nobel Prize winners in science) sign onto the document
“World Scientists Call for Action at Kyoto”.

Denial

## 1995

**The climate change denial industry publishes aseries of op-eds in the Wall
Street Journal accusing the lead scientists of the IPCC report of having
manipulated data;** the attacks are unfounded.

          * info

> Fred Singer, an extremely hawkish rocket scientist with a history of having
worked for the tobacco denial industry, wrote that the IPCC report had been
changed in order to “to deceive policy makers and the public into believing
that the scientific evidence shows human activities are causing global
warming.” Despite the fact that these attacks were shown to be unfounded, they
continue to circulate on the internet today.

Go back

1996: Average global temperatures are about 0.6 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Politics

## 1997

**TheKyoto Protocol is drawn up,** aiming to reduce emissions from
industrialized countries by about 5.0%; **the United States Congress fails to
ratify it.**

          * info

> At Kyoto, U.S. negotiators pushed hard on three fronts: Acceptance that the
United States had already reduced its emissions through reforestation; no
limits on the extent to which emissions trading could be used to fulfill
treaty obligations; and commitment by developing countries to cut their own
emissions. Despite these actions, the Kyoto Protocol was adopted by the
European Union and a number of other countries, becoming the first major
international treaty to curb emissions.

Go back

1999: Global sea level rises over 7.0 inches

1999: World population reaches 6.0 billion

Science

## 2000

**The term“Anthropocene” is coined** to denote the present geological epoch in
which global conditions are significantly affected by human activity.

Science

## 2001

The IPCC’s third report states **“there is new and stronger evidence that most
of the warming observed over the last 50 years is attributable to human
activities;”** the report warns of the consequences of global warming with
continued urgency.

Politics

## 2001

In response to the IPCC report, the Bush administration requests that the
National Academy of Science (NAS) investigate the IPCC, and enumerate the
certainties and uncertainties of climate science.

2002: Average global temperatures are about 0.7 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Science

## 2002

The NAS publishes its report on the IPCC, finding the integrity of climate
science and of the IPCC to be completely intact.

Denial

## 2002

A memo from a top political consultant warns members of the Republican Party
that the “scientific debate is closing against us” and **urges party members
to “continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue in the
debate.”**

          * info

> The memo, written by Republican PR guru Frank Luntz, states: “Voters believe
that there is no consensus about global warming within the scientific
community. Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are
settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly. Therefore,
you need to continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue
in the debate…a compelling story, even if factually inaccurate, can be more
emotionally compelling than a dry recitation of the truth."

Go back

2005: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 380 PPM

Science

## 2007

**The IPCC and Al Gore share the Nobel Peace Prize “for their efforts to build
up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay
the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change";
the IPCC publishesits forth report.

          * info

> The forth IPCC report states that the “warming of the climate system is
unequivocal,” and will very likely carry negative consequences for the planet,
including: food scarcity, water stress, sea level rise, flooding, loss of
biodiversity, drought, and increased intensity of extreme weather.

Go back

Politics

## 2007

**TheBali Road Map is passed** at the 2007 UN Climate Conference; thanks to
aggressive negotiations by the United States **the treaty is
essentiallyuseless.**

          * info

> The Road Map contained no specific commitments on the emissions reductions
or environmental policy, only stating vaguely that these cuts would need to be
“deep.” Still, The Bali Road Map tried to set the stage for the 2009
Copenhagen Climate Conference, and, as the agreement was signed by the United
States and the largest developing countries, Bali represents an important
first step towards renewed post-Kyoto collaboration on climate change.

Go back

2008: Global sea level rises over 8.0 inches

2008: Average global temperatures are about 0.8 degrees Celsius hotter than
the pre-industrial era

Denial

## 2009

**The emails of prominent climate scientists are hacked and published,**
purportedly uncovering an international conspiracy to fabricate climate
research; the attacks are totally unfounded.

          * info

> In an episode known as Climategate, over 1,000 emails between scientists at
the Climate Research Unit of the U.K.’s University of East Anglia were made
public. Despite the fact that these emails, when read in their full context,
don’t amount to any evidence against the integrity of research, the
credibility of climate science is significantly harmed. Climategate rumors are
still circulating the internet today.

Go back

Politics

## 2009

**The Copenhagen Climate Change Conference is deemed a near-complete
failure,** with the United States refusing to sign on to any major
commitments.

          * info

> What was intended to be a comprehensive international plan to curb emissions
became a two and a half page document that had no concrete policy outlines.
The executive director of Greenpeace UK wrote of the conference: “the city of
Copenhagen is a crime scene tonight, with the guilty men and women fleeing to
the airport.” The only bright spot was that 114 countries (including the
United States) signed onto the Copenhagen Accord.

Go back

2011: World population reaches 7.0 billion

Politics

## 2014

**The United States and China reach ahistoric deal** to collaborate in
reducing greenhouse gas pollution; climate negotiations in Lima culminate with
countries agreeing to outline individually tailored emissions reductions
plans, called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs).

          * info

> Historically, the United States had been unwilling to agree to emissions
regulations unless developing nations pledged to curb their emissions as well;
this was one of the principle reasons that most climate conferences before
Lima ended in failure. With this history in mind, the agreement between China
and the United States represented an enormous step forward and boded well for
the Paris Climate Conference that would happen at the end of 2015.

Go back

Science

## 2014

The IPCC releases its fifth report, which calls for urgency in addressing
global climate change.

          * info

> The first page of the IPCC report states in bold: “Human influence on the
climate system is clear, and recent anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse
gases are the highest in history. Recent climate changes have had widespread
impacts on human and natural systems.”

Go back

2015: Global sea level rises about 9.0 inches

2015: Atmospheric CO2 levels reach 400 PPM, the highest concentration in
recorded history

2015: Average global temperatures are about 1.0 degree Celsius hotter than the
pre-industrial era

Denial

## 2015

James Inhofe is named chairman of the US Senate Committee on Environment and
Public Works and holds up a snowball explaining that **if it was cold enough
to snow, how could the earth be warming?**

          * info

> Meanwhile, Texas Senator Ted Cruz cites NASA satellite research, which
clearly shows that the Earth is warming, to show that the Earth is not
warming.

Go back

Politics

## 2015

President Obama unveils the final version of the Clean Power Plan, which aims
to reduce U.S. carbon dioxide emissions by 32.0% from 2005 levels by 2030. In
December, **196 countries come together at the Paris Climate Change Conference
to signthe Paris Agreement** , which pledges to limit rising temperatures
“well below 2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels and pursuing efforts
to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius."

          * info

> There are two very large criticisms of the Paris Agreement: First, that the
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) presented by all
signatory countries still set the Earth on a path to warm between 2.7 to 3.5
degrees Celsius; second, the entire agreement rests on voluntary, nonbinding
emissions cuts. Still, the agreement has built in mechanisms to ratchet up
emissions cuts in 2020, which means that emissions cuts might very well
increase in the next few years, and the deal does contain some binding
elements, such as requiring that all countries participate in a system to
measure the progress of their INDC goals. The bottom line is that the Paris
Agreement goes much farther in addressing the problem of climate change than
the global community ever has before.

Go back

Politics

## 2016

The year is still young, but already policy has shown signs of lagging: in
February, the **Supreme Courttemporarily halted the Clean Power Plan** , and
none of the Republicans vying for the presidency seem to understand that
climate change is a serious issue.

          * info

> The Supreme Court’s decision to halt the Clean Power Plan was the first time
in U.S. history that the Court stepped in to stay a regulation that was still
being reviewed by a lower court. Fortunately, the Clean Power Plan has buffers
built into its timeline, so the case will likely run its course through the
Supreme Court before individual states are required submit their plans for
achieving emissions reductions.

Go back

###### Timeline Credits:

Jamieson, Dale. Reason in a Dark Time: Why the Struggle against Climate Change
Failed--and What It Means for Our Future.

Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of
Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming.

#### Conclusion

The presidential election this November, and the naming of a new Supreme Court
Justice will be critical in determining how the battle against climate change
progresses in the first half of the 21st century. If policy continues to lag,
we may find ourselves to be too late to curb emissions and keep the planet’s
warming below 2 degrees Celsius. The answer is simple: we know our history, so
let’s make sure we don’t repeat it.

#####

                
                                      * **Author:** Lucas Isakowitz
                      * **Editor:** Ari Phillips
                      * **Design:** Miguel Costa
                      * **Development:** Fusion Interactive
                

About Fusion Contact US Press Advertising Jobs Privacy Policy Terms Of Use
User Submission Agreement

(C) 2016 Fusion Media Network, LLC. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

