
>

>> Jump to main content

>>

>> An official website of the United States government.

>>

>> We've made some changes to EPA.gov. If the information you are looking for
is not here, you may be able to find it on the EPA Web Archive or the January
19, 2017 Web Snapshot.

>>

>> ![](https://www.epa.gov/sites/all/themes/epa/logo.png)

>>

>> # US EPA

>>

>> United States Environmental Protection Agency

>>

>> Search Search

>>

>> ## Main menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Environmental Topics

>>  
>>                         * Air

>>  
>>                         * Bed Bugs

>>  
>>                         * Chemicals and Toxics

>>  
>>                         * Environmental Information by Location

>>  
>>                         * Greener Living

>>  
>>                         * Health

>>  
>>                         * Land, Waste, and Cleanup

>>  
>>                         * Lead

>>  
>>                         * Mold

>>  
>>                         * Pesticides

>>  
>>                         * Radon

>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                         * Water

>>  
>>                         * A-Z Index

>>  
>>                       * Laws & Regulations

>>  
>>                         * By Business Sector

>>  
>>                         * By Topic

>>  
>>                         * Compliance

>>  
>>                         * Enforcement

>>  
>>                         * Laws and Executive Orders

>>  
>>                         * Policy and Guidance

>>  
>>                         * Regulations

>>  
>>                       * About EPA

>>  
>>                         * EPA Administrator

>>  
>>                         * Current Leadership

>>  
>>                         * Organization Chart

>>  
>>                         * Staff Directory

>>  
>>                         * Planning, Budget and Results

>>  
>>                         * Jobs and Internships

>>  
>>                         * Headquarters Offices

>>  
>>                         * Regional Offices

>>  
>>                         * Labs and Research Centers

>>  
>>

>> ## Climate Change Indicators

>>

>> Contact Us

>>

>> Share

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
* # Climate Change Indicators:

>>  
>>

>> Sea Surface Temperature

>>

>> ![Share

Icon](/sites/production/files/styles/thumbnail/public/2016-01/twitter31.png)

>>

>> ![Share

Icon](/sites/production/files/styles/thumbnail/public/2016-01/facebook6.png)

>>

>> ![Reddit Share

Icon](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-03/reddit-new.png)

>>

>> This indicator describes global trends in sea surface temperature.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Figure 1.** Average Global Sea
Surface Temperature, 1880–2015

>>  
>>

>> ![Line graph showing changes in average global sea surface temperature from

1880 to 2015.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-07/sea-

surface-temp-figure1-2016.png)

>>

>> ![Download

Data](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2015-12/spreadsheet4.png)
![Download

Image](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2015-12/images11.png)

>>

>> This graph shows how the average surface temperature of the world’s oceans
has changed since 1880. This graph uses the 1971 to 2000 average as a baseline
for depicting change. Choosing a different baseline period would not change
the shape of the data over time. The shaded band shows the range of
uncertainty in the data, based on the number of measurements collected and the
precision of the methods used.

>>

>> Data source: NOAA, 20166  
>  _Web update: August 2016_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Figure 2.** Change in Sea
Surface Temperature, 1901–2015

>>  
>>

>> ![Color-coded map of the world showing changes in average sea surface

temperature from 1901 to

2015.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-07/sea-surface-temp-

figure2-2016.png)

>>

>> ![Download

Data](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2015-12/spreadsheet4.png)
![Download

Image](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2015-12/images11.png)

>>

>> This map shows how average sea surface temperature around the world changed
between 1901 and 2015. It is based on a combination of direct measurements and
satellite measurements. A black “+” symbol in the middle of a square on the
map means the trend shown is statistically significant. White areas did not
have enough data to calculate reliable long-term trends.

>>

>> Data source: IPCC, 20137; NOAA, 20168  
>  _Web update:_ _August_ _2016_

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![Line graph showing changes in average global sea surface temperature from

1880 to 2015.](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/sea-

surface-temp-thumb1-2016.png)  
>  **Figure 1.** Average Global Sea Surface Temperature, 1880–2015

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![Color-coded map of the world showing changes in average sea surface

temperature from 1901 to

2015.](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/sea-surface-temp-

thumb2-2016.png)  
>  **Figure 2.** Change in Sea Surface Temperature, 1901–2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> Key Points

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> Background

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About the

>>  
>>

>> Indicator

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> Indicator Notes

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> Data Sources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Technical

>>  
>>

>> Documentation

>>

>> ### Key Points

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sea surface temperature
increased during the 20th century and

>>  
>>

>> continues to rise. From 1901 through 2015, temperature rose at an average
rate of 0.13°F per decade (see Figure 1).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sea surface temperature has been
consistently higher during the

>>  
>>

>> past three decades than at any other time since reliable observations began
in 1880 (see Figure 1).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Based on the historical record,
increases in sea surface

>>  
>>

>> temperature have largely occurred over two key periods: between 1910 and
1940, and from about 1970 to the present. Sea surface temperature appears to
have cooled between 1880 and 1910 (see Figure 1).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Changes in sea surface
temperature vary regionally. While most

>>  
>>

>> parts of the world’s oceans have seen temperature rise, a few areas have
actually experienced cooling—for example, parts of the North Atlantic (see
Figure 2).

>>

>> ### Background

>>

>> Sea surface temperature—the temperature of the water at the ocean
surface—is an important physical attribute of the world’s oceans. The surface
temperature of the world’s oceans varies mainly with latitude, with the
warmest waters generally near the equator and the coldest waters in the Arctic
and Antarctic regions. As the oceans absorb more heat, sea surface temperature
increases and the ocean circulation patterns that transport warm and cold
water around the globe change.

>>

>> Changes in sea surface temperature can alter marine ecosystems in several
ways. For example, variations in ocean temperature can affect what species of
plants, animals, and microbes are present in a location, alter migration and
breeding patterns, threaten sensitive ocean life such as corals, and change
the frequency and intensity of harmful algal blooms such as “red tide.”1 Over
the long term, increases in sea surface temperature could also reduce the
circulation patterns that bring nutrients from the deep sea to surface waters.
Changes in reef habitat and nutrient supply could dramatically alter ocean
ecosystems and lead to declines in fish populations, which in turn could
affect people who depend on fishing for food or jobs.2

>>

>> Because the oceans continuously interact with the atmosphere, sea surface
temperature can also have profound effects on global climate. Increases in sea
surface temperature have led to an increase in the amount of atmospheric water
vapor over the oceans.3 This water vapor feeds weather systems that produce
precipitation, increasing the risk of heavy rain and snow (see the Heavy
Precipitation and Tropical Cyclone Activity indicators). Changes in sea
surface temperature can shift storm tracks, potentially contributing to
droughts in some areas.4 Increases in sea surface temperature are also
expected to lengthen the growth season for certain bacteria that can
contaminate seafood and cause foodborne illnesses, thereby increasing the risk
of health effects.5

>>

>> ### About the Indicator

>>

>> This indicator tracks average global sea surface temperature from 1880
through 2015. It also includes a map to show how change in sea surface
temperature has varied across the world’s oceans since 1901.

>>

>> Techniques for measuring sea surface temperature have evolved since the
1800s. For instance, the earliest data were collected by inserting a
thermometer into a water sample collected by lowering a bucket from a ship.
Today, temperature measurements are collected more systematically from ships,
as well as at stationary and drifting buoys.

>>

>> The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has carefully
reconstructed and filtered the data in Figure 1 to correct for biases in the
different collection techniques and to minimize the effects of sampling
changes over various locations and times. The data are shown as anomalies, or
differences, compared with the average sea surface temperature from 1971 to
2000. The map in Figure 2 was developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, which calculated long-term trends based on a collection of
published studies.

>>

>> ### Indicator Notes

>>

>> Both components of this indicator are based on instrumental measurements of
surface water temperature. Due to denser sampling and improvements in sampling
design and measurement techniques, newer data are more precise than older
data. The earlier trends shown by this indicator have less certainty because
of lower sampling frequency and less precise sampling methods.

>>

>> ### Data Sources

>>

>> Data for Figure 1 were provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s National Centers for Environmental Information and are
available online at: www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/marineocean-data/extended-
reconstructed-sea-surface-temperature-ersst. These data were reconstructed
from measurements of water temperature, which are available from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration at:
http://icoads.noaa.gov/products.html. Figure 2 is an updated version of a map
that appeared in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth
Assessment Report (www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1), which gathered data from a
variety of studies that provide the best available information about climate
change.

>>

>> ### Technical Documentation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Download related technical
information PDF

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### References

>>

>>           1. For example, see: Ostrander, G.K., K.M. Armstrong, E.T.
Knobbe, D. Gerace, and E.P. Scully. 2000. Rapid transition in the structure of
a coral reef community: The effects of coral bleaching and physical
disturbance. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 97(10):5297–5302.

>>

>>           2. Pratchett, M.S., S.K. Wilson, M.L. Berumen, and M.I.
McCormick. 2004. Sublethal effects of coral bleaching on an obligate coral
feeding butterflyfish. Coral Reefs 23(3):352–356.

>>

>>           3. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013.
Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press. www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1.

>>

>>           4. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013.
Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press. www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1.

>>

>>           5. Trtanj, J., L. Jantarasami, J. Brunkard, T. Collier, J.
Jacobs, E. Lipp, S. McLellan, S. Moore, H. Paerl, J. Ravenscroft, M. Sengco,
and J. Thurston.

>>

>>           6. Chapter 6: Climate impacts on water-related illness. The
impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific
assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program.
https://health2016.globalchange.gov.

>>

>>           7. NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 2016.
Extended reconstructed sea surface temperature (ERSST.v4). National Centers
for Environmental Information. Accessed March 2016. www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-
access/marineocean-data/extended-reconstructed-sea-surface-temperature-ersst.

>>

>>           8. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013.
Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press. www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1.

>>

>>           9. NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 2016.
NOAA Merged Land Ocean Global Surface Temperature Analysis (NOAAGlobalTemp):
Global gridded 5° x 5° data. National Centers for Environmental Information.
Accessed June 2016. www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/marineocean-data/noaa-
global-surface- temperature-noaaglobaltemp.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Printer-friendly PDF of all text and figures

>>

>> ### Learn about other indicators in this section

>>

>> ![Ocean Heat](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/ocean-

heat-landing-thumb-2016.png) ![Sea Surface

Temperature](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/sea-surface-

temp-landing-thumb-2016.png) ![Sea

Level](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/sea-level-landing-

thumb-2016.png) ![Land Loss Along the Atlantic

Coast](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/land-loss-landing-

thumb-2016.png) ![Coastal

Flooding](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/coastal-

flooding-landing-thumb-2016.png) ![Ocean

Acidity](/sites/production/files/styles/small/public/2016-07/acidity-landing-

thumb-2016.png)

>>

>> Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

>>

>> ## Climate Indicators

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate Change Indicators

>>  
>>                       * Greenhouse Gases

>>  
>>                       * Weather and Climate

>>  
>>                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                         * Ocean Heat

>>  
>>                         * Sea Surface Temperature

>>  
>>                         * Sea Level

>>  
>>                         * A Closer Look: Land Loss Along the Atlantic Coast

>>  
>>                         * Coastal Flooding

>>  
>>                         * Ocean Acidity

>>  
>>                       * Snow and Ice

>>  
>>                       * Health and Society

>>  
>>                       * Ecosystems

>>  
>>                       * Frequent Questions

>>  
>>

>> Discover.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Accessibility

>>  
>>                       * EPA Administrator

>>  
>>                       * Budget & Performance

>>  
>>                       * Contracting

>>  
>>                       * Grants

>>  
>>                       * January 19, 2017 Web Snapshot

>>  
>>                       * No FEAR Act Data

>>  
>>                       * Privacy

>>  
>>                       * Privacy and Security Notice

>>  
>>

>> Connect.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Data.gov

>>  
>>                       * Inspector General

>>  
>>                       * Jobs

>>  
>>                       * Newsroom

>>  
>>                       * Open Government

>>  
>>                       * Regulations.gov

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * USA.gov

>>  
>>                       * White House

>>  
>>

>> Ask.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Contact EPA

>>  
>>                       * Hotlines

>>  
>>                       * FOIA Requests

>>  
>>                       * Frequent Questions

>>  
>>

>> Follow.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * EPA's Facebook

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Twitter

>>  
>>                       * EPA's YouTube

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Flickr

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Instagram

>>  
>>

>> Last updated on December 17, 2016

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

