
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> SubscribeMenu

>>

>> Scientific American

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Cart 0

>>  
>>                       * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot

>>  
>>

>> password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-

eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * |Stay Informed

>>  
>>

>> SearchSubscribe

>>

>> Close

>>

>> SearchClose

>>

>> Advanced Search

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Sciences

>>  
>>                       * Mind

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Sustainability

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * Podcasts

>>  
>>                       * Blogs

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Current Issue

>>  
>>                       * Cart0

>>  
>>                       * Sign In

>>  
>>                       * Stay Informed

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share

>>  
>>                       * Latest

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       *           *           *           * Climate

>>  
>>

>> # How Is Worldwide Sea Level Rise Driven by Melting Arctic Ice?

>>

>> Experts explain how land ice thaw and the dynamics of warming water are
raising ocean levels

>>  
>>                 >>                       * By Annie Sneed on June 5, 2017

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on Facebook

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on Twitter

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on Reddit

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on LinkedIn

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share via

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Print

>>  
>>

>> ![How Is Worldwide Sea Level Rise Driven by Melting Arctic

Ice?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/94DB03BF-B5A4-420F-B380E141FA76C871_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&644EFC25-BFFF-432B-879B95BB872CB7D3)

>>

>> Glacier in Prins Christian Sund, Greenland. Credit: londonimages _Getty
Images_

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Climate change is warming the Arctic more than twice as fast as anywhere
else on the planet. One of the most serious consequences is sea level rise,
which threatens nations from Bangladesh to the U.S. But exactly how does
melting Arctic ice contribute to sea level rise? _Scientific American_ asked
Eric Rignot, professor of earth system science at the University of
California, Irvine, and Andrea Dutton, assistant professor of geology at the
University of Florida, how changes in this particular northern region are
driving the oceans to dangerous heights.

>>

>> Seas are now rising an average of 3.2 millimeters per year globally, and
are predicted to climb a total of 0.2 to 2.0 meters by 2100. Rignot and Dutton
say that in the Arctic, the Greenland Ice Sheet poses the greatest risk for
ocean levels because melting land ice is the main cause of rising seas--and
"most of the Arctic's land ice is locked up in Greenland," Rignot explains.
That's 2.96 million cubic kilometers of ice now covering land areas--and it's
melting into the ocean. If the entire Greenland Ice Sheet thawed, Dutton says,
it would raise sea levels by an average of seven meters. That would
significantly flood coastal megacities such as Mumbai and Hong Kong.

>>

>> Greenland's land ice is already thawing fast enough to raise worldwide seas
0.74 millimeter per year. "The melt rate has been increasing," in large part
because the ice sheet's surface thawing has picked up as global temperatures
warm, Dutton says. "This acceleration of surface melt has doubled Greenland's
contribution to sea level rise" **** compared with the period from 1992 to
2011, Dutton adds.

>>

>> And the Arctic has other frozen land areas--mountain glaciers and ice
caps-- in places like Iceland, the Canadian and Russian Arctic, Alaska and
Norway's Svalbard Islands. These hold nowhere near as much water as the
Greenland Ice Sheet but are still a significant part of the sea level
equation. Together with glaciers and ice caps in the Southern Hemisphere
(excluding the Antarctic Ice Sheet), **** their complete meltdown could
potentially raise oceans nearly half a meter, according to the U.S. Geological
Survey. But the northern areas have many more icy features than southern ones,
Rignot notes. "Melting glaciers and ice caps in Patagonia and the other
southern places don't contribute as much as those in the Arctic," he says.

>>

>> In addition to simply adding water to the ocean, thawing Arctic land ice
can raise sea levels even more via a mechanism called thermal expansion. "In a
warmer climate the ocean absorbs a lot of extra heat from the climate system,
and as a result it becomes less dense," Rignot explains. As Arctic land ice
melts into the sea, there is more ocean water overall--and thus more water to
heat up and expand as the climate warms, which drives up sea levels even more.
"The amount it expands is significant, enough that we can measure it," Dutton
says. From 1993 to 2010 thermal expansion added an average of 1.1 millimeters
of sea level rise per year, according to the International Panel on Climate
Change Fifth Assessment Report (pdf).

>>

>> The Arctic has a lot of sea ice, too--at least 6.5 million square
kilometers --and it is about two meters thick on average, according to the
National Snow and Ice Data Center. Dutton and Rignot say that although the sea
ice is shrinking, it does not add to water levels as it melts because it is
already part of the ocean's mass. "You can freeze and melt the sea ice as much
as you want--it's not going to change the sea level," Rignot says. "You're
just changing the state of the water." Dutton provides an analogy: "If you're
sitting in a bar with a drink with ice cubes, and your cup is full and the ice
cubes melt, it's not going to overflow. That ice is already floating in the
water, so it has displaced the volume of its own space."

>>

>> But thawing sea ice still plays a role in sea level rise. "The sea ice acts
as a blanket on top of the ocean," protecting the water from incoming solar
energy and atmospheric heat, Rignot says. As that frozen coating disappears,
its white surface is no longer there to reflect sunlight back into the
atmosphere--so the ocean absorbs much more solar energy. "It's like going from
receiving no heat from the sun to receiving the sun's full heat," he explains.
"It's a tremendous difference." This effect accelerates overall warming, which
in turn melts more land ice and drives up sea levels. So even though all that
melting sea ice may not seem like a big deal because it is not directly adding
to sea levels, Rignot says "it matters greatly--the disappearance of that
blanket disturbs the whole Arctic system."

>>

>> ![](/themes/responsive/images/global/rightsPermsIcon.png) Rights &
Permissions

>>

>> ### ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

>>

>> #### Annie Sneed

>>

>> #### Recent Articles

>>  
>>                 >>                       * What Conservation Efforts Can
Learn from Indigenous Communities

>>  
>>                       * Bird Beak Shapes Depend on More Than Diet

>>  
>>                       * New York Is Building "Living" Wave Barriers to
Prepare for the

>>  
>>

>> Next Superstorm

>>

>> ## Read This Next

>>

>> ![Climate Change Is Transforming Arctic

Rivers](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/987725DC-

BC39-42AF-AB840E370F6D6A54_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Climate

>>

>> ### Climate Change Is Transforming Arctic Rivers

>>

>> April 19, 2017 — Scott Waldman and ClimateWire

>>

>> ![The Arctic Is Getting

Crazy](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/EC12F677-7475-4CB0-BD9524992E2097F5_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Weather

>>

>> ### The Arctic Is Getting Crazy

>>

>> January 5, 2017 — Mark Fischetti

>>

>> ![Climate Change Is Turning Antarctica

Green](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/9E6D4321-2460-4846-BBC0D2D83BAFA04C_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Climate

>>

>> ### Climate Change Is Turning Antarctica Green

>>

>> May 19, 2017 — Scott Waldman and ClimateWire

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> ## Newsletter

>>

>> ## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

>>

>> Sign Up

>>

>> ## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

>>

>> Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

>>

>> Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

>>

>> Follow us

>>  
>>                 >>                       * instagram

>>  
>>                       * soundcloud

>>  
>>                       * youtube

>>  
>>                       * twitter

>>  
>>                       * facebook

>>  
>>                       * rss

>>  
>>

>> Scientific american arabic

>>

>> العربية

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Store

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Press Room

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * FAQs

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Advertise

>>  
>>                       * SA Custom Media

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Use of Cookies

>>  
>>                       * International Editions

>>  
>>

>> Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has
commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them
can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a
strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science
to our readers.

>>

>> (C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

>>

>> All Rights Reserved.

>>

>> Scroll To Top

>>

>> ![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

>>

>> **You have free article s left.**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

>>

>> Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

>>

>> See subscription options

>>

>> Already a subscriber? Sign in.

>>

>> You have no free articles left.

>>

>> Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

>>

>> Sign In

>>

>> See Subscription Options

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

