

Skip to main content

![U.S. National Library of Medicine](/images/NLM-printonly.png)

Share This Page

  * Email This Page
  *     * Share on Facebook
  *     * Share on Twitter

![Genetics Home Reference, Your Guide to Understanding Genetic

Conditions](/images/GHR_LOGO_Tagline.png)

Search

MENU Toggle navigation

CLOSE navigation

  * Home Page
  * Search

  * Home

  * Health Conditions
  * Genes
  * Chromosomes & mtDNA
  * Classroom
  * Help Me Understand Genetics

  * Home

  * Help Me Understand Genetics
  * Cells and DNA
  * What is DNA?

# What is DNA?

DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the hereditary material in humans and almost
all other organisms. Nearly every cell in a person’s body has the same DNA.
Most DNA is located in the cell nucleus (where it is called nuclear DNA), but
a small amount of DNA can also be found in the mitochondria (where it is
called mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA). Mitochondria are structures within cells
that convert the energy from food into a form that cells can use.

The information in DNA is stored as a code made up of four chemical bases:
adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T). Human DNA consists of
about 3 billion bases, and more than 99 percent of those bases are the same in
all people. The order, or sequence, of these bases determines the information
available for building and maintaining an organism, similar to the way in
which letters of the alphabet appear in a certain order to form words and
sentences.

DNA bases pair up with each other, A with T and C with G, to form units called
base pairs. Each base is also attached to a sugar molecule and a phosphate
molecule. Together, a base, sugar, and phosphate are called a nucleotide.
Nucleotides are arranged in two long strands that form a spiral called a
double helix. The structure of the double helix is somewhat like a ladder,
with the base pairs forming the ladder’s rungs and the sugar and phosphate
molecules forming the vertical sidepieces of the ladder.

An important property of DNA is that it can replicate, or make copies of
itself. Each strand of DNA in the double helix can serve as a pattern for
duplicating the sequence of bases. This is critical when cells divide because
each new cell needs to have an exact copy of the DNA present in the old cell.

DNA is a double helix formed by base pairs attached to a sugar-phosphate
backbone.

![DNA is a double helix formed by base pairs attached to a sugar-phosphate

backbone.](/primer/illustrations/dnastructure.jpg)

Credit: U.S. National Library of Medicine

## For more information about DNA:

The National Human Genome Research Institute fact sheet Deoxyribonucleic Acid
(DNA) provides an introduction to this molecule.

StatedClearly offers a video introduction to DNA and how it works.

The New Genetics, a publication of the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences, discusses the structure of DNA and how it was discovered.

A basic explanation and illustration of DNA can be found on Arizona State
University's "Ask a Biologist" website.

The Virtual Genetics Education Centre, created by the University of Leicester,
offers additional information on DNA, genes, and chromosomes.

An overview of mitochondrial DNA is available from the Neuromuscular Disease
Center at Washington University.

### Topics in the Cells and DNA chapter

  * What is a cell?
  * What is DNA?
  * What is a gene?
  * What is a chromosome?
  * How many chromosomes do people have?
  * What is noncoding DNA?

Other chapters in Help Me Understand Genetics

Printable Chapter PDF (1MB)

Published: **May 28, 2019**

The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional
medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition
should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.

  * About
  * Selection Criteria for Links
  * Data Files & API
  * Site Map
  * Subscribe
  * Customer Support

USA.gov

  * U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
  * National Institutes of Health
  * National Library of Medicine
  * Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications

  * Copyright

  * Privacy
  * Accessibility
  * FOIA
  * Viewers & Players

8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

