
>

>> Jump to main content

>>

>> An official website of the United States government.

>>

>> We've made some changes to EPA.gov. If the information you are looking for
is not here, you may be able to find it on the EPA Web Archive or the January
19, 2017 Web Snapshot.

>>

>> ![](https://www.epa.gov/sites/all/themes/epa/logo.png)

>>

>> # US EPA

>>

>> United States Environmental Protection Agency

>>

>> Search Search

>>

>> ## Main menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Environmental Topics

>>  
>>                         * Air

>>  
>>                         * Bed Bugs

>>  
>>                         * Chemicals and Toxics

>>  
>>                         * Environmental Information by Location

>>  
>>                         * Greener Living

>>  
>>                         * Health

>>  
>>                         * Land, Waste, and Cleanup

>>  
>>                         * Lead

>>  
>>                         * Mold

>>  
>>                         * Pesticides

>>  
>>                         * Radon

>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                         * Water

>>  
>>                         * A-Z Index

>>  
>>                       * Laws & Regulations

>>  
>>                         * By Business Sector

>>  
>>                         * By Topic

>>  
>>                         * Compliance

>>  
>>                         * Enforcement

>>  
>>                         * Laws and Executive Orders

>>  
>>                         * Policy and Guidance

>>  
>>                         * Regulations

>>  
>>                       * About EPA

>>  
>>                         * EPA Administrator

>>  
>>                         * Current Leadership

>>  
>>                         * Organization Chart

>>  
>>                         * Staff Directory

>>  
>>                         * Planning, Budget and Results

>>  
>>                         * Jobs and Internships

>>  
>>                         * Headquarters Offices

>>  
>>                         * Regional Offices

>>  
>>                         * Labs and Research Centers

>>  
>>

>> ## Greenhouse Gas Emissions

>>

>> Contact Us

>>

>> Share

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
* # Sources of Greenhouse Gas

>>  
>>

>> Emissions

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Overview

>>  
>>                       * Electricity

>>  
>>                       * Transportation

>>  
>>                       * Industry

>>  
>>                       * Commercial/

>>  
>>

>> Residential

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Agriculture

>>  
>>                       * Land Use/

>>  
>>

>> Forestry

>>

>> ## Overview

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/total-

ghg-2019.jpg)Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printGreenhouse gases trap heat and make the planet
warmer. Human activities are responsible for almost all of the increase in
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere over the last 150 years.1 The largest
source of greenhouse gas emissions from human activities in the United States
is from burning fossil fuels for electricity, heat, and transportation.

>>

>> EPA tracks total U.S. emissions by publishing the _Inventory of U.S.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks_. This annual report estimates the total
national greenhouse gas emissions and removals associated with human
activities across the United States.

>>

>> The primary sources of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States are:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Transportation (28.9 percent of
2017 greenhouse gas emissions) –

>>  
>>

>> The transportation sector generates the largest share of greenhouse gas
emissions. Greenhouse gas emissions from transportation primarily come from
burning fossil fuel for our cars, trucks, ships, trains, and planes. Over 90
percent of the fuel used for transportation is petroleum based, which includes
primarily gasoline and diesel.2

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Electricity production (27.5
percent of 2017 greenhouse gas

>>  
>>

>> emissions) – Electricity production generates the second largest share of
greenhouse gas emissions. Approximately 62.9 percent of our electricity comes
from burning fossil fuels, mostly coal and natural gas.3

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Industry (22.2 percent of 2017
greenhouse gas emissions) –

>>  
>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions from industry primarily come from burning fossil
fuels for energy, as well as greenhouse gas emissions from certain chemical
reactions necessary to produce goods from raw materials.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Commercial and Residential (11.6
percent of 2017 greenhouse gas

>>  
>>

>> emissions) – Greenhouse gas emissions from businesses and homes arise
primarily from fossil fuels burned for heat, the use of certain products that
contain greenhouse gases, and the handling of waste.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Agriculture (9.0 percent of 2017
greenhouse gas emissions) –

>>  
>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture come from livestock such as cows,
agricultural soils, and rice production.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Land Use and Forestry (offset of
11.1 percent of 2017 greenhouse

>>  
>>

>> gas emissions) – Land areas can act as a sink (absorbing CO2 from the
atmosphere) or a source of greenhouse gas emissions. In the United States,
since 1990, managed forests and other lands have absorbed more CO2 from the
atmosphere than they emit.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> Since 1990, gross U.S. greenhouse gas emissions have increased by 1.3
percent. From year to year, emissions can rise and fall due to changes in the
economy, the price of fuel, and other factors. In 2017, U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions decreased compared to 2016 levels. The decrease in CO2 emissions
from fossil fuel combustion was a result of multiple factors, including a
continued shift from coal to natural gas, increased use of renewables in the
electric power sector, and milder weather that contributed to less overall
electricity use.

>>

>> ![Line graph showing total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions for 1990 to 2017.

Total emissions increased from about 6,400 million metric tons of carbon

dioxide equivalents in 1990 to over 7,000 million in 1998, and decreased to

around 6,500 million in

2017.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/total-ghg-over-

time-2019.jpg)All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ### References

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. IPCC (2007). Summary for
Policymakers. In: _Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> 2007: The Physical Science Basis_. Exit _Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor
and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA.

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. IPCC (2007). Climate Change
2007: Mitigation. Exit

>>  
>>

>> _Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_ [B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R.
Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. U.S. Energy Information
Administration (2018). _Electricity

>>  
>>

>> Explained - Basics_

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Electricity Sector Emissions

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/electricity-

ghg-2019.jpg) Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printThe Electricity sector involves the
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) makes up the vast majority of greenhouse gas emissions from the sector,
but smaller amounts of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are also emitted.
These gases are released during the combustion of fossil fuels, such as coal,
oil, and natural gas, to produce electricity. Less than 1 percent of
greenhouse gas emissions from the sector come from sulfur hexafluoride (SF6),
an insulating chemical used in electricity transmission and distribution
equipment.

>>

>> ## Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the Electricity Sector by Fuel Source

>>

>> Coal combustion is more carbon intensive than burning natural gas or
petroleum for electricity. Although coal use accounted for about 67.9 percent
of CO2 emissions from the sector, it represented only 31.2 percent of the
electricity generated in the United States in 2017. Natural gas use accounted
for 31.2 percent of electricity generation in 2017, and petroleum use
accounted for less than one percent. The remaining generation in 2017 came
from non-fossil fuel sources, including nuclear (21.0 percent) and renewable
energy sources (16.2 percent), which include hydroelectricity, biomass, wind,
and solar.1 Most of these non-fossil sources, such as nuclear, hydroelectric,
wind, and solar, are non-emitting.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> In 2017, the electricity sector was the second largest source of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for 27.5 percent of the U.S. total.
Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity have decreased by about 5.2 percent
since 1990 due to a shift in generation to lower- and non-emitting sources of
electricity generation and an increase in end-use energy efficiency.

>>

>> ![Line graph of greenhouse gas emissions from the electricity sector for

1990 to 2017. Emissions started around 1,800 million metric tons of carbon

dioxide equivalents in 1990, peaked at nearly 2,500 million in 2007, and fell

to about 1,775 million in

2017.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/electricity-

timeline-2019.jpg)All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Electricity End-Use

>>

>> ![Pie chart showing total U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector with

Electricity Distributed. 31 percent is from Residential and Commercial, 30

percent is from industry, 29 percent is from transportation, and 10 percent is

from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/total-2019.jpg)All
emission estimates from the _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printElectricity is used by other sectors—in homes,
businesses, and factories. Therefore, it is possible to attribute the
greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation to the sectors that use
the electricity. Looking at greenhouse gas emissions by end-use sector can
help us understand energy demand across sectors and changes in energy use over
time.

>>

>> When emissions from electricity are allocated to energy end-use sectors,
industrial activities account for a much larger share of U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions. Greenhouse gas emissions from commercial and residential buildings
also increase substantially when emissions from electricity end-use are
included, due to the relatively large share of electricity use (e.g., heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning; lighting; and appliances) in these sectors.

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions from Electricity

>>

>> There are a variety of opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
associated with electricity generation, transmission, and distribution. The
table below categorizes these opportunities and provides examples. For a more
comprehensive list, see Chapter 7 of the _Contribution of Working Group III to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change_.2

>>

>> Example Reduction Opportunities for the Electricity Sector Type | **How
Emissions Are Reduced** | **Examples**  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Increased Efficiency of Fossil-fired Power Plants and Fuel Switching |
Increasing the efficiency of existing fossil fuel-fired power plants by using
advanced technologies; substituting less carbon-intensive fuels; shifting
generation from higher-emitting to lower-emitting power plants. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Converting a coal-fired boiler
to use of natural gas, or co-

>>  
>>

>> firing natural gas.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Converting a single-cycle gas
turbine into a combined-cycle

>>  
>>

>> turbine.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Shifting dispatch of electric
generators to lower-emitting units

>>  
>>

>> or power plants.  
>  Renewable Energy | Using renewable energy sources rather than fossil fuel
to generate electricity. | Increasing the share of total electricity generated
from wind, solar, hydro, and geothermal sources, as well as certain biofuel
sources, through the addition of new renewable energy generating capacity.  
>  Increased End-Use Energy Efficiency | Reducing electricity use and peak
demand by increasing efficiency and conservation in homes, businesses, and
industry. | EPA's ENERGY STAR® partners removed over 320 million metric tons
of greenhouse gases in 2016 alone, and helped Americans save over $30 billion
in energy costs, approximately 400 billion kWh of electricity.  
>  Nuclear Energy | Generating electricity from nuclear energy rather than the
combustion of fossil fuels. | Extending the life of existing nuclear plants
and building new nuclear generating capacity.  
>  Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS) | Capturing CO2 as a byproduct of
fossil fuel combustion before it enters the atmosphere, transporting the CO2,
injecting the CO2 deep underground at a carefully selected and suitable
subsurface geologic formation where it is securely stored. | Capturing CO2
from the stacks of a coal-fired power plant and then transferring the CO2 via
pipeline, injecting the CO2 deep underground at a carefully selected and
suitable nearby abandoned oil field where it is securely stored . Learn more
about CCS.

>>

>> ### References

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. U.S. Energy Information
Administration (2018). Electricity

>>  
>>

>> Explained - Basics.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Transportation Sector Emissions

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/transportation-

ghg-2019.jpg)Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printThe Transportation sector includes the
movement of people and goods by cars, trucks, trains, ships, airplanes, and
other vehicles. The majority of greenhouse gas emissions from transportation
are carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions resulting from the combustion of petroleum-
based products, like gasoline, in internal combustion engines. The largest
sources of transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions include passenger
cars and light-duty trucks, including sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks,
and minivans. These sources account for over half of the emissions from the
transportation sector. The remaining greenhouse gas emissions from the
transportation sector come from other modes of transportation, including
freight trucks, commercial aircraft, ships, boats, and trains, as well as
pipelines and lubricants.

>>

>> Relatively small amounts of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are
emitted during fuel combustion. In addition, a small amount of
hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions are included in the Transportation sector.
These emissions result from the use of mobile air conditioners and
refrigerated transport.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> ## Related Links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Carbon Pollution from
Transportation

>>  
>>                       * EPA and U.S. DOE Fuel Economy

>>  
>>                       * SmartWay

>>  
>>                       * Smart Growth

>>  
>>                       * Renewable Fuel Standard

>>  
>>                       * U.S. Inventory's section on Fossil Fuel Combustion

>>  
>>

>> In 2017, greenhouse gas emissions from transportation accounted for about
28.9 percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, making it the largest
contributor of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. In terms of the overall trend,
from 1990 to 2017, total transportation emissions have increased due, in large
part, to increased demand for travel. The number of vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) by light-duty motor vehicles (passenger cars and light-duty trucks)
increased by 45.9 percent from 1990 to 2017, as a result of a confluence of
factors including population growth, economic growth, urban sprawl, and
periods of low fuel prices. Between 1990 and 2004, average fuel economy among
new vehicles sold annually declined, as sales of light-duty trucks increased.
Starting in 2005, average new vehicle fuel economy began to increase while
light-duty VMT grew only modestly for much of the period. Average new vehicle
fuel economy has improved almost every year since 2005, and the truck share is
about 45 percent of new vehicles in model year 2016.

>>

>> Learn more about Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Transportation.

>>

>> ![Line graph of greenhouse gas emissions from transportation for 1990 to

2017. Emissions started just above 1,500 million metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalents in 1990, peaked around 2,000 million in 2005, and fell to about

1,870 million in

2017.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/transportation-

timeline-2019.jpg)Emissions involved in the consumption of electricity for
transportation activities are included above, but not shown separately (as was
done for other sectors). These indirect emissions are negligible, accounting
for less than 1 percent of the total emissions shown in the graph.

>>

>> All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions from Transportation

>>

>> There are a variety of opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
associated with transportation. The table shown below categorizes these
opportunities and provides examples. For a more comprehensive list, see
Chapter 8 of the _Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_.1Exit

>>

>> Examples of Reduction Opportunities in the Transportation Sector Type | How
Emissions Are Reduced | Examples  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Fuel Switching | Using fuels that emit less CO2 than fuels currently being
used. Alternative sources can include biofuels; hydrogen; electricity from
renewable sources, such as wind and solar; or fossil fuels that are less
CO2-intensive than the fuels that they replace. Learn more about Green
Vehicles and Alternative and Renewable Fuels. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Using public buses that are
fueled by compressed natural gas

>>  
>>

>> rather than gasoline or diesel.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Using electric or hybrid
automobiles, provided that the energy

>>  
>>

>> is generated from lower-carbon or non-fossil fuels.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Using renewable fuels such as
low-carbon biofuels.

>>  
>>

>> Improving Fuel Efficiency with Advanced Design, Materials, and Technologies
| Using advanced technologies, design, and materials to develop more fuel-
efficient vehicles. Learn about EPA's vehicle greenhouse gas rules. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Developing advanced vehicle
technologies such as hybrid vehicles

>>  
>>

>> and electric vehicles, that can store energy from braking and use it for
power later.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reducing the weight of materials
used to build vehicles.

>>  
>>                       * Reducing the aerodynamic resistance of vehicles
through better

>>  
>>

>> shape design.  
>  Improving Operating Practices | Adopting practices that minimize fuel use.
Improving driving practices and vehicle maintenance. Learn about how the
freight transportation industry can reduce emissions through EPA's SmartWay
Program. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reducing the average taxi time
for aircraft.

>>  
>>                       * Driving sensibly (avoiding rapid acceleration and
braking,

>>  
>>

>> observing the speed limit).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reducing engine-idling.

>>  
>>                       * Improved voyage planning for ships, such as through
improved

>>  
>>

>> weather routing, to increase fuel efficiency.  
>  Reducing Travel Demand | Employing urban planning to reduce the number of
miles that people drive each day. Reducing the need for driving through travel
efficiency measures such as commuter, biking, and pedestrian programs. Learn
about EPA's Smart Growth Program. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Building public transportation,
sidewalks, and bike paths to

>>  
>>

>> increase lower-emission transportation choices.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Zoning for mixed use areas, so
that residences, schools, stores,

>>  
>>

>> and businesses are close together, reducing the need for driving.

>>

>> ## References

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. IPCC (2014). _Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate

>>  
>>

>> Change_. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-
Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S.
Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von
Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Industry Sector Emissions

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/industry-

ghg-2019.jpg) Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printThe Industry sector produces the goods and raw
materials we use every day. The greenhouse gases emitted during industrial
production are split into two categories: **direct emissions** that are
produced at the facility, and **indirect emissions** that occur off site, but
are associated with the facility's use of electricity.

>>

>> **Direct emissions** are produced by burning fuel for power or heat,
through chemical reactions, and from leaks from industrial processes or
equipment. Most direct emissions come from the consumption of fossil fuels for
energy. A smaller amount of direct emissions, roughly one third, come from
leaks from natural gas and petroleum systems, the use of fuels in production
(e.g., petroleum products used to make plastics), and chemical reactions
during the production of chemicals, iron and steel, and cement.

>>

>> **Indirect emissions** are produced by burning fossil fuel at a power plant
to make electricity, which is then used by an industrial facility to power
industrial buildings and machinery.

>>

>> More information about facility-level emissions from large industrial
sources is available through EPA's Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program's data
publication tool. National-level information about emissions from industry as
a whole can be found in the sections on Fossil Fuel Combustion and the
Industrial Processes chapter in the _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Sinks_ _._

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> In 2017, direct industrial greenhouse gas emissions accounted for 22.2
percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, making it the third largest
contributor to U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, after the Transportation and
Electricity sectors. Including both direct emissions and indirect emissions
associated with electricity use, industry's share of total U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions in 2017 was 29.7 percent, making it the largest contributor of
greenhouse gases of any sector. Greenhouse gas emissions from industry have
declined by 11.8 percent since 1990.

>>

>> ![Line graph of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions from industry

for 1990 to 2017. There are three lines - for total emissions, direct

emissions, and indirect emissions from electricity. All three lines generally

trend

downwards.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/industry-

timeline-2019.jpg)All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions from Industry

>>

>> There are a wide variety of industrial activities that cause greenhouse gas
emissions, and many opportunities to reduce them. The table shown below
provides some examples of opportunities for industry to reduce emissions. For
a more comprehensive list, see Chapter 10 of the _Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change_ _._1Exit

>>

>> Examples of Reduction Opportunities for the Industry Sector Type | **How
Emissions Are Reduced** | **Examples**  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Energy Efficiency | Upgrading to more efficient industrial technology.
EPA's ENERGY STAR® program helps industries become more energy-efficient. |
Identifying the ways that manufacturers can use less energy to light and heat
factories or to run equipment.  
>  Fuel Switching | Switching to fuels that result in less CO2 emissions but
the same amount of energy, when combusted. | Using natural gas instead of coal
to run machinery.  
>  Recycling | Producing industrial products from materials that are recycled
or renewable, rather than producing new products from raw materials. | Using
scrap steel and scrap aluminum as opposed to smelting new aluminum or forging
new steel.  
>  Training and Awareness | Making companies and workers aware of the steps to
reduce or prevent emissions leaks from equipment. EPA has a variety of
voluntary programs that provide resources for training and other steps for
reducing emissions. EPA supports programs for the aluminum, semiconductor, and
magnesium industries. | Instituting handling policies and procedures for
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride
(SF6) that reduce occurrences of accidental releases and leaks from containers
and equipment.

>>

>> ## References

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. IPCC (2014). _Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate

>>  
>>

>> Change_. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-
Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S.
Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von
Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Commercial and Residential Sector Emissions

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/commercial-

ghg-2019.jpg) Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printThe residential and commercial sectors include
all homes and commercial businesses (excluding agricultural and industrial
activities). Greenhouse gas emissions from this sector come from **direct
emissions** including fossil fuel combustion for heating and cooking needs,
management of waste and wastewater, and leaks from refrigerants in homes and
businesses as well as **indirect emissions** that occur offsite but are
associated with use of electricity consumed by homes and businesses.

>>

>> **Direct emissions** are produced from residential and commercial
activities in a variety of ways:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Combustion of natural gas and
petroleum products for heating and

>>  
>>

>> cooking needs emits carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide
(N2O). Emissions from natural gas consumption represent 89.0 percent of the
direct fossil fuel CO2 emissions from the residential and commercial sectors.
Coal consumption is a minor component of energy use in both of these sectors.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Organic waste sent to landfills
emits CH4.

>>  
>>                       * Wastewater treatment plants emit CH4 and N2O.

>>  
>>                       * Fluorinated gases (mainly hydrofluorocarbons, or
HFCs) used in

>>  
>>

>> air conditioning and refrigeration systems can be released during servicing
or from leaking equipment.

>>

>> **Indirect emissions** are produced by burning fossil fuel at a power plant
to make electricity, which is then used in residential and commercial
activities such as lighting and for appliances.

>>

>> More national-level information about emissions from the residential and
commercial sectors can be found in the U.S. Inventory's Energy and Trends
chapters.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> In 2017, direct greenhouse gas emissions from homes and businesses
accounted for 11.6 percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse
gas emissions from homes and businesses vary from year to year based on short-
term fluctuations in energy consumption caused primarily by weather
conditions. Total residential and commercial greenhouse gas emissions in 2017
have increased by 3.4 percent since 1990. Greenhouse gas emissions from on-
site direct emissions in homes and businesses have decreased by 3.2 percent
since 1990. Additionally, indirect emissions from electricity use by homes and
businesses have increased by 7.8 percent since 1990, due to increasing
electricity consumption for lighting, heating, air conditioning, and
appliances.

>>

>> ![Line graph of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions from homes and

businesses for 1990 to 2017. There are three lines - for total emissions,

direct emissions, and indirect emissions from electricity. Total and indirect

emissions trend upwards through 2007, after which they trend downwards; direct

emissions stay roughly

constant.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/commercial-

timeline-2019.jpg)All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions from Homes and Businesses

>>

>> The table shown below provides some examples of opportunities to reduce
emissions from homes and businesses. For a more comprehensive list of options
and a detailed assessment of how each option affects different gases, see
Chapter 9 and Chapter 12 of the _Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_.
Exit

>>

>> Examples of Reduction Opportunities in the Residential and Commercial
Sector Type | How Emissions Are Reduced | Examples  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Homes and Commercial Buildings | Reducing energy use through energy
efficiency. | Homes and commercial buildings use large amounts of energy for
heating, cooling, lighting, and other functions. "Green building" techniques
and retrofits can allow new and existing buildings to use less energy to
accomplish the same functions, leading to fewer greenhouse gas emissions.
Techniques to improve building energy efficiency include better insulation;
more energy-efficient heating, cooling, ventilation, and refrigeration
systems; efficient fluorescent lighting; passive heating and lighting to take
advantage of sunlight; and the purchase of energy-efficient appliances and
electronics. Learn more about ENERGY STAR®.  
>  Wastewater Treatment | Making water and wastewater systems more energy-
efficient. | Drinking water and wastewater systems account for approximately 2
percent of energy use in the United States. By incorporating energy efficiency
practices into their water and wastewater plant, municipalities and utilities
can save 15 to 30 percent in energy use. Learn more about Energy Efficiency
for Water and Wastewater Utilities.  
>  Waste Management | Reducing solid waste sent to landfills. Capturing and
using methane produced in current landfills. | Landfill gas is the natural
byproduct of the decomposition of solid waste in landfills. It primarily
consists of CO2 and CH4. Well established, low-cost methods to reduce
greenhouse gases from consumer waste exist, including recycling programs,
waste reduction programs, and landfill methane capture programs.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Learn about EPA's waste
reduction and resource conservation

>>  
>>

>> efforts.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Learn about EPA's Landfill
Methane Outreach Program, which

>>  
>>

>> promotes the recovery and use of landfill gas.  
>  Air Conditioning and Refrigeration | Reducing leakage from air conditioning
and refrigeration equipment. Using refrigerants with lower global warming
potentials. | Commonly used refrigerants in homes and businesses include
ozone-depleting hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) refrigerants, often HCFC-22,
and blends consisting entirely or primarily of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), both
of which are potent greenhouse gases. In recent years there have been several
advancements in air conditioning and refrigeration technology that can help
food retailers reduce both refrigerant charges and refrigerant emissions.
Learn more about EPA's GreenChill Program to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
from supermarkets.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Agriculture Sector Emissions

>>

>> ![Pie chart of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by economic sector in

2017. 28 percent is from electricity, 29 percent is from transportation, 22
percent is from industry, 12 percent is from commercial and residential, and 9

percent is from

agriculture.](/sites/production/files/styles/medium/public/2019-04/agriculture-

ghg-2019.jpg)Total Emissions in 2017 = 6,457 Million Metric Tons of CO2
equivalent. Percentages may not add up to 100% due to independent rounding.

>>

>>           * Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry in the United States is
a net sink and offsets approximately 11 percent of these greenhouse gas
emissions, not included in total above. All emission estimates from the
_Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 -2017._

>>

>> Larger image to save or printAgricultural activities — crop and livestock
production for food — contribute to emissions in a variety of ways:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Various management practices on
agricultural soils can lead to

>>  
>>

>> increased availability of nitrogen in the soil and result in emissions of
nitrous oxide (N2O). Specific activities that contribute to N2O emissions from
agricultural lands include the application of synthetic and organic
fertilizers, the growth of nitrogen-fixing crops, the drainage of organic
soil, and irrigation practices. Management of agricultural soils accounts for
almost half of the emissions from the Agriculture economic sector.*

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Livestock, especially ruminants
such as cattle, produce methane

>>  
>>

>> ( CH4) as part of their normal digestive processes. This process is called
enteric fermentation, and it represents almost one third of the emissions from
the Agriculture economic sector.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The way in which manure from
livestock is managed also

>>  
>>

>> contributes to CH4 and N2O emissions. Different manure treatment and
storage methods affect how much of these greenhouse gases are produced. Manure
management accounts for about 14 percent of the total greenhouse gas emissions
from the Agriculture economic sector in the United States.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Smaller sources of agricultural
emissions include CO2 from

>>  
>>

>> liming and urea application, CH4 from rice cultivation, and burning crop
residues, which produces CH4 and N2O.

>>

>> More national-level information about emissions from agriculture can be
found in the agriculture chapter in the _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Sinks_ _._

>>

>>           * Management of croplands and grasslands can also lead to
emissions or sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2). However, these emissions
and removals are included under the Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
sector.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> In 2017, greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture economic sector
accounted for 9.0 percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse
gas emissions from agriculture have increased by 8.8 percent since 1990. One
driver for this increase has been the 57.1 percent growth in combined CH4 and
N2O emissions from livestock manure management systems, reflecting the
increased use of emission-intensive liquid systems over this time period.
Emissions from other agricultural sources have either remained flat or changed
by a relatively small amount since 1990.

>>

>> ![Line graph of greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture for 1990 to 2017.

There are three lines - for total emissions, direct emissions, and indirect

emissions from electricity. Total and direct emissions trend upwards; indirect

stay roughly

constant.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/agriculture-

timeline-2019.jpg)All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions from Agriculture

>>

>> The table shown below provides some examples of opportunities to reduce
emissions from agriculture. For a more comprehensive list of options and a
detailed assessment of how each option affects different gases, see Chapter 11
of the _Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Exit

>>

>> Examples of Reduction Opportunities for the Agriculture Sector Type | **How
Emissions Are Reduced** | **Examples**  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Land and Crop Management | Adjusting the methods for managing land and
growing crops. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Fertilizing crops with the
appropriate amount of nitrogen

>>  
>>

>> required for optimal crop production, since over-application of nitrogen
can lead to higher N2O emissions without enhancing crop production.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Draining water from wetland rice
soils during the growing season

>>  
>>

>> to reduce CH4 emissions.  
>  Livestock Management | Adjusting feeding practices and other management
methods to reduce the amount of CH4 resulting from enteric fermentation. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Improving pasture quality to
increase animal productivity, which

>>  
>>

>> can reduce the amount of CH4 emitted per unit of animal product. Also,
increased productivity in livestock can be introduced through improved
breeding practices.  
>  Manure Management |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Controlling the way in which
manure decomposes to reduce N2O and

>>  
>>

>> CH4 emissions.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Capturing CH4 from manure
decomposition to produce renewable

>>  
>>

>> energy.

>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Handling manure as a solid or
depositing it on pasture rather

>>  
>>

>> than storing it in a liquid-based system such as a lagoon. This would
likely reduce CH4 emissions but may increase N2O emissions.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Storing manure in anaerobic
containment areas to maximize CH4

>>  
>>

>> production and then capturing the CH4 to use as an energy substitute for
fossil fuels.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * For more information, see EPA's
AgSTAR Program, a voluntary

>>  
>>

>> outreach and education program that promotes recovery and use of methane
from animal manure.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ## Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry Sector Emissions and

>>

>> Sequestration

>>

>> Plants absorb carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere as they grow, and
they store some of this carbon as aboveground and belowground biomass
throughout their lifetime. Soils and dead organic matter/litter can also store
some of the carbon from these plants depending on how the soil is managed and
other environmental conditions (e.g., climate). This storage of carbon in
plants, dead organic matter/litter and soils is called biological carbon
sequestration. Because biological sequestration takes CO2 out of the
atmosphere and stores it in these carbon pools, it is also called a carbon
"sink."

>>

>> Emissions or sequestration of CO2, as well as emissions of CH4 and N2O can
occur from management of lands in their current use or as lands are converted
to other land uses. Carbon dioxide is exchanged between the atmosphere and the
plants and soils on land, for example, as cropland is converted into
grassland, as lands are cultivated for crops, or as forests grow. In addition,
using biological feedstocks (such as energy crops or wood) for purposes such
as electricity generation, as inputs to processes that create liquid fuels, or
as building materials can lead to emissions or sequestration.*

>>

>> In the United States overall, since 1990, Land Use, Land-Use Change, and
Forestry (LULUCF) activities have resulted in more removal of CO2 from the
atmosphere than emissions. Because of this, the LULUCF sector in the United
States is considered a net sink, rather than a source, of CO2 over this time-
period. In many areas of the world, the opposite is true, particularly in
countries where large areas of forest land are cleared, often for conversion
to agricultural purposes or for settlements. In these situations, the LULUCF
sector can be a net source of greenhouse gas emissions.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * More national-level information
about land use, land-use change,

>>  
>>

>> and forestry is available from the Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
chapter in the _Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks_. More
information on emissions and sequestration from forest land and urban trees in
settlement areas, see also the USFS Resource Update. Exit

>>  
>>                 >>                       * For more information about
global emissions from land use and

>>  
>>

>> forestry activities, see EPA's Global Greenhouse Gas emissions page and the
_Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Exit

>>

>>           * Emissions and sequestration from carbon stocks are presented
under the Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry sector in the Inventory.
Other emissions from methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are also presented
in the Energy sector.

>>

>> ## Emissions and Trends

>>

>> In 2017, the net CO2 removed from the atmosphere from the LULUCF sector
offset 11.1 percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Between 1990 and
2017, total carbon sequestration in the LULUCF sector decreased by 11.5
percent, primarily due to a decrease in the rate of net carbon accumulation in
forests and cropland, as well as an increase in CO2 emissions from
urbanization.

>>

>> ![Line graph of carbon emissions and removals from land use, land use

change, and forestry for 1990 to 2017. There are three lines – for gross

emissions, carbon sinks, and net emissions. All three lines generally trend

upwards.](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2019-04/lulucf-

timeline-2019.jpg)*Note: The LULUCF sector is a net "sink" of emissions in the
United States (e.g., more greenhouse gas emissions are sequestered than
emitted from land use activities), so net greenhouse gas emissions from LULUCF
are negative.

>>

>> All emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Sinks: 1990-2017.

>>

>> Larger image to save or print

>>

>> ## Reducing Emissions and Enhancing Sinks from Land Use, Land-Use Change,

>>

>> and Forestry

>>

>> In the LULUCF sector, opportunities exist to reduce emissions and increase
the potential to sequester carbon from the atmosphere by enhancing sinks. The
table shown below provides some examples of opportunities for both reducing
emissions and enhancing sinks. For a more comprehensive list, see Chapter 11
of the _Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Exit

>>

>> Examples of Reduction Opportunities in the LULUCF Sector Type | **How
Emissions Are Reduced or Sinks Are Enhanced** | **Examples**  
>  ---|---|---  
>  Change in Uses of Land | Increasing carbon storage by using land
differently or maintaining carbon storage by avoiding land degradation. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Minimizing the conversion of
forest land to other land uses,

>>  
>>

>> such as settlements, croplands, or grasslands.  
>  Changes in Land Management Practices | Improving management practices on
existing land-use types. |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Utilizing reduced tillage
practices on cropland and improved

>>  
>>

>> grazing management practices on grassland.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Planting after natural or human-
induced forest disturbances to

>>  
>>

>> accelerate vegetation growth and minimize soil carbon losses.

>>

>> Top of Page

>>

>> ### 6,457 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent – what does that mean?

>>

>> #### An Explanation of Units

>>

>> A million metric tons is equal to about 2.2 billion pounds, or 1 trillion
grams. For comparison, a small car is likely to weigh a little more than 1
metric ton. Thus, a million metric tons is roughly the same mass as 1 million
small cars!

>>

>> The U.S. Inventory uses metric units for consistency and comparability with
other countries. For reference, a metric ton is a little bit larger (about 10
percent) than a U.S. "short" ton.

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions are often measured in carbon dioxide ( _CO 2_ )
_equivalent_. To convert emissions of a gas into CO 2 equivalent, its
emissions are multiplied by the gas's Global Warming Potential (GWP). The GWP
takes into account the fact that many gases are more effective at warming
Earth than CO2, per unit mass.

>>

>> The GWP values appearing in the Emissions Web pages reflect the values used
in the U.S. Inventory, which are drawn from the IPCC's Second Assessment
Report (SAR). For further discussion of GWPs and an estimate of greenhouse gas
emissions using updated GWPs, see Annex 6 of the U.S. Inventory and the IPCC's
discussion on GWPs. Exit

>>

>> Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

>>

>> ## Greenhouse Gas Emissions

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse Gas Emissions

>>  
>>                         * Overview of Greenhouse Gases

>>  
>>                         * Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions

>>  
>>                         * Global Emissions

>>  
>>                         * National Emissions

>>  
>>                         * Facility-Level Emissions

>>  
>>                         * Carbon Footprint Calculator

>>  
>>                         * GHG Equivalencies Calculator

>>  
>>

>> Discover.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Accessibility

>>  
>>                       * EPA Administrator

>>  
>>                       * Budget & Performance

>>  
>>                       * Contracting

>>  
>>                       * Grants

>>  
>>                       * January 19, 2017 Web Snapshot

>>  
>>                       * No FEAR Act Data

>>  
>>                       * Privacy

>>  
>>                       * Privacy and Security Notice

>>  
>>

>> Connect.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Data.gov

>>  
>>                       * Inspector General

>>  
>>                       * Jobs

>>  
>>                       * Newsroom

>>  
>>                       * Open Government

>>  
>>                       * Regulations.gov

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * USA.gov

>>  
>>                       * White House

>>  
>>

>> Ask.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Contact EPA

>>  
>>                       * Hotlines

>>  
>>                       * FOIA Requests

>>  
>>                       * Frequent Questions

>>  
>>

>> Follow.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * EPA's Facebook

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Twitter

>>  
>>                       * EPA's YouTube

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Flickr

>>  
>>                       * EPA's Instagram

>>  
>>

>> Last updated on April 29, 2019

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

