
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/External-TRENDS-

on-demand-webinar.gif)

>>

>> SIGN-UP FOR RETAILWIRE NEWSLETTERS! DON’T MISS OUT!

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>

>> # ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/cropped-rw-

>>

>> new-300-R-2.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sign In For Discussions//
Newsletter Sign Up

>>  
>>                       * search

>>  
>>

>> Search for:

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           * ### Menu

>>  
>>

>> Skip to content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front page

>>  
>>                       * Discussions

>>  
>>                       * Retail news

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                       * Braintrust

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>

>> ### Menu

>>

>> Skip to content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front page

>>  
>>                       * Discussions

>>  
>>                       * Retail news

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                       * Braintrust

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>

>> Search for:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sign In For Discussions

>>  
>>

>> Newsletter Sign Up

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front page

>>  
>>                       * Discussions

>>  
>>                       * Retail news

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                       * Braintrust

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Community Guidelines

>>  
>>

>> Friday, 06/07/2019

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/External-TRENDS-

on-demand-webinar.gif)

>>

>> ## Did Amazon just patent tech that could end showrooming in its stores?

>>

>> 34 expert comments

>>

>> Discussion

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/man-showrooming-

apparel-store-666x333.jpg)

>>

>> Amazon In-store analytics Mobile Marketing Retail Tech Shopper Behavior

>>

>> Jun 19, 2017

>>

>> by George Anderson

>>

>> ![George Anderson](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/anderson-geo-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ![George Anderson](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/anderson-geo-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Do you remember showrooming? It wasn’t that long ago that brick and mortar
retailers were lamenting consumers visiting stores to evaluate a product’s
worth, only to lose sales when shoppers used their mobile phones to comparison
shop for a lower price on Amazon.com and elsewhere.

>>

>> With Amazon opening its own stores, it’s reasonable to ask how the retailer
plans to deal with the same situation. Based on new reporting, one answer may
be to use technology to block shoppers from being able to showroom at all.

>>

>> Amazon has been granted a patent on technology that tracks when people who
are connected to its WiFi network go online while in its stores. The tech,
known as Physical Store Online Shopping Control, can take several actions when
it finds someone is comparison shopping including:

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/lek-in-article-

banner_575x90.jpg)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Redirecting the browser to its
own site;

>>  
>>                       * Alerting a sales associate to talk to the shopper;

>>  
>>                       * Blocking the site altogether.

>>  
>>

>> The recently approved patent was originally filed in May 2012. Amazon has
not commented on published reports by sites including _Engadget_ and _The
Verge_ on whether it plans to deploy the technology.

>>

>> Seventy-seven percent of shoppers have used a mobile phone to help them
while shopping in stores, according to research published earlier this year by
DMI. Nearly two-thirds of consumers said they compare online prices against
what stores charge to get the best deal, according to the Pew Research Center.

>>

>> Past research has shown that large percentages of customers will leave a
store without making a purchase, particularly on higher ticket items, to save
some money online. A study by GroupM Next found 45 percent of those surveyed
would opt out of buying from a store to save 2.5 percent online. A five
percent discount would be enough to convince 60 percent of shoppers to buy
online instead of from a store.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **United States Patent**
**9,665,881 – _United States Patent and

>>  
>>

>> Trademark Office_**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Amazon has the tech to thwart
comparison shoppers in its

>>  
>>

>> stores – _Engadget_ **

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Amazon granted a patent that
prevents in-store shoppers from

>>  
>>

>> online price checking – _The Verge_ **

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **A Tiny Showrooming Tipping
Point – _RetailWire_**

>>  
>>                       * **Mobile Maturity Model: 2016 U.S. Retail – _DMI_**

>>  
>>                       * **79 percent of Americans now shop online, but its
price more

>>  
>>

>> than convenience that sways them – _TechCrunch_ **

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Online shopping and purchasing
preferences – _Pew Research

>>  
>>

>> Center_**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Showrooming moves beyond
barcodes – _RetailWire_**

>>  
>>

>> **DISCUSSION QUESTIONS: What is your reaction to Amazon’s patented Physical
Store Online Shopping Control technology? Do you think Amazon is likely to
deploy the tech in its stores? Do you think other retailers are working on or
planning to use tech that performs similar functions?**

>>

>> Please practice The RetailWire Golden Rule when submitting your comments.

>>

>> Braintrust

>>

>> "I would be shocked if Amazon implemented this tech as described. I do
think they would implement tech to gain insights to make the experience
better."

>>

>> ## Shawn HarrisCustomer Partnerships & Strategy, SmartLens, NA

>>

>> ![Shawn Harris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/09/harris-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Shawn HarrisCustomer Partnerships & Strategy, SmartLens, NA

>>

>> "I believe this technology is a bad idea. Big Brother is watching and this
will freak people out."

>>

>> ## Ken MorrisPrincipal, Boston Retail Partners

>>

>> ![Ken Morris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/morris-k-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Ken MorrisPrincipal, Boston Retail Partners

>>

>> "Look at it from their perspective. They now have a patent they control
that prevents customers from using Wi-Fi to get to Amazon..."

>>

>> ## Steve MontgomeryPresident, b2b Solutions, LLC

>>

>> ![Steve Montgomery](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/montgomery-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Steve MontgomeryPresident, b2b Solutions, LLC

>>

>> ### Join the Discussion!

>>

>> 34 Comments on "Did Amazon just patent tech that could end showrooming in
its stores?"

>>

>> Connect with:

>>

>> ![Facebook](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-social-

login/assets/img/32x32/wpzoom//facebook.png)
![Google](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-social-

login/assets/img/32x32/wpzoom//google.png)
![Twitter](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-social-

login/assets/img/32x32/wpzoom//twitter.png)
![LinkedIn](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-social-

login/assets/img/32x32/wpzoom//linkedin.png)

>>

>> You must be logged in to post a comment.

>>

>> You must be logged in to post a comment.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Sort by: newest | oldest | most voted

>>

>> ![Mark Ryski](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/02/ryski-m-

masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Mark Ryski  
>  Founder, CEO & Author, HeadCount Corporation

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I find it ironic that the company synonymous with showrooming has patented
technology to prevent it. Preventing shoppers from searching online while in-
store may reduce showrooming, but it won’t eliminate it since shoppers can
still use their own data plans to search. And while the idea of overly
restricting online access could be annoying for shoppers, finding some way to
control, guide or curate what shoppers can access when logged onto a
retailers’ Wi-Fi could actually reduce some of the loss that results from
showrooming.

>>

>> 6

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> -1

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Ken Lonyai](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/lonyai-

k-masked.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Ken Lonyai  
>  Consultant, Strategist, Tech Innovator, UX Evangelist

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> If Amazon filters/blocks content that shoppers seek while in their stores,
they will quickly discover how best to lose customer loyalty.

>>

>> As impervious to failure as they seem to be, Amazon is not above missteps
that cost them revenue and customers. For every Prime sychophant, there is an
Amazon customer that can take them or leave them. If Amazon thinks that
blocking open Internet access (or cleverly slowing it) to suit their needs
will work, they will not only drive away occasional/fickle shoppers but even
regulars that feel the giant has overstepped and exercised too much power and
control.

>>

>> It's a big "if" as to whether they will ever attempt something like
Physical Store Online Shopping Control, but if they do, the press,
blogosphere, and RetailWire BrainTrust will have a feast at their expense.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Sterling Hawkins](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/08/hawkins-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Sterling Hawkins  
>  Co-founder, CART (Center for Advancing Retail & Technology)

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Just because Amazon could block content while on store Wi-Fi doesn't mean
they will. And I'm with you that it would be a quick way to alienate shoppers.
Blocking otherwise pubic information from customers is rarely (if ever) the
right answer. However, using it as a trigger to deploy customer service or
change the in-store experience could be very viable.

>>

>> 3

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Art Suriano](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/suriano-art-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Art Suriano  
>  Chief Executive Officer, The TSi Company

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Interesting technology but, if implemented, I could see customers getting
angry and many not coming back. I think it could be beneficial for the
technology to alert a salesperson instead. Frankly, if more store associates
paid attention to customers shopping, much of the technology developed today
would not be as important. If the store associate was alerted, they could
approach the customer, unaware the person was price shopping on their phone.
Then they could engage with the customer, find out more about what they were
interested in and, if the store associate knew how to make the right
recommendations, in many cases they would close the sale. I know the price is
important, but several statistics show that customers are willing to pay more
for service. When the customer is left to fend for everything on their own,
why not shop for the best price? But if the customer is made to feel
appreciated and valued, often they will fork over those few extra dollars and
they will be happy to do it.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Max Goldberg](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/max-

goldberg-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Max Goldberg  
>  President, Max Goldberg & Associates

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> It's ironic that the company that benefits most from showrooming would
patent a process to block it. That said, it's easy to bypass, just turn off
Wi-Fi and use data from your mobile carrier.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Chris Petersen, PhD.](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/petersen-c-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Chris Petersen, PhD.  
>  President, Integrated Marketing Solutions

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Just because you can patent shopping control technology does NOT mean you
should implement it in your stores. The genie is out of the bottle. Consumers
expect access and to control their experience, any time and everywhere -- even
in Amazon stores.

>>

>> 3

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Ryan Mathews](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/mathews-r-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Ryan Mathews  
>  Founder, CEO, Black Monk Consulting

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> This strikes me as a tempest in a teapot. The technology doesn't stop
showrooming, it just stops you from being able to do it for free. If a
customer is willing to incur a data charge, the whole "blocking" mechanism
fails since it is keyed off of Wi-Fi. Where others see irony, I just see a
company that keeps innovating. Most innovation fails and/or never comes to
market, but that never slows down a true innovator and I'm still putting my
money on the company that never rests. Lots of Amazon's ideas are anywhere
from impractical to flat-out silly. The important thing to remember is -- in
the best tradition of design thinking -- they never stop generating new ideas
and they don't worry when ideas fail. It's a lesson other retailers could
profit from.

>>

>> 4

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Brandon Rael](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/rael-

brandon-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Brandon Rael  
>  Strategy & Operations Leader | Retail Strategist | Trusted Advisor |

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> It's simply remarkable that the company that was benefiting significantly
from the "showrooming" experience would create a technology to suppress these
capabilities. In today's age of the customer, the democratization of data,
information, reviews and the ability to comparison shop, consumers can control
the shopping journey.

>>

>> However, consumers and even Amazon loyalists will find a means and a way
around this. The brick-and-mortar channels are as relevant and vital as ever,
as up to 90 percent of purchases are influenced by the multi-sensory
experiences that only a store could offer.

>>

>> This potentially could lead to some frustration, and friction, all of which
Amazon prides itself on mitigating with their platform.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Shawn Harris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/09/harris-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Shawn Harris  
>  Customer Partnerships & Strategy, SmartLens, NA

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I would be shocked if Amazon implemented this tech as described. I do think
they would implement the tech to monitor in-store web traffic to gain insights
to make the overall shopping experience better. I would recommend other
retailers do the same; many are still struggling to make sense of the data
they have.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Liz Crawford](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/PIC-

Latest-Liz-Crawford-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Liz Crawford  
>  Crawford Consulting

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Sure Amazon will deploy tech in its stores - especially now that it's
bought Whole Foods. Amazon's push into traditional retail should have everyone
(hello Target) shaking in their shoes.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> -1

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Lee Kent](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/kent-l-

masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Lee Kent  
>  Principal, Your Retail Authority, LLC

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Amazon would be crazy to deploy the technology in any negative way. If they
want to use it in order to send an employee to assist, great. Amazon will soon
be joining the many other retailers who have learned to accept showrooming for
what it is and to find other ways to provide their customers experiences and
services that will win their dollars.

>>

>> For my 2 cents.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Bill Hanifin](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/hanifin-b-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Bill Hanifin  
>  CEO, Hanifin Loyalty LLC

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Readers should not jump to the conclusion that Amazon will use this
patented technology to prevent customers from searching online while in their
stores. Showrooming was shown to be a positive for the customer shopping
experience a few years ago and I think Amazon is too smart to make the blunder
of preventing the behavior in its stores today. The expectation should be that
Amazon will analyze the collected data to optimize its product merchandising
and pricing strategies.

>>

>> As the lead article states, "A five percent discount would be enough to
convince 60 percent of shoppers to buy online instead of from a store." Amazon
would only have to make a small adjustment in pricing to stop the bleeding to
other sources.

>>

>> One other thought: Considering that many of the showrooming shoppers in
brick-and-mortar retailers were probably migrating away to Amazon to get that
5 percent discount, I wonder how much sales loss really concerns Amazon.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Warren Thayer](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/thayer-w-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Warren Thayer  
>  Editorial Director & Co-Founder, Frozen & Refrigerated Buyer

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> An idea that probably seemed worth exploring five years ago when it was
patented but would be a terrible idea today. I believe it would really tick
off customers and that some of the scathing comments about it would go viral.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Ken Morris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/morris-k-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Ken Morris  
>  Principal, Boston Retail Partners

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I believe this technology is a bad idea. Big Brother is watching and this
will freak people out. Just because you block Wi-Fi access anyone can simply
move to their own provider to do the same thing. It made sense five years ago
but five years is an eternity in cellular technology and access is way better
today. Once you block customers they will stop using your app and you will
create a bad customer moment. In retail CRM you have the 80 percent/20 percent
rule where 20 percent of your customers are responsible for 80 percent of your
sales. Savvy retailers try to minimize bad customer moments for this 20
percent of tier-one customers because that is why people leave and never come
back -- this is a bad customer moment generator.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Jerry Gelsomino](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/gelsomino-j-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Jerry Gelsomino  
>  Principal, FutureBest

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I think that there is much more to come on this discussion. I hope the
software is used to better understand customers so that they are better
served.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Stefan Weitz](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/Headshot-1-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Stefan Weitz  
>  Executive Vice President, Technology, Radial

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> This is just a patent -- when I was at Microsoft we filed many of these
without ever ultimately commercializing them. This one in particular is
interesting because a.) it requires the person to be on the store Wi-Fi
network and b.) it actually has a number of outcomes including alerting an
associate to come and save the sale (not just blocking as many of the
headlines initially reported).

>>

>> Despite the fact that the store would have to have some pretty egregious
terms of service to allow for inspection of all your internet traffic when
using their network, it could actually be an interesting piece of technology
that would allow the retailer lots of flexibility to save the sale (even such
things as real-time discounting of items in their store if someone is
comparison shopping).

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Jasmine Glasheen](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/glasheen-j-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Jasmine Glasheen  
>  Writer, influencer and content marketer

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> This technology would be incredibly frustrating for customers accustomed to
comparing prices. It seems distinctly un-Amazon, when the company has built
its name on being the best price in town.  
>  I'm skeptical of such a technology, which would quickly deflate burgeoning
customer interest in Amazon's physical stores.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Sky Rota](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/rota-s-

masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Sky Rota  
>  CEO, GenZinsider.com

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I can't even say this idea may have sounded good in 2012 because I don't
think it was ever a good idea. I don't like the "control" word. I want to be
in control. I can tell you that if I go into a store that tries to take
control of my phone I will run far from that store and never come back. And
don't forget we Generation Zers are sharers so something like this will spread
like wild fire. I don't recommend anyone using this technology. #DontEvenTryit

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Marge Laney](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/laney-m-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Marge Laney  
>  CEO, Alert Tech

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Did they patent the technology to keep others from doing so? Or do they
intend to use it? Either way the giant can, once again, manipulate consumers
in the name of convenience.

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Tom Brown](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/blank-

profile-picture-973460_960_720-150x150.png)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Tom Brown

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> To prevent others from doing so, obviously.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> -1

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Larry Negrich](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/negrich-l-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Larry Negrich  
>  Vice President of Marketing, Reflexis Inc.

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> With the addition of physical stores, I expect Amazon to offer an engaging
in-store app experience utilizing this technology as well as other in-
aisle/in-store location technologies. Amazon will surely up in-store promotion
tech to make offers/communication based on the shoppers’ web searches made
from within the store.

>>

>> As far as this specific technology, I expect Amazon to use every
technological advantage they have, including monitoring of Wi-Fi activity. Of
course, the effectiveness of this technology requires the shopper to utilize
the free Wi-Fi/app and anyone not logged into the in-store network or Amazon
app would not be monitored.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Chad Bowman](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/blank-

profile-picture-973460_960_720-150x150.png)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Chad Bowman  
>  Software Development Leader, Infor

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Sometimes companies create patents to block others from building similar
software, it would certainly benefit Amazon if it were more difficult to
implement software like this at their competition. They could also use it to
provide real-time price matching, this would allow the store to retain the
sale if they can accept the matched price.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Shep Hyken](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/hyken-s-

masked-1-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Shep Hyken  
>  Chief Amazement Officer, Shepard Presentations, LLC

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I can't imagine that Amazon would block customers from going online while
shopping. If price is an issue, then why would Amazon put competitive prices
(even lower prices) on their website? Yes, Amazon shows you where you can get
the product for less than their competitive prices. Why? Because they are
confident that the value they give the consumer can outweigh a few dollars in
savings (much of the time).

>>

>> I can see Amazon using this technology to enhance the shopper's experience,
not diminish it.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Mohamed Amer](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Amer-

mohamed-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Mohamed Amer  
>  Independent Board Member, Investor and Startup Advisor

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> When I first read the news and patent I did find it ironic and amusing at
the same time given the filing date and the patent ownership.

>>

>> On further reflection, I can see this patent by Amazon as an attempt to
keep others from blocking showrooming in stores. The company may be hoping
that the patent covers with sufficient breadth (yet specific enough) how to
combat showrooming, so others are unable to actually defeat showrooming under
the scenarios covered by the patent.

>>

>> That doesn't preclude Amazon from exercising portions of the patent such as
alerting a sales associate so they can salvage the deal.

>>

>> Patents give the legal owner the rights to use and keep others from using
those patented processes and technologies.

>>

>> 6

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Vahe Katros](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/blank-

profile-picture-973460_960_720-150x150.png)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Vahe Katros

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Jeff Bezos has chutzpah! He also may have supplied a few of you with
something to post on the lunch room wall as motivation. When I looked at the
patent and noticed that it was filed on May 4, 2012 -- and I’m not sure how
long it took to write the patent -- but let’s say that somewhere in early 2012
or maybe even 2011, Jeff challenged his people to find how retailers can
thwart showrooming. One thing that's true is Amazon must continue to grow, so
while we should necessarily review this rationally, as a thought experiment
perhaps we might examine a scenario where this reveals that Amazon has spent
years thinking about things. Perhaps it's my paranoia, an aspect of culture in
retail and here in Silicon Valley but as I recall, Amazon started with books
and video, improved the experience and expanded to new categories. What if
they do the same now? What if they've spent the last five years thinking about
executing the same strategy offline, again, because they need… Read more »

>>

>> 2

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Steve Montgomery](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/montgomery-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Steve Montgomery  
>  President, b2b Solutions, LLC

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Many of today’s comments are about the irony of Amazon patenting a
technology that prevents showrooming. Look at it from their perspective. They
now have a patent they control that prevents customers from using Wi-Fi to get
to Amazon for that exact purpose. The underlying purpose may not to prevent
showrooming in their stores, but to control a patent that can prevent Wi-Fi
being used to do it in other retail stores.

>>

>> 1

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Craig Sundstrom](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/blank-profile-picture-973460_960_720-150x150.png)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Craig Sundstrom  
>  CFO, Weisner Steel

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Certainly Amazon will deploy if it thinks it works, but I'm not sure how
much it really will. To me "showrooming" is about viewing and then buying
elsewhere … actually having an internet connection during the process isn't
necessary (though I'm sure it often happens).

>>

>> But the irony of this makes the story worthwhile, regardless!

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Ricardo Belmar](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/02/belmar-r-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Ricardo Belmar  
>  Sr Director, Global Enterprise Marketing, Infovista

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> I don't believe we should jump to the conclusion that because this patent
means Amazon could block a website it means they will block competitive retail
sites. Maybe the goal of that feature is to block questionable content? We
don't know. I would focus more on the insight they will gain from the other
features and the ability to create dynamic pricing per customer. Imagine the
level of knowledge Amazon will be able to apply in the store just as they do
when you shop with them online! I see that as the significance of this patent.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Cathy Hotka](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/hotka-

c-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Cathy Hotka  
>  Principal, Cathy Hotka & Associates

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> Ahh…the irony of having a shiny new technology that you cannot ever use…!

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Min-Jee Hwang](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Min-

Jee-H-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Min-Jee Hwang  
>  Director of Marketing, Wiser Solutions, Inc.

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> If shoppers are browsing the same product on a competitor site, having an
employee walk over and chat with them would be a great way to keep them from
checking out elsewhere. But also, this only works when connected to the
retailer's WiFi, it can't stop all showrooming if shoppers are using their own
network.

>>

>> The underlying reasons for this technology are certainly things other
retailers are focusing on: being more attentive to the customer experience and
securing sales over competitors. The means might be different, but putting
these ideas to work will be a major factor in determining the winners in
retail.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Vahe Katros](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/blank-

profile-picture-973460_960_720-150x150.png)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Vahe Katros

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> One more thing. Talk of Amazon's interest in acquiring Slack speaks to the
future of "conversational applications."

>>

>> If you are throwing a BBQ, planning a party, installing a home theater,
seeking advice about a purchase, getting a second opinion regarding a piece of
furniture from your friends and/or interior decorators, doing a home
renovation, talking to folks in a store, or a supplier hotline and your
handyman and the person whose review you loved on Amazon, and so on … you'll
be having a temporary set of conversations across multiple channels. Those
that may include Alexa, or the voice system in your 2020 automobile (because
auto companies are working on the problem of distracted driving). If you
consider this patent in that context and AMZN's interest, you can see that the
future of retail and shopping and life in general will get more interesting.
And thinking otherwise speaks to the famous quote about “Fighting the Last
War.”

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Kai Clarke](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/clarke-k-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Kai Clarke  
>  CMO, COO American Retail Consultants

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> There is an important notation to this showrooming technology. You have to
be connected to their Wi-Fi in the store for this to work. Most people who are
on their cellphones are not using a local store Wi-Fi, unless they have been
there before. Along with this and the advance of 5G in the next year or so,
and other incredible cellular "seamless" solutions to data access, the real
question might be when would this "patented" technology be used? I think that
this is much ado about nothing, while distorting the use of a technology
patent.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Michael Carini](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/MichaelC_026-400px-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> Guest

>>

>> Michael Carini  
>  CEO, LastMile Retail

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> This solution fails to address the issue of showrooming, because most users
on cellular devices are smart enough to turn off their Wi-Fi in order to find
better prices. Those who stay on Wi-Fi will be alienated by the limited
browser experience. While Amazon’s new patent is potentially useful for
controlling Wi-Fi only devices, those are a small minority of devices users
have with them in the store. In total, since the restraints could potentially
prevent sales altogether, Amazon and other retailers shouldn’t waste their
time.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![Christopher P. Ramey](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/ramey-c-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> BrainTrust

>>

>> Christopher P. Ramey  
>  President, Affluent Insights & The Home Trust International

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/icon-

link.gif)

>>

>> 1 year 11 months ago

>>

>> This technology, as described, is irrelevant. Many retailers and hoteliers
employ technology to block cell phones.

>>

>> 0

>>

>> **|**

>>

>> 0

>>

>>           * Share ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/fb-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/twitter-18x18.png) ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-icons/google-18x18.png)
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/social-

icons/li-18x18.png) Hide Replies ∧

>>

>> ![wpDiscuz](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/loading.gif)

>>

>> Braintrust

>>

>> "I would be shocked if Amazon implemented this tech as described. I do
think they would implement tech to gain insights to make the experience
better."

>>

>> ## Shawn HarrisCustomer Partnerships & Strategy, SmartLens, NA

>>

>> ![Shawn Harris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/09/harris-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Shawn HarrisCustomer Partnerships & Strategy, SmartLens, NA

>>

>> "I believe this technology is a bad idea. Big Brother is watching and this
will freak people out."

>>

>> ## Ken MorrisPrincipal, Boston Retail Partners

>>

>> ![Ken Morris](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/morris-k-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Ken MorrisPrincipal, Boston Retail Partners

>>

>> "Look at it from their perspective. They now have a patent they control
that prevents customers from using Wi-Fi to get to Amazon..."

>>

>> ## Steve MontgomeryPresident, b2b Solutions, LLC

>>

>> ![Steve Montgomery](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/braintrust/montgomery-s-masked-150x150.jpg)

>>

>> ## Steve MontgomeryPresident, b2b Solutions, LLC

>>

>> ## Take Our Instant Poll

>>

>> **How likely is Amazon to deploy its Physical Store Online Shopping Control
technology in its brick and mortar locations?**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Very likely

>>  
>>                       * Somewhat likely

>>  
>>                       * Somewhat unlikely

>>  
>>                       * Very unlikely

>>  
>>                       * Not sure/no opinion

>>  
>>

>> View Results

>>

>> ![Loading ...](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/plugins/wp-

polls/images/loading.gif) Loading ...

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/arrow-

wbnr-300x600.jpg)

>>

>> ## Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2019/06/iqmetrix-360-view-resource-feature.jpg)

>>

>> ## See How Retailers Can Lead with Unified Commerce

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ipsos-

>>  
>>

>> views-feature-1000x5000.jpg)

>>

>> ## Do you know the most important factors that influence your customer’s

>>

>> journey?

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/arrow-

>>  
>>

>> digital-sign-feature-1000x500.jpg)

>>

>> ## A RetailWire Webinar: The Evolving Intellect of Digital Signage

>>

>> More

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/RX_REG_300x250.png)

>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/eblasts-rocket-

boy-300x600.jpg)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Community Guidelines

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/cropped-rw-

new-300-R-2.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Marketing

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Community Guidelines

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>

>> ![Powered by Listrak](https://www.retailwire.com/wp-

content/themes/retailwire/images/ilistrak-footer-logo.png)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

