
>

>> Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Strategy

>>  
>>                       * Life

>>  
>>                       * All

>>  
>>

>> ##### Tech

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Tech Insider

>>  
>>                         * Media

>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                         * Transportation

>>  
>>

>> ##### Finance

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Finance

>>  
>>                         * Markets Insider

>>  
>>                         * Retail

>>  
>>                         * Your Money

>>  
>>

>> ##### Politics

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Politics

>>  
>>                         * Military & Defense

>>  
>>

>> ##### Strategy

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Strategy

>>  
>>                         * Advertising

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>

>> ##### Life

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Life

>>  
>>                         * Coupons

>>  
>>                         * Entertainment

>>  
>>                         * Insider Picks

>>  
>>                         * Sports

>>  
>>

>> ##### Featured

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Better Capitalism

>>  
>>                         * Embracing Disruption

>>  
>>                         * Insider TV

>>  
>>

>> ##### Subscribe

>>  
>>                 >>                         * BI Intelligence

>>  
>>                         * BI Prime

>>  
>>

>> ##### About BI

>>  
>>                 >>                         * About

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                         * Advertise

>>  
>>                         * Contributors FAQ

>>  
>>                         * Corporate

>>  
>>                         * Corrections Policy

>>  
>>

>> ##### Follow BI

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Newsletters

>>  
>>                         * Events

>>  
>>                         * RSS

>>  
>>                         * Facebook

>>  
>>                         * Twitter

>>  
>>                         * Instagram

>>  
>>                         * YouTube

>>  
>>                         * LinkedIn

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>

>> World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

>>

>> Edition

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BI Prime

>>  
>>                       * Intelligence

>>  
>>

>> Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

>>

>> Edition

>>

>> International Editions:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * United States US

>>  
>>

>> Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * International INTL

>>  
>>                       * Deutschland DE

>>  
>>                       * Australia AUS

>>  
>>                       * France FR

>>  
>>                       * India IN

>>  
>>                       * Italy IT

>>  
>>                       * Japan JP

>>  
>>                       * Malaysia MY

>>  
>>                       * Netherlands NL

>>  
>>                       * Nordic SE

>>  
>>                       * Poland PL

>>  
>>                       * Singapore SG

>>  
>>                       * South Africa ZA

>>  
>>                       * Spain ES

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates,
"Click to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe,
indicating different international options."

>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Tech Enterprise  Science  advertising  Media
Transportation

>>  
>>

>> Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes
previous / next navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Finance Markets Insider  Retail
Your Money  Chevron icon It

>>  
>>

>> indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next
navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Politics Military & Defense
News  Chevron icon It indicates an

>>  
>>

>> expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation
options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Strategy Careers  Chevron icon
It indicates an expandable

>>  
>>

>> section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Life Entertainment  Travel
Sports  Chevron icon It indicates an

>>  
>>

>> expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation
options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * All

>>  
>>                       * Coupons Target  Walmart  EBay  Nike  Container
Store

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>

>> World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

>>

>> Edition

>>

>> US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera. * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights
reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Terms of Service ,  Privacy
Policy and  Cookies Policy .

>>  
>>                       * Sitemap

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimer

>>  
>>                       * Commerce Policy

>>  
>>                       * Coupons

>>  
>>                       * Made in NYC

>>  
>>                       * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

>>  
>>

>> Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

>>

>> # Prince Charles apparently finds flying first class 'incredibly

>>

>> uncomfortable'

>>

>> Rosie Fitzmaurice

>>

>> Apr. 10, 2017, 6:57 AM

>>

>> Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It
symobilizes a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the
ability to send an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth,
tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

>>

>> More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon
Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

>>

>> ![prince charles

plane](https://amp.businessinsider.com/images/58eb652bdd0895d2668b456d-750-562.jpg)His
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales reportedly finds first class flying
"uncomfortable" and longs for the use of private jets. REUTERS/William
West/Pool For most of us, flying first class is an unattainable luxury, one
that appears to be reserved for the high rollers of this world.

>>

>> However, His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales reportedly finds flying
first class "incredibly uncomfortable."

>>

>> According to The Times, a new biography on the prince written by US author
Sally Bedell Smith reveals that when travelling to America to accept an
environmental leadership award in 2007, the prince opted to fly first class on
board a scheduled flight along with his 14-strong entourage.

>>

>> The staunch environmentalist was reportedly attempting to reduce his carbon
footprint by reducing his use of private charters.

>>

>> However, the book claims that while on his return flight home, he wrote a
letter to a friend complaining about the "incredibly uncomfortable" seats
located in the upper class deck, and longed for the use of his own private
jet.

>>

>> The Prince and Duchess of Cornwall's travel arrangements made the headlines
once again last week, when they were criticised for booking Prime Minister
Theresa May's RAF Voyager jet for their nine-day European charm offensive,
following the triggering of Article 50.

>>

>> While the jet is thought to have been flying half empty between
destinations for the royal couple's soft diplomatic duties, Theresa May was
forced to hire a costly Boeing 757 from a charter firm for her three-day trip
to the Middle East, where she was to conduct crucial new trade agreements.

>>

>> More: Lifestyle Royal Family Prince Charles First Class

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### The riskiest vacation hot spots in the Caribbean, ranked

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### Sorry, Apple's controversial $1,000 computer-screen stand isn't a rip-

>>

>> off â€” it's a missed opportunity

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### 'Siri, I'm getting pulled over': A shortcut for iPhones can

>>

>> automatically record the police

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### Every notable HBO original TV show, ranked from worst to best by

>>

>> critics

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### Jeff Bezos explains why he prefers people who 'are right a lot' and

>>

>> how anyone can learn to be right a lot, too

>>

>> Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close
an interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

>>

>> Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with
an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play
button in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

>>

>> Also check out: * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Terms of Service ,  Privacy
Policy and  Cookies Policy .

>>  
>>                       * Sitemap

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimer

>>  
>>                       * Commerce Policy

>>  
>>                       * Coupons

>>  
>>                       * Made in NYC

>>  
>>                       * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

>>  
>>

>> Edition

>>

>> International Editions:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * United States US

>>  
>>

>> Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * International INTL

>>  
>>                       * Deutschland DE

>>  
>>                       * Australia AUS

>>  
>>                       * France FR

>>  
>>                       * India IN

>>  
>>                       * Italy IT

>>  
>>                       * Japan JP

>>  
>>                       * Malaysia MY

>>  
>>                       * Netherlands NL

>>  
>>                       * Nordic SE

>>  
>>                       * Poland PL

>>  
>>                       * Singapore SG

>>  
>>                       * South Africa ZA

>>  
>>                       * Spain ES

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

