
>

>> Skip to Main Content

>>

>> ×

>>

>> Saving your location allows us to provide you with more relevant
information. Set Location

>>

>> ×

>>

>> Default

>>

>> High Contrast

>>

>> Reset

>>

>> Increase Font SizeFont

>>

>> Decrease Font SizeFont

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>                       * Email the Webmaster

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * About OPR

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * E-Lists

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Settings

>>  
>>

>> ![CA.gov](/images/Ca-Gov-Logo-Gold.svg)

>>

>> ![Governor's Office of Planning and Research](/images/header-logo.png)

>>

>> Menu Search

>>

>> Search this site:

>>

>> Search

>>

>> ×

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Clearinghouses

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * State Clearinghouse

>>  
>>

>> Review of environmental documents prepared for CEQA, and resrouces to find,
apply and manage federal grants.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * CEQA Document Submission

>>  
>>                         * Federal Assistance

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * __CEQAnet   __

>>  
>>                         * __Summary Postings

>>  
>>                         * Adaptation Clearinghouse   __

>>  
>>

>> Resources to plan for and implement climate adaptation projects.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CEQA

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * CEQA

>>  
>>

>> _California Environmental Quality Act_

>>

>> Reducing the potential environmental impacts of proposed projects.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * __Transportation (SB  743)

>>  
>>                         * __Current Guideline Update

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * __CEQA Updates

>>  
>>                         * CEQA and Climate Change

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * Technical Advisories

>>  
>>                         * __California Jobs

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Facts and Metrics

>>  
>>                       * Planning and Land Use

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * __Land Use Resources

>>  
>>

>> Local Government, Infill Development, Military, Renewables, Case Studies,
Urban Forestry

>>  
>>                 >>                         * General Plan Guidelines

>>  
>>                         * __Climate Adaptation (ICARP)

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * __Transportation

>>  
>>                         * Environmental Goals

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * __Partnerships

>>  
>>                         * __Water

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Meetings and Events

>>  
>>                       * Search

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       1. Home

>>  
>>                       2. Facts and Metrics

>>  
>>                       3. The Scientific Consensus

>>  
>>

>> # The Scientific Consensus

>>

>> The scientific community has reached a strong consensus that global
temperatures are rising rapidly as a direct result of billions of tons of
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions from human-made sources.

>>

>> The world's leading scientific body focused on climate change is the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change __ (IPCC), formed in 1988 by the
World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment
Programme. The IPCC, made up of hundreds of scientists with relevant expertise
from throughout the world, evaluates the state of peer-reviewed1 and published
climate research every few years. The IPCC first expressed the scientific
consensus that climate change is real and caused by humans in 2001. The group
of international experts came to the same conclusion in the 2007 IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report, stating that all available evidence pointed to a more than
90% probability that human activities are warming the planet.2

>>

>> The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released the Summary
for Policymakers __ for the Fifth Assessment in September 2013. This report
finds that evidence of warming is "unequivocal" and that it is "extremely
likely" that human influence has been the dominant cause of that warming. The
latest observations illustrate the changes that are already underway. The
observations show: increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations,
rising air and ocean water temperatures, declines in the extent of arctic ice,
and declining pH in ocean waters.3

>>

>> To view more information about how climate change has changed over time,
and to "plot" your own times series graph using data from 1895 through 2012,
please visit the NOAA Plot Time Series Website __ maintained by the National
Climatic Data Center's Climate Services and Monitoring Division.

>>

>> Every major scientific organization in the United States with relevant
expertise has confirmed the IPCC's conclusion, including the National Academy
of Sciences,4 the American Meteorological Society,5 the American Geophysical
Union,6 and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.7 The list
of international scientific organizations affirming the worldwide consensus on
climate change is even longer (see List of Organizations). Several studies
have shown that about 97% of climate scientists actively doing research agree
that climate change is happening and is human-caused.8,9 A study published in
May, 2013 examined 11,944 climate abstracts from 1991–2011 in peer-reviewed
scientific literature and affirmed that 97.1% of these scientists endorsed the
consensus position that humans are causing global warming.10

>>

>> Does this mean that no scientific questions remain about climate change? Of
course not. Scientists continue their efforts to better understand the many
complex issues associated with climate change, including the rate of warming
in the future, the specific climate impacts local areas will face, and the
future rate of ice melt and sea level rise. The basic, fundamental facts that
climate change is occurring and its central cause is human-made emissions are
no longer subject to meaningful scientific debate: climate change is real,
it's caused by human activities, we are already seeing the effects, and our
current path has put us on course for dire results in the not-too-distant
future.

>>

>> The US National Academy of Sciences and The Royal Society cordially invite
you to join us for the release of "Climate Change: Evidence & Causes," __ a
new publication produced jointly by the two institutions. Written by a UK-US
team of leading climate scientists and reviewed by climate scientists and
others, the publication is intended as a brief, readable reference document
for decision makers, policy makers, educators, and other individuals seeking
authoritative information on the some of the questions that continue to be
asked.

>>

>> Several studies have shown that about 97% of climate scientists actively
doing research agree that climate change is happening and is human-caused.8,9
A study published in May, 2013 examined 11,944 climate abstracts from
1991–2011 in peer-reviewed scientific literature and affirmed that 97.1% of
these scientists endorsed the consensus position that humans are causing
global warming.10 For more information about scientific consensus around
climate change, please visit the American Association for the Advancement of
Science "What We Know" __ website.

>>

>> ## Additional Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * World Scientists’ Warning to
Humanity: A Second Notice   __

>>  
>>

>> ![graphic: Satellites See Unprecedented Greenland Ice Sheet Surface

Melt](/facts/images/Surface_Melt.jpg) Satellites See Unprecedented Greenland
Ice Sheet Surface Melt  
>  Source: NASA.

>>

>> ### References

>>

>>           1. "Peer Review" is a process used by scientific and scholarly
journals to ensure that the articles they publish represent the best
scholarship available. When an article is submitted to a peer-reviewed
journal, the editors send it out to the other experts in the same field (the
author's peers) for review of the article's quality and relevance. Journals
and publications that are not peer-reviewed rely only on the judgment of the
editors, who are limited in number and may not have any relevant expertise. __

>>

>>           2. IPCC 4th, Working Group I: The Physical Basis for Climate
Change, Summary for Policy Makers **at pp. 3, n. 7; 10.**

>>

>>           3. IPCC 5th, Working Group I: The Physical Basis for Climate
Change, Summary for Policy Makers **at pp. 3, n. 7; 10.**

>>

>>           4. See Joint Science Academies' Statement: Global Response to
Climate Change **. June 7, 2005 (includes U.S. National Academy of
Sciences).**

>>

>>           5. See AMS, _Climate Change – An Information Statement of the
American Meteorological Society_ **(Adopted by AMS Council on February 1,
2007) Bull. Amer. Met. Soc., 88.**

>>

>>           6. See AGU, Humans Impact Climate, and the Scientific Community
has the Responsibility to Educate and Communicate the Implications of Climate
Change to the Public and Policy Makers **. Reaffirmed February 2012.**

>>

>>           7. See AAAS Board Statement on Climate Change **. December 9,
2006.**

>>

>>           8. Doran, PT and MK Zimmerman (2009). Examining the scientific
consensus on climate change. _Eos Trans American Geophysical Union_. 90(3): p.
22. __

>>

>>           9. Anderegg, WRL, JW Prall, J Harold, and SH Schneider (2010).
Expert credibility in climate change. _Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA._ 107: p. 12107-12109. __

>>

>>           10. Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in
the scientific literature.
http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/2/024024/article ****

>>  
>>                     >>                       * Back to Top

>>  
>>                       * Conditions of Use

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Accessibility

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>                       * Email the Webmaster

>>  
>>

>> Copyright (C) State of California

>>

>> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

