
>

>> >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * Sections __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * Home

>>  
>>

>> The Washington Post logo

>>

>> Democracy Dies in Darkness

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Try 1 month for $1

>>  
>>                       * Username

>>  
>>                       * Sign In

>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>  
>>                 >>                         * My Post __

>>  
>>                         * My Reading List __

>>  
>>                         * Account Settings __

>>  
>>                         * Newsletters & alerts __

>>  
>>                         * Gift subscriptions __

>>  
>>                         * Contact us __

>>  
>>                         * Help desk __

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * My Post __

>>  
>>                       * My Reading List __

>>  
>>                       * Account Settings __

>>  
>>                       * Newsletters & alerts __

>>  
>>                       * Gift subscriptions __

>>  
>>                       * Contact us __

>>  
>>                       * Help desk __

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Accessibility for screenreader

>>  
>>

>> Opinions

>>

>> # Why fossil fuels survive

>>

>>
![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/5AwMLN5p0KjI6hXJ4TyZMLTFrW0=/1484x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/PQLJPAVEMMI6LLJ7TEOOGN2OEM.jpg)  
>  A drilling rig is seen near Kennedy, Tex., in 2012. (Eric Gay/AP)

>>

>> ![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

>>

>> By Robert J. Samuelson

>>

>> ![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

>>

>> Robert J. Samuelson

>>

>> Columnist focusing on economics

>>

>> Bio __

>>

>> Columnist

>>

>> February 28, 2018

>>

>> Anyone who tells you that dealing with climate change is simply a matter of
sweeping away the obstructionism of oil companies is living in a dream world.
The real obstacle is us — our vast dependence on fossil fuels and the
difficulty of extricating ourselves without crippling the world economy.

>>

>> It’s true that the Trump administration has withdrawn from the Paris
climate agreement, making any transition harder. But the problems transcend
President Trump’s disengagement, as a new study from the oil giant BP makes
clear.

>>

>> Reading it, you might think it came from an environmental group. The
study’s central conclusion, writes BP chief executive Bob Dudley, is that many
anti- global-warming policies fall “well short of” what’s “necessary to
achieve the Paris climate goals. We need a far more decisive break from the
past.”

>>

>> The study projects global energy supply and demand to 2040 to see whether
environmentally friendly policies make significant progress against global
warming. It assumes a larger role for “renewables” — mostly wind and solar
power — and other policies that would dampen fossil fuel consumption.
Consider:

>>

>> ●Electric cars make large advances compared with a negligible role today.
By 2040, the number of electric vehicles worldwide hits 300 million out of 2
billion total vehicles (roughly a doubling of today’s total). More important,
these electric vehicles account for a disproportionate share of driving, about
30 percent. As a result, there’s no increase in oil and liquid fuel demand for
cars and light vehicles, despite an assumed doubling in worldwide travel.

>>

>> ●There’s a continued boom in solar and wind power. From now until 2040,
these renewables are the fastest-growing source of energy, increasing
fivefold. As a share of global primary fuel consumption, the gain is from 4
percent to 14 percent. Their impact on electricity generation is even greater,
rising from 7 percent in 2016 to 25 percent in 2040.

>>

>> ●Electric utilities continue to switch to natural gas as their primary fuel
from coal, which has much higher carbon emissions. About half the growth in
natural gas consumption reflects this switching.

>>

>> Against this backdrop, you’d expect significant progress in curbing
greenhouse gases. Not so.

>>

>> Just the opposite: Total use of fossil fuels (oil, natural gas and coal) is
projected to increase almost 20 percent between 2016 and 2040. The electric
cars, renewables and fuel switching merely offset some — but not all — of the
added energy demand from population and economic growth. The BP study assumes
a world population of 9.2 billion in 2040, up from 7.4 billion in 2016. Over
the same period, the global economy doubles its output.

>>

>> What this means is that greenhouse gases are still pouring into the
atmosphere, albeit at a slower rate. There’s a slight shift away from fossil
fuels. In 2016, these fuels provided 85 percent of world energy. The
projection for 2040 is 74 percent, even with favorable assumptions about
renewables and electric vehicles.

>>

>> Virtually all the energy increase is projected to come from developing
countries for factories, offices, homes, air conditioners and heaters. India
and China alone account for half the increase in energy use by 2040.

>>

>> Governments, says Spencer Dale, BP’s chief economist, should discourage the
use of fossil fuels through either a carbon tax or a “tax and trade” system.
That could unleash hordes of companies and entrepreneurs to find ways to limit
emissions. “If we don’t like something [greenhouse gases], the easiest way to
get less of it is to put a price on it,” Dale says.

>>

>> Indeed, this could herald a “decisive break” from the past. But it might
also break public opinion, at least in the United States. How high would
prices have to go to prove Dale’s point? To succeed, the price increase might
have to be fairly stiff — say, an extra $2 or $3 a gallon for gasoline — and
that might be far more than Congress would adopt or many Americans would
accept.

>>

>> Suppressing greenhouse gases is, at best, a thorny policy issue
encompassing technology, atmospheric science, international relations and
practical politics. Put them all together and, at worst, it could be mission
impossible.

>>

>> _Read more fromRobert Samuelson’s archive._

>>

>> We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an
affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees
by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.

>>

>> ![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

>>

>> Robert J. Samuelson Robert J. Samuelson writes a twice-weekly column on
economics.

>>

>>
![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

>>

>> Subscriber sign in

>>

>> ### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

>>

>> Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or
purchase a subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

>>

>> Try 1 month for $1

>>

>> Unblock ads

>>

>> Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

>>

>> ![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=307315456358341&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

