

# Human overpopulation

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![Unbalanced

scales.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Unbalanced_scales.svg/45px-

Unbalanced_scales.svg.png)

|

The **neutrality of this article is disputed**. Relevant discussion may be
found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to
do so are met. _( May 2019)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

\---|---

"Overpopulate" and "Overpopulating" redirect here. For the general concept of
overpopulation, see Overpopulation.

The condition where human numbers exceed the short or long-term carrying
capacity of the environment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b7/Population_curve.svg/350px-

Population_curve.svg.png)

Graph of human population from 10000 BCE to 2000 CE. It shows exponential rise
in world population that has taken place since the end of the seventeenth
century.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/World_population_v3.svg/220px-

World_population_v3.svg.png)

World population v3

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Population_2017_test.png/500px-

Population_2017_test.png)

Map of population density by country, per square kilometer. (See _List of
countries by population density._ )

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Population_density.png/350px-

Population_density.png)

Areas of high population densities, calculated in 1994

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Fertility_rate_world_map_2.png/350px-

Fertility_rate_world_map_2.png)

Map of countries and territories by fertility rate (See _List of countries and
territories by fertility rate._ )

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Population_growth_rate_world_2018.svg/350px-

Population_growth_rate_world_2018.svg.png)

Human population growth rate in percent, with the variables of births, deaths,
immigration, and emigration – 2018

**Human overpopulation** (or **population overshoot** ) occurs when the
ecological footprint of a human population in a specific geographical location
exceeds the carrying capacity of the place occupied by that group.
Overpopulation can further be viewed, in a long term perspective, as existing
if a population cannot be maintained given the rapid depletion of non-
renewable resources or given the degradation of the capacity of the
environment to give support to the population. Changes in lifestyle could
reverse overpopulated status without a large population reduction.[1][2][3]

The term _human overpopulation_ refers to the relationship between the entire
human population and its environment: the Earth,[4] or to smaller geographical
areas such as countries. Overpopulation can result from an increase in births,
a decline in mortality rates, an increase in immigration, or an unsustainable
biome and depletion of resources. It is possible for very sparsely populated
areas to be overpopulated if the area has a meagre or non-existent capability
to sustain life (e.g. a desert). Advocates of population moderation cite
issues like quality of life, carrying capacity, and risk of starvation as a
basis to argue for population decline. Scientists suggest that the human
impact on the environment as a result of overpopulation, profligate
consumption and proliferation of technology has pushed the planet into a new
geological epoch known as the Anthropocene.[5][6][7]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 History of concern
  * 3 Human population
    * 3.1 History of population growth
    * 3.2 Projections of population growth
    * 3.3 Urban growth
  * 4 Causes
  * 5 Demographic transition
  * 6 Carrying capacity
  * 7 Effects of human overpopulation
  * 8 Resources
    * 8.1 Fresh water
    * 8.2 Food
    * 8.2.1 Global perspective
    * 8.2.2 Africa
    * 8.2.3 Asia
    * 8.2.4 Other countries
    * 8.2.5 Population as a function of food availability
    * 8.2.6 As a result of water deficits
    * 8.3 Land
    * 8.4 Fossil fuels
    * 8.5 Wealth and poverty
  * 9 Environment
  * 10 Warfare and conflict
    * 10.1 Criticism of this hypothesis
  * 11 Proposed solutions and mitigation measures
    * 11.1 Reducing overpopulation
    * 11.1.1 Education and empowerment
    * 11.1.2 Birth regulations
    * 11.2 Extraterrestrial settlement
    * 11.3 Urbanization
  * 12 Graph gallery
  * 13 See also
  * 14 References
  * 15 Further reading
  * 16 External links

## Overview[edit]

Human population has been rising continuously since the end of the Black
Death, around the year 1350,[8] although the most significant increase has
been since the 1950s, mainly due to medical advancements and increases in
agricultural productivity. The rate of population growth has been declining
since the 1980s, while the absolute total numbers are increasing. Recent rate
increases in several countries previously enjoying steady declines are also
apparently contributing to continued growth in total numbers. As pointed out
by Hans Rosling, the critical factor is that the population is not "just
growing", but that the growth ratio reached its peak and the total population
is now growing much slower.[9] The UN population forecast of 2017 was
predicting "near end of high fertility" globally and anticipating that by 2030
over ⅔ of world population will be living in countries with fertility below
the replacement level.[10] and for total world population to stabilize between
10-12 billion people by year 2100.[11]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/29/UN_population_estimates_and_projection_1950-2011.png/220px-

UN_population_estimates_and_projection_1950-2011.png)

UN population estimates and projection 1950-2100

The United Nations has expressed concerns on continued population growth in
sub-Saharan Africa.[12] Recent research has demonstrated that those concerns
are well grounded.[13][ _unreliable source?_ ] As of June 6, 2019 the world's
human population is estimated to be 7.711 billion.[14] Or, 7,622,106,064 on
May 14, 2018 and the United States Census Bureau calculates 7,472,985,269 for
that same date.[15] and over 7 billion by the United Nations.[16][17][18] Most
contemporary estimates for the carrying capacity of the Earth under existing
conditions are between 4 billion and 16 billion. Depending on which estimate
is used, human overpopulation may or may not have already occurred.
Nevertheless, the rapid recent increase in human population is causing some
concern. The population is expected to reach between 8 and 10.5 billion
between the years 2040[19][20] and 2050.[21] In 2017, the United Nations
increased the medium variant projections to 9.8 billion for 2050 and 11.2
billion for 2100.[22]

The recent rapid increase in human population over the past three centuries
has raised concerns that the planet may not be able to sustain present or
future numbers of inhabitants. The InterAcademy Panel Statement on Population
Growth, circa 1994, stated that many environmental problems, such as rising
levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, global warming, and pollution, are
aggravated by the population expansion.[23] Other problems associated with
overpopulation include the increased demand for resources such as fresh water
and food, starvation and malnutrition, consumption of natural resources (such
as fossil fuels) faster than the rate of regeneration, and a deterioration in
living conditions. Wealthy but highly populated territories like Britain rely
on food imports from overseas.[24] This was severely felt during the World
Wars when, despite food efficiency initiatives like "dig for victory" and food
rationing, Britain needed to fight to secure import routes. However, many
believe that waste and over-consumption, especially by wealthy nations, is
putting more strain on the environment than overpopulation.[25]

In spite of concerns about overpopulation, widespread in developed countries,
the number of people living in extreme poverty globally shows a stable decline
(this has been disputed by some experts[26][27][28]), even though the
population has grown seven-fold over the last 200 years. Child mortality has
declined, which in turn has led to reduced birth rates, thus slowing overall
population growth.[29] The global number of famine-related deaths have
declined, and food supply per person has increased with population growth.[30]

Most countries have no direct policy of limiting their birth rates, but the
rates have still fallen due to education about family planning and increasing
access to birth control and contraception.[ _citation needed_ ]

## History of concern[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/Overpopulation_in_H%E1%BB%93_Ch%C3%AD_Minh_City%2C_Vietnam.JPG/275px-

Overpopulation_in_H%E1%BB%93_Ch%C3%AD_Minh_City%2C_Vietnam.JPG)

Thousands of scooters make their way through Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Concern about overpopulation is an ancient topic. Tertullian was a resident of
the city of Carthage in the second century CE, when the population of the
world was about 190 million (only 3–4% of what it is today). He notably said:
"What most frequently meets our view (and occasions complaint) is our teeming
population. Our numbers are burdensome to the world, which can hardly support
us.... In very deed, pestilence, and famine, and wars, and earthquakes have to
be regarded as a remedy for nations, as the means of pruning the luxuriance of
the human race." Before that, Plato, Aristotle and others broached the topic
as well.[31]

Throughout recorded history, population growth has usually been slow despite
high birth rates, due to war, plagues and other diseases, and high infant
mortality. During the 750 years before the Industrial Revolution, the world's
population increased very slowly, remaining under 250 million.[32]

By the beginning of the 19th century, the world population had grown to a
billion individuals, and intellectuals such as Thomas Malthus predicted that
humankind would outgrow its available resources, because a finite amount of
land would be incapable of supporting a population with a limitless potential
for increase.[33] Mercantillists argued that a large population was a form of
wealth, which made it possible to create bigger markets and armies.

During the 19th century, Malthus's work was often interpreted in a way that
blamed the poor alone for their condition and helping them was said to worsen
conditions in the long run.[34] This resulted, for example, in the English
poor laws of 1834[34] and in a hesitating response to the Irish Great Famine
of 1845–52.[35]

The UN publication 'World population prospects' (2017) projects that the world
population will reach 9.8 billion in 2050 and 11.2 billion in 2100. Human
population is predicted to stabilise soon thereafter.

A 2014 study published in _Science_ challenges this projection, asserting that
population growth will continue into the next century.[36][37] Adrian Raftery,
a University of Washington professor of statistics and sociology and one of
the contributors to the study, says: "The consensus over the past 20 years or
so was that world population, which is currently around 7 billion, would go up
to 9 billion and level off or probably decline. We found there's a 70 percent
probability the world population will not stabilize this century. Population,
which had sort of fallen off the world's agenda, remains a very important
issue."[38] A more recent UN projection suggests the population could grow to
as many as 15 billion by 2100.[39]

In 2017, more than a third of 50 Nobel prize-winning scientists surveyed by
the _Times Higher Education_ at the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings said that
human overpopulation and environmental degradation are the two greatest
threats facing humankind.[40] In November that same year, a statement by
15,364 scientists from 184 countries indicated that rapid human population
growth is the "primary driver behind many ecological and even societal
threats."[41]

## Human population[edit]

### History of population growth[edit]

Main article: World population

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/53/Poulation-

since-10000BC.jpg/225px-Poulation-since-10000BC.jpg)

Data from World Population.

## Population[12]

Year | Billion  
1804 | 1  
1927 | 2  
1959 | 3  
1974 | 4  
1987 | 5  
1999 | 6  
2011 | 7  
2020 | 7.7 (estimate)[42]

The human population has gone through a number of periods of growth since the
dawn of civilization in the Holocene period, around 10,000 BCE. The beginning
of civilization roughly coincides with the receding of glacial ice following
the end of the last glacial period.[43] It is estimated that between 1–5
million people, subsisting on hunting and foraging, inhabited the Earth in the
period before the Neolithic Revolution, when human activity shifted away from
hunter-gathering and towards very primitive farming.[44]

Around 8000 BCE, at the dawn of agriculture, the population of the world was
approximately 5 million.[45] The next several millennia saw a steady increase
in the population, with very rapid growth beginning in 1000 BCE, and a peak of
between 200 and 300 million people in 1 BCE.

The Plague of Justinian caused Europe's population to drop by around 50%
between 541 and the 8th century.[46] Steady growth resumed in 800 CE.[47]
However, growth was again disrupted by frequent plagues; most notably, the
Black Death during the 14th century. The effects of the Black Death are
thought to have reduced the world's population, then at an estimated 450
million, to between 350 and 375 million by 1400.[48] The population of Europe
stood at over 70 million in 1340;[49] these levels did not return until 200
years later.[50] England's population reached an estimated 5.6 million in
1650, up from an estimated 2.6 million in 1500.[51] New crops from the
Americas via the Spanish colonizers in the 16th century contributed to the
population growth.[52]

In other parts of the globe, China's population at the founding of the Ming
dynasty in 1368 stood close to 60 million, approaching 150 million by the end
of the dynasty in 1644.[53][54] The population of the Americas in 1500 may
have been between 50 and 100 million.[55]

Encounters between European explorers and populations in the rest of the world
often introduced local epidemics of extraordinary virulence. Archaeological
evidence indicates that the death of around 90% of the Native American
population of the New World was caused by Old World diseases such as smallpox,
measles, and influenza.[56] Europeans introduced diseases alien to the
indigenous people, therefore they did not have immunity to these foreign
diseases.[57]

After the start of the Industrial Revolution, during the 18th century, the
rate of population growth began to increase. By the end of the century, the
world's population was estimated at just under 1 billion.[58] At the turn of
the 20th century, the world's population was roughly 1.6 billion.[58] By 1940,
this figure had increased to 2.3 billion.[59] Each subsequent addition of a
billion humans took less and less time: 33 years to reach three billion in
1960, 14 years for four billion in 1974, 13 years for five billion in 1987,
and 12 years for six billion in 1999.[60]

Dramatic growth beginning in 1950 (above 1.8% per year) coincided with greatly
increased food production as a result of the industrialization of agriculture
brought about by the Green Revolution.[61] The rate of human population growth
peaked in 1964, at about 2.1% per year.[62] For example, Indonesia's
population grew from 97 million in 1961 to 237.6 million in 2010,[63][64] a
145% increase in 49 years. In India, the population grew from 361.1 million
people in 1951 to just over 1.2 billion by 2011,[65][66] a 235% increase in 60
years.

Continent | 1900 population[67]  
\---|---  
Africa | 133 million  
Asia | 904 million  
Europe | 408 million  
Latin America and Caribbean | 74 million  
North America | 82 million

There is concern over the sharp population increase in many countries,
especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, that has occurred over the last several
decades, and that it is creating problems with land management, natural
resources and access to water supplies.[68]

The population of Chad has, for example, grown from 6,279,921 in 1993 to
10,329,208 in 2009.[69] Niger, Uganda, Nigeria, Tanzania, Ethiopia and the DRC
are witnessing a similar growth in population. The situation is most acute in
western, central and eastern Africa.[13] Refugees from places like Sudan have
further strained the resources of neighboring states like Chad and Egypt. Chad
is also host to roughly 255,000 refugees from Sudan's Darfur region, and about
77,000 refugees from the Central African Republic, while approximately 188,000
Chadians have been displaced by their own civil war and famines, have either
fled to either the Sudan, the Niger or, more recently, Libya.[70]

According to UN data, there are on average 250 babies born each minute, or
more than 130 million a year.[71]

### Projections of population growth[edit]

Main article: Projections of population growth

Continent | Projected 2050 population[72]  
\---|---  
Africa | 2.5 billion  
Asia | 5.5 billion  
Europe | 716 million  
Latin America and Caribbean | 780 million  
North America | 435 million

According to projections, the world population will continue to grow until at
least 2050, with the population reaching 9 billion in 2040,[73][74] and some
predictions putting the population as high as 11 billion in 2050.[75] The
median estimate for future growth sees the world population reaching 8.6
billion in 2030, 9.8 billion in 2050 and 11.2 billion by 2100[76] assuming a
continuing decrease in average fertility rate from 2.5 births per woman in
2010–2015 to 2.2 in 2045–2050 and to 2.0 in 2095–2100, according to the
medium-variant projection.[76] Walter Greiling projected in the 1950s that
world population would reach a peak of about nine billion, in the 21st
century, and then stop growing, after a readjustment of the Third World and a
sanitation of the tropics.[77]

In 2000, the United Nations estimated that the world's population was growing
at the rate of 1.14% (or about 75 million people) per year and according to
data from the CIA's World Factbook, the world human population currently
increases by 145 every minute.[78]

According to the United Nations' World Population Prospects report:[79]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dd/Net_Population_Growth_in_2016.svg/400px-

Net_Population_Growth_in_2016.svg.png)

Net annual human population increase by country – 2016.

  * The world population is currently growing by approximately 74 million people per year. Current United Nations predictions estimate that the world population will reach 9.0 billion around 2050, assuming a decrease in average fertility rate from 2.5 down to 2.0.[80][81]
  * Almost all growth will take place in the less developed regions, where today's 5.3 billion population of underdeveloped countries is expected to increase to 7.8 billion in 2050. By contrast, the population of the more developed regions will remain mostly unchanged, at 1.2 billion. An exception is the United States population, which is expected to increase by 44% from 2008 to 2050.[82]
  * In 2000–2005, the average world fertility was 2.65 children per woman, about half the level in 1950–1955 (5 children per woman). In the medium variant, global fertility is projected to decline further to 2.05 children per woman.
  * During 2005–2050, nine countries are expected to account for half of the world's projected population increase: India, Pakistan,[83] Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bangladesh, Uganda, United States, Ethiopia, and China, listed according to the size of their contribution to population growth. China would be higher still in this list were it not for its one-child policy.
  * Global life expectancy at birth is expected to continue rising from 65 years in 2000–2005 to 75 years in 2045–2050. In the more developed regions, the projection is to 82 years by 2050. Among the least developed countries, where life expectancy today is just under 50 years, it is expected to increase to 66 years by 2045–2050.
  * The population of 51 countries or areas is expected to be lower in 2050 than in 2005.
  * During 2005–2050, the net number of international migrants to more developed regions is projected to be 98 million. Because deaths are projected to exceed births in the more developed regions by 73 million during 2005–2050, population growth in those regions will largely be due to international migration.
  * In 2000–2005, net migration in 28 countries either prevented population decline or doubled at least the contribution of natural increase (births minus deaths) to population growth.
  * Birth rates are now falling in a small percentage of developing countries, while the actual populations in many developed countries would fall without immigration.[80]

### Urban growth[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/2006megacities.PNG/350px-2006megacities.PNG)

Urban areas with at least one million inhabitants in 2006. 3% of the world's
population lived in cities in 1800, rising to 47% at the end of the twentieth
century.

In 1800 only 3% of the world's population lived in cities. By the 20th
century's close, 47% did so. In 1950 there were 83 cities with populations
exceeding one million; but by 2007 this had risen to 468 "agglomerations".[84]
If the trend continues, the world's urban population will double every 38
years. In 2007 UN forecasted that urban population would rise to three out of
five or 60% by 2030 and an increase in urban population from 3.2 billion to
nearly 5 billion by 2030.[85] As of 2018 55% live in cities and UN predicts
that it will be 68% by 2050.[86]

% of world population living in cities Year | 1800 | 2000 | 2018 | 2050  
\---|---|---|---|---  
% City | 3% | 47% | 55% | *68%

The increase will be most dramatic in the poorest and least-urbanised
continents, Asia and Africa. Projections indicate that most urban growth over
the next 25 years will be in developing countries.[87] One billion people,
one-seventh of the world's population, or one-third of urban population, now
live in shanty towns,[88] which are seen as "breeding grounds" for social
problems such as unemployment, poverty, crime, drug addiction, alcoholism, and
other social ills. In many poor countries, slums exhibit high rates of disease
due to unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and lack of basic health care.[89]

In 2000, there were 18 megacities - conurbations such as Tokyo, Beijing,
Guangzhou, Seoul, Karachi, Mexico City, Mumbai, São Paulo, London and New York
City - that have populations in excess of 10 million inhabitants.[90] Greater
Tokyo already has 38 million, more than the entire population of Canada (at
36.7 million).

According to the _Far Eastern Economic Review_ , Asia alone will have at least
10 'hypercities' by 2025, that is, cities inhabited by more than 19 million
people, including Jakarta (24.9 million people), Dhaka (25 million), Karachi
(26.5 million), Shanghai (27 million) and Mumbai (33 million).[91] Lagos has
grown from 300,000 in 1950 to an estimated 15 million today, and the Nigerian
government estimates that city will have expanded to 25 million residents by
2015.[92] Chinese experts forecast that Chinese cities will contain 800
million people by 2020.[93]

## Causes[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2d/Kathmandu_street.jpg/220px-

Kathmandu_street.jpg)

Street in Kathmandu

From a historical perspective, technological revolutions have coincided with
population expansion. There have been three major technological revolutions –
the tool-making revolution, the agricultural revolution, and the industrial
revolution – all of which allowed humans more access to food, resulting in
subsequent population explosions. For example, the use of tools, such as bow
and arrow, allowed primitive hunters greater access to more high energy foods
(e.g. animal meat). Similarly, the transition to farming about 10,000 years
ago greatly increased the overall food supply, which was used to support more
people. Food production further increased with the industrial revolution as
machinery, fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides were used to increase land
under cultivation as well as crop yields. Today, starvation is caused by
economic and political forces rather than a lack of the means to produce
food.[94][95]

Significant increases in human population occur whenever the birth rate
exceeds the death rate for extended periods of time. Traditionally, the
fertility rate is strongly influenced by cultural and social norms that are
rather stable and therefore slow to adapt to changes in the social,
technological, or environmental conditions. For example, when death rates fell
during the 19th and 20th century – as a result of improved sanitation, child
immunizations, and other advances in medicine – allowing more newborns to
survive, the fertility rate did not adjust downward, resulting in significant
population growth. Until the 1700s, seven out of ten children died before
reaching reproductive age.[96] Today, more than nine out of ten children born
in industrialized nations reach adulthood.[ _citation needed_ ]

There is a strong correlation between overpopulation and poverty.[97] In
contrast, the invention of the birth control pill and other modern methods of
contraception resulted in a dramatic decline in the number of children per
household in all but the very poorest countries.[98]

Agriculture has sustained human population growth. This dates back to
prehistoric times, when agricultural methods were first developed, and
continues to the present day, with fertilizers, agrochemicals, large-scale
mechanization, genetic manipulation, and other technologies.[99]

Humans have historically exploited the environment using the easiest, most
accessible resources first. The richest farmland was plowed and the richest
mineral ore mined first. Ceballos, Ehrlich A and Ehrlich P said that
overpopulation is demanding the use of ever more creative, expensive and/or
environmentally destructive means in order to exploit ever more difficult to
access and/or poorer quality natural resources to satisfy consumers.[100]

## Demographic transition[edit]

Main articles: Demographic transition and Sub-replacement fertility

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Babies_per_woman_%28total_fertility%29.png/220px-

Babies_per_woman_%28total_fertility%29.png)

Babies per woman (total fertility) in USA, Russia, China, Nigeria; 1800-2018

The theory of demographic transition held that, after the standard of living
and life expectancy increase, family sizes and birth rates decline. However,
as new data has become available, it has been observed that after a certain
level of development (HDI equal to 0.86 or higher) the fertility increases
again and is often represented as a "J" shape.[101] This means that both the
worry that the theory generated about aging populations and the complacency it
bred regarding the future environmental impact of population growth could need
reevaluation.

Factors cited in the old theory included such social factors as later ages of
marriage, the growing desire of many women in such settings to seek careers
outside child rearing and domestic work, and the decreased need for children
in industrialized settings. The latter factor stems from the fact that
children perform a great deal of work in small-scale agricultural societies,
and work less in industrial ones; it has been cited to explain the decline in
birth rates in industrializing regions.

Many countries have high population growth rates but lower total fertility
rates because high population growth in the past skewed the age demographic
toward a young age, so the population still rises as the more numerous younger
generation approaches maturity. "Demographic entrapment" is a concept
developed by Maurice King, Honorary Research Fellow at the University of
Leeds, who posits that this phenomenon occurs when a country has a population
larger than its carrying capacity, no possibility of migration, and exports
too little to be able to import food. This will cause starvation. He claims
that for example many sub-Saharan nations are or will become stuck in
demographic entrapment, instead of having a demographic transition.[102]

For the world as a whole, the number of children born per woman decreased from
5.02 to 2.65 between 1950 and 2005. A breakdown by region is as follows:

  * Europe – 2.66 to 1.41
  * North America – 3.47 to 1.99
  * Oceania – 3.87 to 2.30
  * Central America – 6.38 to 2.66
  * South America – 5.75 to 2.49
  * Asia (excluding Middle East) – 5.85 to 2.43
  * Middle East & North Africa – 6.99 to 3.37
  * Sub-Saharan Africa – 6.7 to 5.53

Excluding the theoretical reversal in fertility decrease for high development,
the projected world number of children born per woman for 2050 would be around
2.05. Only the Middle East & North Africa (2.09) and Sub-Saharan Africa (2.61)
would then have numbers greater than 2.05.[103]

## Carrying capacity[edit]

Main article: Carrying capacity

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/Ambox_contradict.svg/40px-

Ambox_contradict.svg.png)

|

This article **appears to contradict the article _Carrying capacity_**. Please
see discussion on the linked talk page. Please do not remove this message
until the contradictions are resolved. _( August 2017)_

\---|---

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/74/Familiy_Planning_Ethiopia_%28bad_effects%29.jpg/220px-

Familiy_Planning_Ethiopia_%28bad_effects%29.jpg)

A family planning placard in Ethiopia. It shows some negative effects of
having too many children.

Some groups (for example, the World Wide Fund for Nature[104][105] and Global
Footprint Network) have stated that the carrying capacity for the human
population has been exceeded as measured using the Ecological Footprint. In
2006, WWF's "Living Planet Report" stated that in order for all humans to live
with the current consumption patterns of Europeans, we would be spending three
times more than what the planet can renew.[106] Humanity as a whole was using,
by 2006, 40 percent more than what Earth can regenerate.[107] However, Roger
Martin of Population Matters states the view: "the poor want to get rich, and
I want them to get rich," with a later addition, "of course we have to change
consumption habits,... but we've also got to stabilise our numbers".[108]
Another study by the World Wildlife Fund in 2014 found that it would take the
equivalent of 1.5 Earths of biocapacity to meet humanity's current levels of
consumption.[109]

But critics question the simplifications and statistical methods used in
calculating Ecological Footprints. Therefore, Global Footprint Network and its
partner organizations have engaged with national governments and international
agencies to test the results – reviews have been produced by France, Germany,
the European Commission, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Japan and the United Arab
Emirates.[110] Some point out that a more refined method of assessing
Ecological Footprint is to designate sustainable versus non-sustainable
categories of consumption.[111][112] However, if yield estimates were adjusted
for sustainable levels of production, the yield figures would be lower, and
hence the overshoot estimated by the Ecological Footprint method even higher.

Other studies give particular attention to resource depletion and increased
world affluence.[ _further explanation needed_ ] [113][114]

In a 1994 study titled _Food, Land, Population and the U.S. Economy_ , David
Pimentel and Mario Giampietro estimated the maximum U.S. population for a
sustainable economy at 200 million.[115] And in order to achieve a sustainable
economy and avert disaster, the United States would have to reduce its
population by at least one-third, and world population would have to be
reduced by two-thirds.[116]

Many quantitative studies have estimated the world's carrying capacity for
humans, that is, a limit to the world population.[117] A meta-analysis of 69
such studies suggests a point estimate of the limit to be 7.7 billion people,
while lower and upper meta-bounds for current technology are estimated as 0.65
and 98 billion people, respectively. They conclude: "recent predictions of
stabilized world population levels for 2050 exceed several of our meta-
estimates of a world population limit".[118]

## Effects of human overpopulation[edit]

Further information: Overconsumption and Human impact on the environment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/29/Crowded_BTS_skytrain_Bangkok.jpg/300px-

Crowded_BTS_skytrain_Bangkok.jpg)

Crowded people on Siam BTS Station on the rush hour in Bangkok, Thailand

Some more problems associated with or exacerbated by human overpopulation and
over-consumption are:

  * Inadequate fresh water[119] for drinking as well as sewage treatment and effluent discharge. Some countries, like Saudi Arabia, use energy-expensive desalination to solve the problem of water shortages.[120][121]
  * Depletion of natural resources, especially fossil fuels.[122]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/World_energy_consumption%2C_1970-2025%2C_EIA.png/220px-

World_energy_consumption%2C_1970-2025%2C_EIA.png)

World energy consumption and predictions, 1970–2025.

  * Increased levels of air pollution, water pollution, soil contamination and noise pollution.
  * Changes in atmospheric composition and consequent global warming.[123][124][125]
  * Loss of arable land and increase in desertification.[126] Deforestation and desertification can be reversed by adopting property rights, and this policy is successful even while the human population continues to grow.[127]
  * Mass species extinctions and contracting biodiversity[128][129][130][131][132] from reduced habitat in tropical forests due to slash-and-burn techniques that sometimes are practiced by shifting cultivators, especially in countries with rapidly expanding rural populations; present extinction rates may be as high as 140,000 species lost per year.[133] As of February 2011, the IUCN Red List lists a total of 801 animal species having gone extinct during recorded human history,[134] although the vast majority of extinctions are thought to be undocumented.[133] Biodiversity would continue to grow at an exponential rate if not for human influence.[135] Sir David King, former chief scientific adviser to the UK government, told a parliamentary inquiry: "It is self-evident that the massive growth in the human population through the 20th century has had more impact on biodiversity than any other single factor."[136][137] Paul and Anne Ehrlich said population growth is one of the main drivers of the Earth's extinction crisis.[138] The _Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services_ , released by IPBES in 2019, says that human population growth is a factor in biodiversity loss.[139]

The Yangtze River dolphin, Atlantic gray whale, West African black rhino,
Merriam's elk, California grizzly bear, silver trout, blue pike and dusky
seaside sparrow are all victims of human overpopulation.

—Chris Hedges, 2009[140]

  * High infant and child mortality.[141] High rates of infant mortality are associated with poverty. Rich countries with high population densities have low rates of infant mortality.[142] However, both global poverty and infant mortality has declined over the last 200 years of population growth.[29][30]
  * Intensive factory farming to support large populations. It results in human threats including the evolution and spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria diseases, excessive air and water pollution, and new viruses that infect humans.
  * Increased chance of the emergence of new epidemics and pandemics.[143] For many environmental and social reasons, including overcrowded living conditions, malnutrition and inadequate, inaccessible, or non-existent health care, the poor are more likely to be exposed to infectious diseases.[144]
  * Starvation, malnutrition[145] or poor diet with ill health and diet-deficiency diseases (e.g. rickets). However, rich countries with high population densities do not have famine.[146]
  * Low life expectancy in countries with fastest growing populations.[147] Overall life expectancy has increased globally despite of population growth, including countries with fast-growing populations.[29]
  * Unhygienic living conditions for many based upon water resource depletion, discharge of raw sewage[148] and solid waste disposal. However, this problem can be reduced with the adoption of sewers. For example, after Karachi, Pakistan installed sewers, its infant mortality rate fell substantially.[149]
  * Elevated crime rate due to drug cartels and increased theft by people stealing resources to survive.[150]
  * Conflict over scarce resources and crowding, leading to increased levels of warfare.[151]
  * Less personal freedom and more restrictive laws. Laws regulate and shape politics, economics, history and society and serve as a mediator of relations and interactions between people. The higher the population density, the more frequent such interactions become, and thus there develops a need for more laws and/or more restrictive laws to regulate these interactions and relations. It was even speculated by Aldous Huxley in 1958 that democracy is threatened due to overpopulation, and could give rise to totalitarian style governments.[152] However, over the last 200 years of population growth, the actual level of personal freedom has increased rather than declined.[29]

Many of these problems are explored in the dystopic science fiction film
_Soylent Green_ , where an overpopulated Earth suffers from food shortages,
depleted resources and poverty and in the documentary "Aftermath: Population
Overload".

David Attenborough described the level of human population on the planet as a
multiplier of all other environmental problems.[153] In 2013, he described
humanity as "a plague on the Earth" that needs to be controlled by limiting
population growth.[154]

Most biologists and sociologists see overpopulation as a serious threat to the
quality of human life.[155][156] Some deep ecologists, such as the radical
thinker and polemicist Pentti Linkola, see human overpopulation as a threat to
the entire biosphere.[157]

The effects of overpopulation are compounded by overconsumption. According to
Paul R. Ehrlich:

> Rich western countries are now siphoning up the planet’s resources and
destroying its ecosystems at an unprecedented rate. We want to build highways
across the Serengeti to get more rare earth minerals for our cellphones. We
grab all the fish from the sea, wreck the coral reefs and put carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere. We have triggered a major extinction event ... A world
population of around a billion would have an overall pro-life effect. This
could be supported for many millennia and sustain many more human lives in the
long term compared with our current uncontrolled growth and prospect of sudden
collapse ... If everyone consumed resources at the US level – which is what
the world aspires to – you will need another four or five Earths. We are
wrecking our planet’s life support systems.[158]

Some economists, such as Thomas Sowell[159] and Walter E. Williams[146] argue
that third world poverty and famine are caused in part by bad government and
bad economic policies.

## Resources[edit]

**Youth unemployment is also soaring, with the economy unable to absorb the
spiraling numbers of those seeking to enter the work force. Many young people
do not have the skills to match the needs of the Egyptian market, and the
economy is small, weak and insufficiently industrialized... Instead of being
something productive, the population growth is a barrel of explosives.** —Ofir
Winter, an Egypt specialist at the Institute for National Security
Studies[160]

Overpopulation does not depend only on the size or density of the population,
but on the ratio of population to available sustainable resources. It also
depends on how resources are managed and distributed throughout the
population.

The resources to be considered when evaluating whether an ecological niche is
overpopulated include clean water, clean air, food, shelter, warmth, and other
resources necessary to sustain life. If the quality of human life is
addressed, there may be additional resources considered, such as medical care,
education, proper sewage treatment, waste disposal and energy supplies.
Overpopulation places competitive stress on the basic life sustaining
resources,[161] leading to a diminished quality of life.[156]

Directly related to maintaining the health of the human population is water
supply, and it is one of the resources that experience the biggest strain.
With the global population at about 7.5 billion, and each human theoretically
needing 2 liters of drinking water, there is a demand for 15 billion liters of
water each day to meet the minimum requirement for healthy living (United).
Weather patterns, elevation, and climate all contribute to uneven distribution
of fresh drinking water. Without clean water, good health is not a viable
option. Besides drinking, water is used to create sanitary living conditions
and is the basis of creating a healthy environment fit to hold human life. In
addition to drinking water, water is also used for bathing, washing clothes
and dishes, flushing toilets, a variety of cleaning methods, recreation,
watering lawns, and farm irrigation. Irrigation poses one of the largest
problems, because without sufficient water to irrigate crops, the crops die
and then there is the problem of food rations and starvation. In addition to
water needed for crops and food, there is limited land area dedicated to food
production, and not much more that is suitable to be added. Arable land,
needed to sustain the growing population, is also a factor because land being
under or over cultivated easily upsets the delicate balance of nutrition
supply. There are also problems with location of arable land with regard to
proximity to countries and relative population (Bashford 240). Access to
nutrition is an important limiting factor in population sustainability and
growth. No increase in arable land added to the still increasing human
population will eventually pose a serious conflict. Only 38% of the land area
of the globe is dedicated to agriculture, and there is not room for much more.
Although plants produce 54 billion metric tons of carbohydrates per year, when
the population is expected to grow to 9 billion by 2050, the plants may not be
able to keep up (Biello). Food supply is a primary example of how a resource
reacts when its carrying capacity is exceeded. By trying to grow more and more
crops off of the same amount of land, the soil becomes exhausted. Because the
soil is exhausted, it is then unable to produce the same amount of food as
before, and is overall less productive. Therefore, by using resources beyond a
sustainable level, the resource become nullified and ineffective, which
further increases the disparity between the demand for a resource and the
availability of a resource. There must be a shift to provide adequate recovery
time to each one of the supplies in demand to support contemporary human
lifestyles. [162][163][164]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/Yangzhou_-

_industrial_area_west_of_Wenfeng_Temple_-_P1130239.JPG/220px-Yangzhou_-

_industrial_area_west_of_Wenfeng_Temple_-_P1130239.JPG)

An industrial area, with a power plant, south of Yangzhou's downtown, China

David Pimentel has stated that "With the imbalance growing between population
numbers and vital life sustaining resources, humans must actively conserve
cropland, freshwater, energy, and biological resources. There is a need to
develop renewable energy resources. Humans everywhere must understand that
rapid population growth damages the Earth's resources and diminishes human
well-being."[165][166]

These reflect the comments also of the United States Geological Survey in
their paper The Future of Planet Earth: Scientific Challenges in the Coming
Century. "As the global population continues to grow...people will place
greater and greater demands on the resources of our planet, including mineral
and energy resources, open space, water, and plant and animal resources."
"Earth's natural wealth: an audit" by _New Scientist_ magazine states that
many of the minerals that we use for a variety of products are in danger of
running out in the near future.[167] A handful of geologists around the world
have calculated the costs of new technologies in terms of the materials they
use and the implications of their spreading to the developing world. All agree
that the planet's booming population and rising standards of living are set to
put unprecedented demands on the materials that only Earth itself can
provide.[167] Limitations on how much of these materials is available could
even mean that some technologies are not worth pursuing long term.... "Virgin
stocks of several metals appear inadequate to sustain the modern 'developed
world' quality of life for all of Earth's people under contemporary
technology".[168]

On the other hand, some cornucopian researchers, such as Julian L. Simon and
Bjørn Lomborg believe that resources exist for further population growth. In a
2010 study, they concluded that "there are not (and will never be) too many
people for the planet to feed" according to The Independent.[169] Some critics
warn, this will be at a high cost to the Earth: "the technological optimists
are probably correct in claiming that overall world food production can be
increased substantially over the next few decades...[however] the
environmental cost of what Paul R. and Anne H. Ehrlich describe as 'turning
the Earth into a giant human feedlot' could be severe. A large expansion of
agriculture to provide growing populations with improved diets is likely to
lead to further deforestation, loss of species, soil erosion, and pollution
from pesticides and fertilizer runoff as farming intensifies and new land is
brought into production."[170] Since we are intimately dependent upon the
living systems of the Earth,[171][172][173] some scientists have questioned
the wisdom of further expansion.

According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, a four-year research effort
by 1,360 of the world's prominent scientists commissioned to measure the
actual value of natural resources to humans and the world, "The structure of
the world's ecosystems changed more rapidly in the second half of the
twentieth century than at any time in recorded human history, and virtually
all of Earth's ecosystems have now been significantly transformed through
human actions."[174] "Ecosystem services, particularly food production, timber
and fisheries, are important for employment and economic activity. Intensive
use of ecosystems often produces the greatest short-term advantage, but
excessive and unsustainable use can lead to losses in the long term. A country
could cut its forests and deplete its fisheries, and this would show only as a
positive gain to GDP, despite the loss of capital assets. If the full economic
value of ecosystems were taken into account in decision-making, their
degradation could be significantly slowed down or even reversed."[175][176]

Another study was done by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
called the Global Environment Outlook.

Although all resources, whether mineral or other, are limited on the planet,
there is a degree of self-correction whenever a scarcity or high-demand for a
particular kind is experienced. For example, in 1990 known reserves of many
natural resources were higher, and their prices lower, than in 1970, despite
higher demand and higher consumption. Whenever a price spike would occur, the
market tended to correct itself whether by substituting an equivalent resource
or switching to a new technology.[177]

### Fresh water[edit]

Further information: Water crisis

Fresh water supplies, on which agriculture depends, are running low
worldwide.[178][179] This water crisis is only expected to worsen as the
population increases.[180]

Potential problems with dependence on desalination are reviewed below,
however, the majority of the world's freshwater supply is contained in the
polar icecaps, and underground river systems accessible through springs and
wells.

Fresh water can be obtained from salt water by desalination. For example,
Malta derives two thirds of its freshwater by desalination. A number of
nuclear powered desalination plants exist;[181][182] however, the high costs
of desalination, especially for poor countries, makes the transport of large
amounts of desalinated seawater to interiors of large countries
impractical.[183] The cost of desalination varies; Israel is now desalinating
water for a cost of 53 cents per cubic meter,[184] Singapore at 49 cents per
cubic meter.[185] In the United States, the cost is 81 cents per cubic meter
($3.06 for 1,000 gallons).[186]

According to a 2004 study by Zhou and Tol, "one needs to lift the water by
2000 m, or transport it over more than 1600 km to get transport costs equal to
the desalination costs. Desalinated water is expensive in places that are both
somewhat far from the sea and somewhat high, such as Riyadh and Harare. In
other places, the dominant cost is desalination, not transport. This leads to
somewhat lower costs in places like Beijing, Bangkok, Zaragoza, Phoenix, and,
of course, coastal cities like Tripoli." Thus while the study is generally
positive about the technology for affluent areas that are proximate to oceans,
it concludes that "Desalinated water may be a solution for some water-stress
regions, but not for places that are poor, deep in the interior of a
continent, or at high elevation. Unfortunately, that includes some of the
places with biggest water problems."[187] "Another potential problem with
desalination is the byproduction of saline brine, which can be a major cause
of marine pollution when dumped back into the oceans at high
temperatures."[187]

The world's largest desalination plant is the Jebel Ali Desalination Plant
(Phase 2) in the United Arab Emirates, which can produce 300 million cubic
metres of water per year,[188] or about 2500 gallons per second. The largest
desalination plant in the US is the one at Tampa Bay, Florida, which began
desalinating 25 million gallons (95000 m³) of water per day in December 2007.
A 17 January 2008, article in the _Wall Street Journal_ states, "Worldwide,
13,080 desalination plants produce more than 12 billion gallons of water a
day, according to the International Desalination Association."[189] After
being desalinated at Jubail, Saudi Arabia, water is pumped 200 miles (320 km)
inland though a pipeline to the capital city of Riyadh.[190]

However, new data originating from the GRACE experiments and isotopic testing
done by the IAEA show that the Nubian aquifer—which is under the largest,
driest part of the earth's surface, has enough water in it to provide for "at
least several centuries". In addition to this, new and highly detailed maps of
the earth's underground reservoirs will be soon created from these
technologies that will further allow proper budgeting of cheap water.[191]

### Food[edit]

Some scientists argue that there is enough food to support the world
population,[192][193] and some dispute this, particularly if sustainability is
taken into account.[194]

Many countries rely heavily on imports. Egypt and Iran rely on imports for 40%
of their grain supply. Yemen and Israel import more than 90%. And just 6
countries – Argentina, Australia, Canada, France, Thailand and the USA –
supply 90% of grain exports. In recent decades the US alone supplied almost
half of world grain exports.[195]

A 2001 United Nations report says population growth is "the main force driving
increases in agricultural demand" but "most recent expert assessments are
cautiously optimistic about the ability of global food production to keep up
with demand for the foreseeable future (that is to say, until approximately
2030 or 2050)", assuming declining population growth rates.[196]

However, the observed figures for 2016 show an actual increase in absolute
numbers of undernourished people in the world, 815 million in 2016 versus 777
million in 2015.[197] The FAO estimates that these numbers are still far lower
than the nearly 900 million registered in 2000.[197]

#### Global perspective[edit]

Further information: 2007–2008 world food price crisis

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8f/Food_production_per_capita.svg/220px-

Food_production_per_capita.svg.png)

Growth in food production has been greater than population growth.

The amounts of natural resources in this context are not necessarily fixed,
and their distribution is not necessarily a zero-sum game. For example, due to
the Green Revolution and the fact that more and more land is appropriated each
year from wild lands for agricultural purposes, the worldwide production of
food had steadily increased up until 1995. World food production per person
was considerably higher in 2005 than 1961.

As world population doubled from 3 billion to 6 billion, daily calorie
consumption in poor countries increased from 1,932 to 2,650, and the
percentage of people in those countries who were malnourished fell from 45% to
18%. This suggests that Third World poverty and famine are caused by
underdevelopment, not overpopulation.[198] However, others question these
statistics.[199] From 1950 to 1984, as the Green Revolution transformed
agriculture around the world, grain production increased by over 250%.[200]
The world population has grown by about four billion since the beginning of
the Green Revolution and most believe that, without the Revolution, there
would be greater famine and malnutrition than the UN presently
documents.[61][201]

The number of people who are overweight has surpassed the number who are
undernourished. In a 2006 news story, MSNBC reported, "There are an estimated
800 million undernourished people and more than a billion considered
overweight worldwide." The U.S. has one of the highest rates of obesity in the
world.[202] However, studies show that wealthy and educated people are far
likelier to eat healthy food,[203] indicating obesity is a disease related to
poverty and lack of education and excessive advertising of unhealthy eatables
at cheaper cost, high in calories, with little nutritive value are
consumed.[204][205]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Percentage_population_undernourished_world_map.PNG/220px-

Percentage_population_undernourished_world_map.PNG)

Percentage of population suffering from undernourishment by country, according
to United Nations statistics.

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations states in its
report _The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2018_ that the new data
indicates an increase of hunger in the world, reversing the recent trend. It
is estimated that in 2017 the number of undernourished people increased to 821
million, around 11 per cent of the world population. The FAO states: "Evidence
shows that, for many countries, recent increases in hunger are associated with
extreme climate events, especially where there is both high exposure to
climate extremes and high vulnerability related to agriculture and livelihood
systems."[197]

As of 2008, the price of grain has increased due to more farming used in
biofuels,[206] world oil prices at over $100 a barrel,[207] global population
growth,[208] climate change,[209] loss of agricultural land to residential and
industrial development,[210][211] and growing consumer demand in China and
India[212][213] Food riots have recently taken place in many countries across
the world.[214][215][216] An epidemic of stem rust on wheat caused by race
Ug99 is currently spreading across Africa and into Asia and is causing major
concern. A virulent wheat disease could destroy most of the world's main wheat
crops, leaving millions to starve. The fungus has spread from Africa to Iran,
and may already be in Afghanistan and Pakistan.[217][218][219]

Food security will become more difficult to achieve as resources run out.
Resources in danger of becoming depleted include oil, phosphorus, grain, fish,
and water.[220][221] The British scientist John Beddington predicted in 2009
that supplies of energy, food, and water will need to be increased by 50% to
reach demand levels of 2030.[222][223] According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), food supplies will need to be increased by 70% by 2050 to
meet projected demands.[224]

#### Africa[edit]

The _Population Reference Bureau_ in the US reported that the population of
Sub-Saharan Africa – the poorest region in the continent – is rising faster
than most of the rest of the world, and that "Rapid population growth makes it
difficult for economies to create enough jobs to lift large numbers of people
out of poverty." Seven of the 10 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with the
highest fertility rates also appear among the bottom 10 listed on the United
Nations' Human Development Index.[225]

Hunger and malnutrition kill nearly 6 million children a year, and more people
are malnourished in sub-Saharan Africa this decade than in the 1990s,
according to a report released by the Food and Agriculture Organization. In
sub-Saharan Africa, the number of malnourished people grew to 203.5 million
people in 2000–02 from 170.4 million 10 years earlier says _The State of Food
Insecurity in the World_ report. In 2001, 46.4% of people in sub-Saharan
Africa were living in extreme poverty.[226]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/Dhaka_street_crowds.jpg/220px-

Dhaka_street_crowds.jpg)

Dhaka street crowds. Bangladesh.

#### Asia[edit]

According to a 2004 article from the BBC, China, the world's most populous
country, suffers from an "obesity surge". The article stated that,
"Altogether, around 200 million people are thought to be overweight, 22.8% of
the population, and 60 million (7.1%) obese".[227] More recent data indicate
China's grain production peaked in the mid-1990s, due to increased extraction
of groundwater in the North China Plain.[228]

#### Other countries[edit]

Japan may face a food crisis that could reduce daily diets to the austere
meals of the 1950s, believes a senior government adviser.[229]

#### Population as a function of food availability[edit]

Thinkers from a wide range of academic fields and political
backgrounds—including agricultural scientist David Pimentel,[230] behavioral
scientist Russell Hopfenberg,[231] right-wing anthropologist Virginia
Abernethy,[232] ecologist Garrett Hardin,[233] ecologist and anthropologist
Peter Farb, journalist Richard Manning,[234] environmental biologist Alan D.
Thornhill,[235] cultural critic and writer Daniel Quinn,[236] and anarcho-
primitivist John Zerzan,[237]—propose that, like all other animal populations,
human populations predictably grow and shrink according to their available
food supply, growing during an abundance of food and shrinking in times of
scarcity.

Proponents of this theory argue that every time food production is increased,
the population grows. Most human populations throughout history validate this
theory, as does the overall current global population. Populations of hunter-
gatherers fluctuate in accordance with the amount of available food. The world
human population began increasing after the Neolithic Revolution and its
increased food supply. This was, subsequent to the Green Revolution, followed
by even more severely accelerated population growth, which continues today.
Often, wealthier countries send their surplus food resources to the aid of
starving communities; however, proponents of this theory argue that this
seemingly beneficial notion only results in further harm to those communities
in the long run. Peter Farb, for example, has commented on the paradox that
"intensification of production to feed an increased population leads to a
still greater increase in population."[238] Daniel Quinn has also focused on
this phenomenon, which he calls the "Food Race" (comparable, in terms of both
escalation and potential catastrophe, to the nuclear arms race).

Critics of this theory point out that, in the modern era, birth rates are
lowest in the developed nations, which also have the highest access to food.
In fact, some developed countries have both a diminishing population and an
abundant food supply. The United Nations projects that the population of 51
countries or areas, including Germany, Italy, Japan, and most of the states of
the former Soviet Union, is expected to be lower in 2050 than in 2005.[
_citation needed_ ] This shows that, limited to the scope of the population
living within a single given political boundary, particular human populations
do not always grow to match the available food supply. However, the global
population as a whole still grows in accordance with the total food supply and
many of these wealthier countries are major _exporters_ of food to poorer
populations, so that, "it is through exports from food-rich to food-poor areas
(Allaby, 1984; Pimentel et al., 1999) that the population growth in these
food-poor areas is further fueled."[230]

Regardless of criticisms against the theory that population is a function of
food availability, the human population is, on the global scale, undeniably
increasing,[239] as is the net quantity of human food produced — a pattern
that has been true for roughly 10,000 years, since the human development of
agriculture. The fact that some affluent countries demonstrate negative
population growth fails to discredit the theory as whole, since the world has
become a globalized system with food moving across national borders from areas
of abundance to areas of scarcity. Hopfenberg and Pimentel's findings support
both this[230] and Quinn's direct accusation that "First World farmers are
fueling the Third World population explosion."[240] Additionally, the
hypothesis is not so simplistic as to be rejected by any single case study, as
in Germany's recent population trends; clearly other factors are at work to
limit the population in wealthier areas: contraceptive access, educational
programs, cultural norms and, most influentially, differing economic realities
from nation to nation.

#### As a result of water deficits[edit]

Water deficits, which are already spurring heavy grain imports in numerous
smaller countries, may soon do the same in larger countries, such as China or
India, if technology is not used.[241] The water tables are falling in scores
of countries (including Northern China, the US, and India) owing to widespread
overdrafting beyond sustainable yields. Other countries affected include
Pakistan, Iran, and Mexico. This overdrafting is already leading to water
scarcity and cutbacks in grain harvest. Even with the overpumping of its
aquifers, China has developed a grain deficit. This effect has contributed in
driving grain prices upward. Most of the 3 billion people projected to be
added worldwide by mid-century will be born in countries already experiencing
water shortages. Desalination is also considered a viable and effective
solution to the problem of water shortages.[184][185]

### Land[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/Landusepiechart.png/250px-

Landusepiechart.png)

Percentages of the Earth's surface covered by water, dedicated to agriculture,
under conversion, intact, and used for human habitation. While humans occupy
only 0.05% of the Earth's total area, human effects are felt on over one-
quarter of the land.

The World Resources Institute states that "Agricultural conversion to
croplands and managed pastures has affected some 3.3 billion [hectares] –
roughly 26 percent of the land area. All totaled, agriculture has displaced
one-third of temperate and tropical forests and one-quarter of natural
grasslands."[242][243] Forty percent of the land area is under conversion and
fragmented; less than one quarter, primarily in the Arctic and the deserts,
remains intact.[244] Usable land may become less useful through salinization,
deforestation, desertification, erosion, and urban sprawl. Global warming may
cause flooding of many of the most productive agricultural areas.[245] The
development of energy sources may also require large areas, for example, the
building of hydroelectric dams. Thus, available useful land may become a
limiting factor. By most estimates, at least half of cultivable land is
already being farmed, and there are concerns that the remaining reserves are
greatly overestimated.[246]

High crop yield vegetables like potatoes and lettuce[ _citation needed_ ] use
less space on inedible plant parts, like stalks, husks, vines, and inedible
leaves. New varieties of selectively bred and hybrid plants have larger edible
parts (fruit, vegetable, grain) and smaller inedible parts; however, many of
these gains of agricultural technology are now historic, and new advances are
more difficult to achieve. With new technologies, it is possible to grow crops
on some marginal land under certain conditions. Aquaculture could
theoretically increase available area. Hydroponics and food from bacteria and
fungi, like quorn, may allow the growing of food without having to consider
land quality, climate, or even available sunlight, although such a process may
be very energy-intensive. Some argue that not all arable land will remain
productive if used for agriculture because some marginal land can only be made
to produce food by unsustainable practices like slash-and-burn agriculture.
Even with the modern techniques of agriculture, the sustainability of
production is in question.

Some countries, such as the United Arab Emirates and particularly the Emirate
of Dubai have constructed large artificial islands, or have created large dam
and dike systems, like the Netherlands, which reclaim land from the sea to
increase their total land area.[247][248] Some scientists have said that in
the future, densely populated cities will use vertical farming to grow food
inside skyscrapers.[249] The notion that space is limited has been decried by
skeptics, who point out that the Earth's population of roughly 6.8 billion
people could comfortably be housed an area comparable in size to the state of
Texas, in the United States (about 269,000 square miles or 696,706.80 square
kilometres).[250] However, the impact of humanity extends over a far greater
area than that required simply for housing.

### Fossil fuels[edit]

See also: Peak oil

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8f/Hubbert_peak_oil_plot.svg/220px-

Hubbert_peak_oil_plot.svg.png)

M. King Hubbert's prediction of world petroleum production rates. Modern
agriculture is totally reliant on petroleum energy.

Population optimists have been criticized for failing to take into account the
depletion of fossil fuels required for the production of fertilizers, tillage,
transportation, etc.[251] In his 1992 book _Earth in the Balance_ , Al Gore
wrote, "... it ought to be possible to establish a coordinated global program
to accomplish the strategic goal of completely eliminating the internal
combustion engine over, say, a twenty-five-year period..."[252] Approximately
half of the oil produced in the United States is refined into gasoline for use
in internal combustion engines.[253]

The report _Peaking of World Oil Production: Impacts, Mitigation, and Risk
Management_ , commonly referred to as the Hirsch report, was created by
request for the US Department of Energy and published in February 2005.[254]
Some information was updated in 2007.[255] It examined the time frame for the
occurrence of peak oil, the necessary mitigating actions, and the likely
impacts based on the timeliness of those actions. It concludes that world oil
peaking is going to happen, and will likely be abrupt. Initiating a mitigation
crash program 20 years before peaking appears to offer the possibility of
avoiding a world liquid fuels shortfall for the forecast period.

Optimists counter that fossil fuels will be sufficient until the development
and implementation of suitable replacement technologies—such as nuclear power
or various sources of renewable energy—occurs.[256] Methods of manufacturing
fertilizers from garbage, sewage, and agricultural waste by using thermal
depolymerization have been discovered.[257][258]

With increasing awareness about global warming, the question of peak oil has
become less relevant. According to many studies, about 80% of the remaining
fossil fuels must be left untouched because the bottleneck has shifted from
resource availability to the resource of absorbing the generated greenhouse
gases when burning fossil fuels.[259]

### Wealth and poverty[edit]

Main articles: Demographic transition and Income and fertility

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/Percentage_living_on_less_than_%241_per_day_1981-2001.png/220px-

Percentage_living_on_less_than_%241_per_day_1981-2001.png)

As the world's population has grown, the percentage of the world's population
living on less than $1 per day (adjusted for inflation) has halved in 20
years. The graph shows the 1981–2001 period.

The United Nations indicates that about 850 million people are malnourished or
starving,[145] and 1.1 billion people do not have access to safe drinking
water.[119] Since 1980, the global economy has grown by 380 percent, but the
number of people living on less than 5 US dollars a day increased by more than
1.1 billion.[260]

The UN Human Development Report of 1997 states: "During the last 15–20 years,
more than 100 developing countries, and several Eastern European countries,
have suffered from disastrous growth failures. The reductions in standard of
living have been deeper and more long-lasting than what was seen in the
industrialised countries during the depression in the 1930s. As a result, the
income for more than one billion people has fallen below the level that was
reached 10, 20 or 30 years ago". Similarly, although the proportion of
"starving" people in sub-Saharan Africa has decreased, the absolute number of
starving people has increased due to population growth. The percentage dropped
from 38% in 1970 to 33% in 1996 and was expected to be 30% by 2010.[199] But
the region's population roughly doubled between 1970 and 1996. To keep the
numbers of starving constant, the percentage would have dropped by more than
half.[175][261]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b6/CIA_WFB_TotFertilityRate-

GDP-Population_-_Simplified_2016.png/350px-CIA_WFB_TotFertilityRate-GDP-

Population_-_Simplified_2016.png)

Log-log graph of total fertility rate (TFR) vs. GDP (PPP) per capita with
population size shown as bubble area, for all countries having population
greater than 2 million (2016 estimates; 30 largest countries
bold).[262][263][264]

As of 2004, there were 108 countries in the world with more than five million
people. All of these in which women have, on the average, more than 4 children
in their lifetime, have a per capita GDP of less than $5000. Only in two
countries with per capita GDP above ~$15,000 do women have, on the average,
more than 2 children in their lifetime: these are Israel and Saudi Arabia,
with average lifetime births per woman between 2 and 4.

## Environment[edit]

“ | You know, when we first set up WWF, our objective was to save endangered
species from extinction. But we have failed completely; we haven’t managed to
save a single one. If only we had put all that money into condoms, we might
have done some good. | ”  
\---|---|---  
— Sir Peter Scott, Founder of the World Wide Fund for Nature, _Cosmos
Magazine_ , 2010[265]

Overpopulation has substantially adversely impacted the environment of Earth
starting at least as early as the 20th century.[156] According to the Global
Footprint Network, "today humanity uses the equivalent of 1.5 planets to
provide the resources we use and absorb our waste".[266] There are also
economic consequences of this environmental degradation in the form of
ecosystem services attrition.[267] Beyond the scientifically verifiable harm
to the environment, some assert the moral right of other species to simply
exist rather than become extinct. Environmental author Jeremy Rifkin has said
that "our burgeoning population and urban way of life have been purchased at
the expense of vast ecosystems and habitats. ... It's no accident that as we
celebrate the urbanization of the world, we are quickly approaching another
historic watershed: the disappearance of the wild."[268]

Says Peter Raven, former President of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) in their seminal work AAAS Atlas of Population &
Environment, "Where do we stand in our efforts to achieve a sustainable world?
Clearly, the past half century has been a traumatic one, as the collective
impact of human numbers, affluence (consumption per individual) and our
choices of technology continue to exploit rapidly an increasing proportion of
the world's resources at an unsustainable rate. ... During a remarkably short
period of time, we have lost a quarter of the world's topsoil and a fifth of
its agricultural land, altered the composition of the atmosphere profoundly,
and destroyed a major proportion of our forests and other natural habitats
without replacing them. Worst of all, we have driven the rate of biological
extinction, the permanent loss of species, up several hundred times beyond its
historical levels, and are threatened with the loss of a majority of all
species by the end of the 21st century."

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3c/Traffic_jam_on_Phu_Nhuan_district.JPG/220px-

Traffic_jam_on_Phu_Nhuan_district.JPG)

Traffic congestion in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam

Further, even in countries which have both large population growth and major
ecological problems, it is not necessarily true that curbing the population
growth will make a major contribution towards resolving all environmental
problems.[269] However, as developing countries with high populations become
more industrialized, pollution and consumption will invariably increase.

The Worldwatch Institute said in 2006 that the booming economies of China and
India are "planetary powers that are shaping the global biosphere". The report
states:

> The world's ecological capacity is simply insufficient to satisfy the
ambitions of China, India, Japan, Europe and the United States as well as the
aspirations of the rest of the world in a sustainable way.[270]

According to Worldwatch Institute, if China and India were to consume as much
resources per capita as the United States, in 2030 they would each require a
full planet Earth to meet their needs.[271] In the long term these effects can
lead to increased conflict over dwindling resources[272] and in the worst case
a Malthusian catastrophe.

Many studies link population growth with emissions and the effect of climate
change.[273][274]

## Warfare and conflict[edit]

It has been suggested[275] that overpopulation leads to increased levels of
tensions both between and within countries. Modern usage of the term
"lebensraum" supports the idea that overpopulation may promote warfare through
fear of resource scarcity and increasing numbers of youth lacking the
opportunity to engage in peaceful employment (the youth bulge theory).

### Criticism of this hypothesis[edit]

The hypothesis that population pressure causes increased warfare has been
recently criticized on empirical grounds. Two studies focusing on specific
historical societies and analyses of cross-cultural data have failed to find
positive correlation between population density and incidence of warfare.
Andrey Korotayev, in collaboration with Peter Turchin, has shown that such
negative results do not falsify the population-warfare hypothesis.[276]

Population and warfare are dynamical variables, and if their interaction
causes sustained oscillations, then we do not in general expect to find strong
correlation between the two variables measured at the same time (that is,
unlagged). Korotayev and Turchin have explored mathematically what the
dynamical patterns of interaction between population and warfare (focusing on
internal warfare) might be in both stateless and state societies. Next, they
have tested the model predictions in several empirical case studies: early
modern England, Han and Tang China, and the Roman Empire. Their empirical
results have supported the population-warfare theory: that there is a tendency
for population numbers and internal warfare intensity to oscillate with the
same period but shifted in phase (with warfare peaks following population
peaks).

Furthermore, they have demonstrated that in the agrarian societies the rates
of change of the two variables behave precisely as predicted by the theory:
population rate of change is negatively affected by warfare intensity, while
warfare rate of change is positively affected by population
density.[276][277][278]

## Proposed solutions and mitigation measures[edit]

“ | Given the current levels of violence by this culture against both humans
and the natural world, however, it's not possible to speak of reductions in
population and consumption that do not involve violence and privation, not
because the reductions themselves would necessarily involve violence, but
because violence and privation have become the default of our culture. | ”  
\---|---|---  
— Derrick Jensen, _Endgame_ , 2006[279]

Several solutions and mitigation measures have the potential to reduce
overpopulation. Some solutions are to be applied on a global planetary level
(e.g., via UN resolutions), while some on a country or state government
organization level, and some on a family or an individual level. Some of the
proposed mitigations aim to help implement new social, cultural, behavioral
and political norms to replace or significantly modify current norms.

For example, in societies like China, the government has put policies in place
that regulate the number of children allowed to a couple. Other societies have
implemented social marketing strategies in order to educate the public on
overpopulation effects. "The intervention can be widespread and done at a low
cost. A variety of print materials (flyers, brochures, fact sheets, stickers)
needs to be produced and distributed throughout the communities such as at
local places of worship, sporting events, local food markets, schools and at
car parks (taxis / bus stands)."[280]

Such prompts work to introduce the problem so that new or modified social
norms are easier to implement. Certain government policies are making it
easier and more socially acceptable to use contraception and abortion methods.
An example of a country whose laws and norms are hindering the global effort
to slow population growth is Afghanistan. "The approval by Afghan President
Hamid Karzai of the Shia Personal Status Law in March 2009 effectively
destroyed Shia women's rights and freedoms in Afghanistan. Under this law,
women have no right to deny their husbands sex unless they are ill, and can be
denied food if they do."[281]

Scientists and technologists including e.g. Huesemann and Ehrlich caution that
science and technology, as currently practiced, cannot solve the serious
problems global human society faces, and that a cultural-social-political
shift is needed to reorient science and technology in a more socially
responsible and environmentally sustainable direction.[282] [283]

### Reducing overpopulation[edit]

Main article: Human population planning

#### Education and empowerment[edit]

One option is to focus on education about overpopulation, family planning, and
birth control methods, and to make birth-control devices like male and female
condoms, contraceptive pills and intrauterine devices easily available.
Worldwide, nearly 40% of pregnancies are unintended (some 80 million
unintended pregnancies each year).[284] An estimated 350 million women in the
poorest countries of the world either did not want their last child, do not
want another child or want to space their pregnancies, but they lack access to
information, affordable means and services to determine the size and spacing
of their families. In the United States, in 2001, almost half of pregnancies
were unintended.[285] In the developing world, some 514,000 women die annually
of complications from pregnancy and abortion,[286] with 86% of these deaths
occurring in the sub-Saharan Africa region and South Asia.[287] Additionally,
8 million infants die, many because of malnutrition or preventable diseases,
especially from lack of access to clean drinking water.[288]

Women's rights and their reproductive rights in particular are issues regarded
to have vital importance in the debate.[289]

“ | The only ray of hope I can see – and it's not much – is that wherever
women are put in control of their lives, both politically and socially, where
medical facilities allow them to deal with birth control and where their
husbands allow them to make those decisions, birth rate falls. Women don't
want to have 12 kids of whom nine will die. | ”  
\---|---|---  
— David Attenborough, _The Independent_ , 2012[290]

Egypt announced a program to reduce its overpopulation by family planning
education and putting women in the workforce. It was announced in June 2008 by
the Minister of Health and Population, and the government has set aside 480
million Egyptian pounds (about $90 million US) for the program.[291]

Several scientists (including e.g. Paul and Anne Ehrlich and Gretchen Daily)
proposed that humanity should work at stabilizing its absolute numbers, as a
starting point towards beginning the process of reducing the total numbers.
They suggested the following solutions and policies: following a small-family-
size socio-cultural-behavioral norm worldwide (especially one-child-per-family
ethos), and providing contraception to all along with proper education on its
use and benefits (while providing access to safe, legal abortion as a backup
to contraception), combined with a significantly more equitable distribution
of resources globally.[292][293] In the book "Evolution Science and Ethics in
the Third Millennium", Robert Cliquet and Dragana Avramov also point out that
the one (and a half)-child-per-family ethos is certainly a good one and that
we should reduce the world population so that it is no larger than 1 to 3
billion.[294]

Business magnate Ted Turner proposed a "voluntary, non-imposed" one-child-per-
family cultural norm. A "pledge two or fewer" campaign is run by Population
Matters (a UK population concern organisation), in which people are encouraged
to limit themselves to small family size.

Population planning that is intended to reduce population size or growth rate
may promote or enforce one or more of the following practices, although there
are other methods as well:

  * Greater and better access to contraception
  * Reducing infant mortality so that parents do not need to have many children to ensure at least some survive to adulthood.[295]
  * Improving the status of women in order to facilitate a departure from traditional sexual division of labour.
  * One-Child and Two-Child policies, and other policies restricting or discouraging births directly.
  * Family planning[296]
  * Creating small family "role models"[296]
  * Tighter immigration restrictions

The method(s) chosen can be strongly influenced by the cultural and religious
beliefs of community members.

#### Birth regulations[edit]

Overpopulation can be mitigated by birth control; some nations, like the
People's Republic of China, use strict measures to reduce birth rates.
Religious and ideological opposition to birth control has been cited as a
factor contributing to overpopulation and poverty.[297]

Sanjay Gandhi, son of late Prime Minister of India Indira Gandhi, implemented
a forced sterilization programme between 1975 and 1977. Officially, men with
two children or more had to submit to sterilization, but there was a greater
focus on sterilizing women than sterilizing men. Some unmarried young men and
political opponents may also have been sterilized[ _citation needed_ ]. This
program is still remembered and criticized in India, and is blamed for
creating a public aversion to family planning, which hampered government
programs for decades.[298]

Urban designer Michael E. Arth has proposed a "choice-based, marketable birth
license plan" he calls "birth credits".[299] Birth credits would allow any
woman to have as many children as she wants, as long as she buys a license for
any children beyond an average allotment that would result in zero population
growth. If that allotment was determined to be one child, for example, then
the first child would be free, and the market would determine what the license
fee for each additional child would cost. Extra credits would expire after a
certain time, so these credits could not be hoarded by speculators. The actual
cost of the credits would only be a fraction of the actual cost of having and
raising a child, so the credits would serve more as a wake-up call to women
who might otherwise produce children without seriously considering the long
term consequences to themselves or society.[300]

![Comparing Population Growth By Country's Development,

2002.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c4/Comparing_Population_Growth_By_Country%27s_Development%2C_2002.svg/350px-

Comparing_Population_Growth_By_Country%27s_Development%2C_2002.svg.png)

Another choice-based approach, similar to Arth's birth credits, is financial
compensation or other benefits (free goods and/or services) by the state (or
state-owned companies) offered to people who voluntarily undergo
sterilization. Such compensation has been offered in the past by the
government of India.[301]

In 2014 the United Nations estimated there is an 80% likelihood that the
world's population will be between 9.6 billion and 12.3 billion by 2100. Most
of the world's expected population increase will be in Africa and southern
Asia. Africa's population is expected to rise from the current one billion to
four billion by 2100, and Asia could add another billion in the same
period.[302] Because the median age of Africans is relatively low (e.g. in
Uganda it is 15 years old) birth credits would have to limit fertility to one
child per two women to reach the levels of developed countries immediately.
For countries with a wide base in their population pyramid it will take a
generation for the people who are of child-bearing age to have their
families.[300] An example of demographic momentum is China, which added
perhaps 400,000 more people after its one-child policy was enacted. Arth has
suggested that the focus should be on the developed countries and that some
combination of birth credits and additional compensation supplied by the
developed countries could rapidly lead to zero population growth while also
quickly raising the standard of living in developing countries.[300]

### Extraterrestrial settlement[edit]

Main article: Space colonization

See also: Space advocacy and Steady-state economy § Pushing some of the
terrestrial limits into outer space

Various scientists and science fiction authors have contemplated that
overpopulation on Earth may be remedied in the future by the use of
extraterrestrial settlements. In the 1970s, Gerard K. O'Neill suggested
building space habitats that could support 30,000 times the carrying capacity
of Earth using just the asteroid belt, and that the Solar System as a whole
could sustain current population growth rates for a thousand years.[303]
Marshall Savage (1992, 1994) has projected a human population of five
quintillion (5 x 1018) throughout the Solar System by 3000, with the majority
in the asteroid belt.[304] Freeman Dyson (1999) favours the Kuiper belt as the
future home of humanity, suggesting this could happen within a few
centuries.[305] In _Mining the Sky_ , John S. Lewis suggests that the
resources of the solar system could support 10 quadrillion (1016) people. In
an interview, Stephen Hawking claimed that overpopulation is a threat to human
existence and "our only chance of long-term survival is not to remain inward
looking on planet Earth but to spread out into space."[306]

K. Eric Drexler, famous inventor of the futuristic concept of molecular
nanotechnology, has suggested in _Engines of Creation_ that colonizing space
will mean breaking the Malthusian limits to growth for the human species.

It may be possible for other parts of the Solar System to be inhabited by
humanity at some point in the future. Geoffrey Landis of NASA's Glenn Research
Center in particular has pointed out that "[at] cloud-top level, Venus is the
paradise planet", as one could construct aerostat habitats and floating cities
there easily, based on the concept that breathable air is a lifting gas in the
dense Venusian atmosphere. Venus would, like also Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune,
in the upper layers of their atmospheres, even afford a gravitation almost
exactly as strong as that on Earth ( _see_ colonization of Venus).[307]

Many science fiction authors, including Carl Sagan, Arthur C. Clarke,[308] and
Isaac Asimov,[309] have argued that shipping any excess population into space
is not a viable solution to human overpopulation. According to Clarke, "the
population battle must be fought or won here on Earth".[308] The problem for
these authors is not the lack of resources in space (as shown in books such as
_Mining the Sky_ [310] ), but the physical impracticality of shipping vast
numbers of people into space to "solve" overpopulation on Earth. However,
Gerard K. O'Neill's calculations show that Earth could offload all new
population growth with a launch services industry about the same size as the
current airline industry.[311]

The StarTram concept, by James R. Powell (the co-inventor of maglev transport)
and others, envisions a capability to send up to 4 million people a decade to
space per facility.[312] A hypothetical extraterrestrial colony could
potentially grow by reproduction only (i.e., without any immigration), with
all of the inhabitants being the direct descendants of the original colonists.

### Urbanization[edit]

Despite the increase in population density within cities (and the emergence of
megacities), UN Habitat states in its reports that urbanization may be the
best compromise in the face of global population growth.[313] Cities
concentrate human activity within limited areas, limiting the breadth of
environmental damage.[314] But this mitigating influence can only be achieved
if urban planning is significantly improved[315] and city services are
properly maintained.

## Graph gallery[edit]

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/Afghanistanpop.svg/120px-Afghanistanpop.svg.png)

Afghanistan shows a classic youth bulge.

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7e/Angola_population_pyramid_2005.png/120px-Angola_population_pyramid_2005.png)

Angola shows the same, even more pronounced.

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/China_population_pyramid_2005.png/120px-China_population_pyramid_2005.png)

China had an extreme youth bulge until the 1960s, when it sharply curbed
partly as an effect of the one-child policy.

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/20/Uspop.svg/120px-Uspop.svg.png)

Compare the population pyramid of the USA which was bulging until the 1960s
and has steadily slimmed since.

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/26/LibyaPopulation2011.jpg/120px-LibyaPopulation2011.jpg)

A population pyramid based on the 2011 Libyan population.

## See also[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Human overpopulation**_  
\---|---

  * Accelerating change (population growth is a factor)
  * Antinatalism
  * Behavioral sink, a rat over-population experiment
  * Demographic trap
  * Earth system science
  * Ethnic bioweapon
  * Eugenics
  * Fertility and intelligence
  * Gaia hypothesis
  * Global catastrophic risk
  * Human migration
  * Human population planning
  * List of countries and dependencies by population
  * List of organisations campaigning for population stabilisation
  * List of people that have expressed views relating to overpopulation as a problem
  * List of population concern organizations
  * Malthusianism
  * Malthusian trap
  * Overexploitation
  * Overshoot (population)
  * People smuggling
  * Planetary boundaries
  * Population ageing
  * Reserve army of labour
  * Societal collapse
  * Tragedy of the commons
  * Voluntary Human Extinction Movement

In documentary and art films

  * _Koyaanisqatsi_
  * _What a Way to Go: Life at the End of Empire_

In fiction

  * Overpopulation fiction (category)

Other

  * Overpopulation in domestic pets
  * Political demography

## References[edit]

  1. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R. Ehrlich  & Anne H. (1990). _The population explosion_. London: Hutchinson. pp. 39–40. ISBN 978-0091745516. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "When is an area overpopulated? When its population cannot be maintained without rapidly depleting nonrenewable resources [39] (or converting renewable resources into nonrenewable ones) and without decreasing the capacity of the environment to support the population. In short, if the long-term carrying capacity of an area is clearly being degraded by its current human occupants, that area is overpopulated."
  2. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R; Ehrlich, Anne H (2004), _One with Nineveh: Politics, Consumption, and the Human Future_ , Island Press/Shearwater Books, pp. 76–180, 256
  3. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R; Ehrlich, Anne H (1991), _Healing the Planet: Strategies for Resolving the Environmental Crisis_ , Addison-Wesley Books, pp. 6–8, 12, 75, 96, 241
  4. **^** "Global food crisis looms as climate change and population growth strip fertile land Archived 29 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Guardian.co.uk (2007-08-31).
  5. **^** "Coping with the Anthropocene". _Phys.org_. 17 March 2015. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
  6. **^** Vaughan, Adam (7 January 2016). "Human impact has pushed Earth into the Anthropocene, scientists say". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
  7. **^** Dimick, Dennis (21 September 2014). "As World's Population Booms, Will Its Resources Be Enough for Us?". _National Geographic_. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
  8. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 2008-11-03.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  9. **^** Rosling, Hans (2018). _Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong About the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think_. Sceptre. ISBN 9781473637467.
  10. **^** _population.un.org_ (PDF) https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/PopFacts_2017-3_The-end-of-high-fertility.pdf. Retrieved 9 December 2018. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
  11. **^** _population.un.org_ (PDF) https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2017_KeyFindings.pdf. Retrieved 9 December 2018. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
  12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "BBC News – Population seven billion: UN sets out challenges". BBC. 22 May 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zinkina J., Korotayev A. Explosive Population Growth in Tropical Africa: Crucial Omission in Development Forecasts (Emerging Risks and Way Out). _World Futures_ 70/2 (2014): 120–139 Archived 23 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
  14. **^** http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/
  15. **^** "U.S. and World Population Clock". Retrieved 5 March 2016.
  16. **^** "Population seven billion: UN sets out challenges". BBC. 26 October 2011. Retrieved 27 October 2011.
  17. **^** Coleman, Jasmine (31 October 2011). "World's 'seven billionth baby' is born". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved 31 October 2011.
  18. **^** "7 billion people is a 'serious challenge '".
  19. **^** "World Population Clock – Worldometers". Worldometers.info. Retrieved 1 August 2010.
  20. **^** "International Data Base (IDB) – World Population". Census.gov. 28 June 2010. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010. Retrieved 1 August 2010.
  21. **^** "World Population Prospects:The 2008 Revision" (PDF). Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. June 2009.
  22. **^** "World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100". Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. June 2017.
  23. **^** "joint statement by fifty-eight of the world's scientific academies". Archived from the original on 10 February 2010.
  24. **^** WRIGHT, OLIVER. "Britain's food self-sufficiency at risk from reliance on overseas imports of fruit and vegetables that could be produced at home". _independent.co.uk_. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
  25. **^** Fred Pearce (13 April 2009). "Consumption Dwarfs Population as Main Environmental Threat". Yale University. Retrieved 12 November 2012.
  26. **^** Jason Hickel (29 January 2019). Bill Gates says poverty is decreasing. He couldn’t be more wrong. _The Guardian._ Retrieved 30 January 2019.
  27. **^** Jones, Campbell; Parker, Martin; Ten Bos, Rene (2005). _For Business Ethics_. Routledge. p. 101. ISBN 978-0415311359. "Critics of neoliberalism have therefore looked at the evidence that documents the results of this great experiment of the past 30 years, in which many markets have been set free. Looking at the evidence, we can see that the total amount of global trade has increased significantly, but that global poverty has increased, with more today living in abject poverty than before neoliberalism."
  28. **^** Haymes, Stephen N.; de Haymes, María V.; Miller, Reuben J., eds. (2015). _The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States_. London and New York: Routledge. pp. 1  & 2\. ISBN 978 0 41 567344 0.
  29. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "The short history of global living conditions and why it matters that we know it". _Our World in Data_. Retrieved 24 September 2018.
  30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Does population growth lead to hunger and famine?". _Our World in Data_. Retrieved 24 September 2018.
  31. **^** Roberts, R.E. (1924). The Theology of Tertullian, Chapter 5 (pp. 79–119) Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Tertullian.org (2001-07-14). Retrieved on 2012-08-29.
  32. **^** George Moffet, _Critical Masses: The Global Population Challenge_ (1994): "[the world's population remained] capped by birth rates and death rates locked in a seemingly permanent equilibrium."
  33. **^** "VII, paragraph 10, lines 8–10". _An Essay on the Principle of Population_. London: J. Johnson. 1798. " The power of population is so superior to the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man, that premature death must in some shape or other visit the human race"
  34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gregory Claeys: The "Survival of the Fittest" and the Origins of Social Darwinism, in: Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 61, No. 2, 2002, p. 223–240
  35. **^** Cormac Ó Gráda: Famine. A Short History, Princeton University Press 2009, ISBN 978-0-691-12237-3 (pp. 20, 203–206)
  36. **^** Carrington, Damien (18 September 2014). "World population to hit 11bn in 2100 – with 70% chance of continuous rise". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 19 December 2016.
  37. **^** Gerland, P.; Raftery, A. E.; Ev Ikova, H.; Li, N.; Gu, D.; Spoorenberg, T.; Alkema, L.; Fosdick, B. K.; Chunn, J.; Lalic, N.; Bay, G.; Buettner, T.; Heilig, G. K.; Wilmoth, J. (18 September 2014). "World population stabilization unlikely this century". _Science_. AAAS. **346** (6206): 234–7. Bibcode:2014Sci...346..234G. doi:10.1126/science.1257469. ISSN 1095-9203. PMC 4230924. PMID 25301627.
  38. **^** World population to keep growing this century, hit 11 billion by 2100 Archived 4 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. UWToday. 18 September 2014
  39. **^** Harris, Paul (22 October 2011). "Population of world 'could grow to 15bn by 2100'". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 31 August 2016.
  40. **^** Moody, Oliver (31 August 2017). "Overpopulation is the biggest threat to mankind, Nobel laureates say". _The Times_. Retrieved 2 September 2017.
  41. **^** Ripple WJ, Wolf C, Newsome TM, Galetti M, Alamgir M, Crist E, Mahmoud MI, Laurance WF (13 November 2017). "World Scientists' Warning to Humanity: A Second Notice" (PDF). _BioScience_. **67** (12): 1026–1028. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix125.
  42. **^** "Current World Population". Worldometers. Retrieved 18 April 2014.
  43. **^** "A Brief Introduction to the History of Climate". Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
  44. **^** "The Neolithic Agricultural Revolution" (PDF). Council For Economic Education. p. 46. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
  45. **^** "What was the population of the world in the past?", World-o-meters
  46. **^** "Plague, Plague Information, Black Death Facts, News, Photos". National Geographic. Retrieved 3 November 2008.
  47. **^** " _Epidemics and pandemics: their impacts on human history_ ". J. N. Hays (2005). p.46. ISBN 1-85109-658-2
  48. **^** "Historical Estimates of World Population". Census.gov. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2008.
  49. **^** "History of Europe – Demographic and agricultural growth". Encyclopædia Britannica.
  50. **^** "Europe's Black Death is a history lesson in human tragedy – and economic renewal". TIME Europe. 17 July 2000, VOL. 156 NO. 3
  51. **^** "History of Europe – Demographics". Encyclopædia Britannica.
  52. **^** "China's Population: Readings and Maps". Columbia University, East Asian Curriculum Project.
  53. **^** "Ming Dynasty: Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2009". Archived from the original on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 15 August 2010.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  54. **^** "Qing China's Internal Crisis: Land Shortage, Famine, Rural Poverty". Asia for Educators, Columbia University.
  55. **^** J. N. Hays (1998). " _The burdens of disease: epidemics and human response in western history._ ". p 72. ISBN 0-8135-2528-4
  56. **^** "The Story Of... Smallpox – and other Deadly Eurasian Germs". Public Broadcasting Service (PBS).
  57. **^** "Stacy Goodling, "Effects of European Diseases on the Inhabitants of the New World" Archived 10 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine"
  58. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "International Programs". _census.gov_. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013.
  59. **^** "modelling exponential growth" (PDF). _esrl.noaa.gov_.
  60. **^** Benatar, David (2008). _Better Never to Have Been: The Harm of Coming into Existence_. Oxford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0199549269.
  61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The limits of a Green Revolution?". BBC News. 29 March 2007.
  62. **^** "United Nations, United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2011): World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision". Archived from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2012.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  63. **^** Widjojo Nitisastro (2006). "Population Trends in Indonesia". Equinox Publishing. p. 268. ISBN 979-3780-43-6. Retrieved 6 November 2011.
  64. **^** "Central Bureau of Statistics: _Census 2010_ " (PDF) (in Indonesian). Badan Pusat Statistik. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 17 January 2011.
  65. **^** "Census Population" (PDF). _Census of India_. Ministry of Finance India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2008.
  66. **^** "Provisional Population Totals – Census 2011". _Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner_. Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 2011. Retrieved 29 March 2011.
  67. **^** "Transitions in World Population Archived 9 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine" (PDF). Population Reference Bureau (PRB).
  68. **^** Akin L. Mabogunje (4 May 1995). "The Environmental Challenges In Sub Saharan Africa". African Technology Forum. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
  69. **^** "Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)". CIA. Retrieved 5 March 2010.
  70. **^** "Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation – Chad". World Food Program. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
  71. **^** Lamble, Lucy (23 April 2018). "With 250 babies born each minute, how many people can the Earth sustain?". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
  72. **^** "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision" (PDF). United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2017. Retrieved 2 December 2018.
  73. **^** "World Population Clock – Worldometers". Worldometers.info. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  74. **^** "International Data Base (IDB) – World Population". Census.gov. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  75. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2009.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations". _esa.un.org_. Retrieved 29 November 2017.
  77. **^** Walter Greiling: Wie werden wir leben? ( _"How are we going to live?"_ ) Econ publishers, Munich 1954
  78. **^** "People and Society:WORLD:Population growth rate". _The World Factbook_. Retrieved 4 March 2012.
  79. **^** "World Population Prospects". United Nations. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  80. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United Nations Population Division". Retrieved 6 March 2018.[ _specify_ ]
  81. **^** _WORLD POPULATION TO 2300_ (PDF). United Nations. 2004. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  82. **^** "US Census Bureau estimates and news release.of AUG. 14, 2008". Census.gov. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  83. **^** Pamela Constable, ‘A disaster in the making’: Pakistan’s population surges to 207.7 million (September 2017), _The Washington Post_
  84. **^** "Principal Agglomerations of the World". Citypopulation.de. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  85. **^** Lewis, Mark (11 June 2007). "Megacities Of The Future". _Forbes_. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  86. **^** "68% of the world population projected to live in urban areas by 2050, says UN". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 16 March 2018. Retrieved 9 November 2018.
  87. **^** "Nigeria: Lagos, the mega-city of slums". Archived from the original on 18 February 2011.
  88. **^** Whitehouse, David (19 May 2005). "Half of humanity set to go urban". BBC News. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  89. **^** "Planet of Slums – The Third World's Megacities". Blackcommentator.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  90. **^** "The world goes to town". _The Economist_. 3 May 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  91. **^** "Planet of Slums by Mike Davis". Atimes.com. 20 May 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  92. **^** "Lagos, Nigeria facts". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 12 July 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  93. **^** english@peopledaily.com.cn (16 September 2004). "China's urban population to reach 800 to 900 million by 2020: expert". _People's Daily_. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  94. **^** Huesemann, M.H., and J.A. Huesemann (2011). _Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment_ , "Unintended Consequences of Industrial Agriculture", New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, Canada, pp. 23–25.
  95. **^** _Techno-Fix: Why Technology Won't Save Us Or the Environment By Michael Huesemann, Joyce Huesemann_. New Society Publishers. p. 73. "despite the fact that hunger and starvation may not be due to food shortages but rather the result of various economic and political factors"
  96. **^** McKeown, T. (1988). _The Origins of Human Disease_ , Basil Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp.60.
  97. **^** "Poverty Causes Population Growth Causes Poverty – The Donella Meadows Project". _donellameadows.org_. Retrieved 17 September 2017.
  98. **^** http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/family/trendsContraceptiveUse2015Report.pdf
  99. **^** "Agriculture and Human Population Growth". CK-12.
  100. **^** Ceballos, G.; Ehrlich, A. H.; Ehrlich, P. R. (2015). _The Annihilation of Nature: Human Extinction of Birds and Mammals_. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 146 ISBN 1421417189
  101. **^** Myrskylä, M.; Kohler, H. P.; Billari, F. C. (2009). "Advances in development reverse fertility declines". _Nature_. **460** (7256): 741–743. Bibcode:2009Natur.460..741M. doi:10.1038/nature08230. PMID 19661915.
  102. **^** King, M.; Elliott, C. (1996). "Averting a world food shortage: Tighten your belts for CAIRO II". _BMJ_. **313** (7063): 995–997. doi:10.1136/bmj.313.7063.995. PMC 2352328. PMID 8892423.
  103. **^** "World Resources Institute". Earthtrends.wri.org. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  104. **^** Morales, Alex (24 October 2006). "Canada". Bloomberg. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  105. **^** "WWF – Living Planet Report 2006". Panda.org. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  106. **^** "WWF LIving planet report". Panda.org. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  107. **^** Ecological Footprint Atlas 2009, Global Footprint Network, https://www.footprintnetwork.org/atlas
  108. **^** Martin, Roger (2010). "Stopping at two children is better for the planet". BBC HARDtalk. Interviewed by Carrie Gracie
  109. **^** Carrington, Damian (30 September 2014). "Earth has lost half of its wildlife in the past 40 years, says WWF". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
  110. **^** "Publications – Global Footprint Network". Retrieved 17 September 2017.
  111. **^** Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh and Harmen Verbruggen (1999). "Spatial sustainability, trade and indicators: an evaluation of the 'ecological footprint'" (PDF). _Ecological Economics_. **29** (1): 61–72. doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(99)00032-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2007.
  112. **^** "Planning and Markets: Peter Gordon and Harry W. Richardson". Pam.usc.edu. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  113. **^** Ryerson, W. F. (2010). "Population, The Multiplier of Everything Else". In McKibben, D (ed.). _The Post Carbon Reader: Managing the 21st Century Sustainability Crisis_. Watershed Media. ISBN 978-0-9709500-6-2
  114. **^** Brown, L. R. (2012). _World on the Edge_. Earth Policy Institute. Norton. ISBN 9781136540752.
  115. **^** David Pimentel; Mario Giampietro (21 November 1994). FOOD, LAND, POPULATION and the U.S. ECONOMY (Report). Washington, D.C.: Carrying Capacity Network. Retrieved 7 September 2014.
  116. **^** "Eating Fossil Fuels | EnergyBulletin.net". Dieoff.org. 21 November 1994. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  117. **^** Cohen, J.E. (1995). _How many people can the earth support?_ W.W. Norton  & Company, New York, NY, USA.
  118. **^** Van Den Bergh, Jeroen C. J. M.; Rietveld, Piet (2004). "Reconsidering the Limits to World Population: Meta-analysis and Meta-prediction". _BioScience_. **54** (3): 195. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2004)054[0195:RTLTWP]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0006-3568.
  119. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Shiklomanov, I. A. (2000). "Appraisal and Assessment of World Water Resources". _Water International_. **25** : 11–32. doi:10.1080/02508060008686794.
  120. **^** "French-run water plant launched in Israel". Archived from the original on 13 December 2009.
  121. **^** "Black  & Veatch-Designed Desalination Plant Wins Global Water Distinction". Archived from the original on 24 March 2010.
  122. **^** Hubbert, M.K. _Techniques of Prediction as Applied to Production of Oil and Gas_ , US Department of Commerce, NBS Special Publication 631, May 1982
  123. **^** _International Energy Outlook 2000_ , Energy Information Administration, Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, D.C. (2000)
  124. **^** "The world in 2050:Impact of global growth on carbon emissions". Pwc.com. 30 October 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  125. **^** Wynes, Seth; Nicholas, Kimberly A. (28 November 2017). "The climate mitigation gap: education and government recommendations miss the most effective individual actions". _Environmental Research Letters_. **12** (7): 074024. Bibcode:2017ERL....12g4024W. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7541 - via Institute of Physics.
  126. **^** UNEP, _Global Environmental Outlook 2000_ , Earthscan Publications, London, UK (1999)
  127. **^** Polgreen, Lydia (11 February 2007). "Trees and crops reclaim desert in Niger". _International Herald Tribune_. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  128. **^** Leakey, Richard and Roger Lewin, 1996, _The Sixth Extinction : Patterns of Life and the Future of Humankind_ , Anchor, ISBN 0-385-46809-1
  129. **^** Humans Are Causing the Sixth Mass Extinction in the Earth's History, Says Study. _Vice._ 23 June 2015. See also: Ceballos, Gerardo; Ehrlich, Paul R.; Barnosky, Anthony D.; García, Andrés; Pringle, Robert M.; Palmer, Todd M. (2015). "Accelerated modern human–induced species losses: Entering the sixth mass extinction". _Science Advances_. **1** (5): e1400253. Bibcode:2015SciA....1E0253C. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1400253.
  130. **^** "Human Population Growth and Extinction". Center for Biological Diversity.
  131. **^** Pimm, S. L.; Jenkins, C. N.; Abell, R.; Brooks, T. M.; Gittleman, J. L.; Joppa, L. N.; Raven, P. H.; Roberts, C. M.; Sexton, J. O. (30 May 2014). "The biodiversity of species and their rates of extinction, distribution, and protection" (PDF). _Science_. **344** (6187): 1246752. doi:10.1126/science.1246752. Retrieved 15 December 2016. "The overarching driver of species extinction is human population growth and increasing per capita consumption."
  132. **^** Ceballos, Gerardo; Ehrlich, Paul R; Dirzo, Rodolfo (23 May 2017). "Biological annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass extinction signaled by vertebrate population losses and declines". _PNAS_. **114** (30): E6089–E6096. doi:10.1073/pnas.1704949114. PMC 5544311. PMID 28696295. " Much less frequently mentioned are, however, the ultimate drivers of those immediate causes of biotic destruction, namely, human overpopulation and continued population growth, and overconsumption, especially by the rich. These drivers, all of which trace to the fiction that perpetual growth can occur on a finite planet, are themselves increasing rapidly."
  133. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pimm, Stuart L.; Russell, Gareth J.; Gittleman, John L.; Brooks, Thomas M. (1995). "The Future of Biodiversity". _Science_. **269** (5222): 347–350. Bibcode:1995Sci...269..347P. doi:10.1126/science.269.5222.347.
  134. **^** "IUCN Red List" (PDF). Archived from the original on 6 March 2009. Retrieved 30 September 2009.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  135. **^** Sahney, S., Benton, M.J. and Ferry, P.A. (2010). "Links between global taxonomic diversity, ecological diversity and the expansion of vertebrates on land". _Biology Letters_. **6** (4): 544–547. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2009.1024. PMC 2936204. PMID 20106856. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  136. **^** "Citizens arrest Archived 27 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine". The Guardian. 11 July 2007.
  137. **^** "Population Bomb Author's Fix For Next Extinction: Educate Women Archived 10 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine". _Scientific American_. 12 August 2008.
  138. **^** Sutter, John D. (12 December 2016). "How to stop the sixth mass extinction". _CNN_. Retrieved 19 December 2016.
  139. **^** Watts, Jonathan (6 May 2019). "Human society under urgent threat from loss of Earth's natural life". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 18 May 2019.
  140. **^** We Are Breeding Ourselves to Extinction. Chris Hedges for Truthdig. March 8, 2009
  141. **^** U.S. National Research Council, Commission on the Science of Climate Change, Washington, D.C. (2001)
  142. **^** Image:Infant mortality vs.jpg
  143. **^** " "Emerging Infectious Diseases" by Mark E.J. Woolhouse and Sonya Gowtage-Sequeria". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  144. **^** "WHO Infectious Diseases Report". Who.int. Archived from the original on 20 November 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  145. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2001). Food Insecurity: When People Live With Hunger and Fear Starvation. The State of Food insecurity in the World 2001 Archived 1 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. FAO, ISBN 92-5-104628-X
  146. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Williams, Walter (1999-02-24). Population control nonsense Archived 15 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine. jewishworldreview.com
  147. **^** McGranahan, G.; Lewin, S.; Fransen, T.; Hunt, C.; Kjellén, M.; Pretty, J.; Stephens, C.; Virgin, I. (2000). "News and notes: Environmental change and human health in countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific". _Global Change and Human Health_. **1** : 9. doi:10.1023/A:1011567429284.
  148. **^** "Wastewater Pollution in China". Dbc.uci.edu. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  149. **^** "Clean water could save millions of lives". Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2014.
  150. **^** American Council for the United Nations University (2002)
  151. **^** Heidelberger Institut fur International Konfliktforschung, _Konfliktbarometer 2003: 12. Jarlickhe Konfliktanalyse_ University of Heidelberg, Germany (2004)
  152. **^** Huxley, Aldous. "BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED: overpopulation". Retrieved 9 July 2014. (A non-fiction book, with the entire book focused on the effects of human overpopulation on human affairs including both societal and individual concerns.)
  153. **^** "People and Planet speech". Royal Society of Arts.
  154. **^** David Attenborough – Humans are plague on Earth Archived 20 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine. _The Telegraph._ 22 January 2013.
  155. **^** Wilson, E.O. (2002). _The Future of Life_ , Vintage ISBN 0-679-76811-4
  156. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Ron Nielsen, _The Little Green Handbook: Seven Trends Shaping the Future of Our Planet_ , Picador, New York (2006) ISBN 978-0-312-42581-4
  157. **^** Pentti Linkola, "Can Life Prevail?", Arktos Media, 2nd Revised ed. 2011. pp. 120–121. ISBN 1907166637.
  158. **^** McKie, Robin. Biologists say half of all species could be extinct by end of century (February 2017), _The Guardian_
  159. **^** Sowell, Thomas (1998-02-12). Julian Simon, combatant in a 200-year war. jewishworldreview.com
  160. **^** "Census intensifies concern in Cairo over soaring population".
  161. **^** "Another Inconvenient Truth: The World's Growing Population Poses a Malthusian Dilemma Archived 25 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine". Scientific American (2009-10-02).
  162. **^** Bashford, Alison. "Population, Geopolitics, and International Organizations in the Mid Twentieth Century." Journal of World History 19.3 (2008): 327–347. Humanities Source Database. Web. 9 Nov 2013.
  163. **^** David Biello (26 September 2012). "Will Humanity Face a Carbohydrate Shortage?". Scientific American. Retrieved 29 April 2014.
  164. **^** "U.S. and World Population Clock". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 29 April 2014.
  165. **^** David Pimentel, et al. "Will Limits of the Earth's Resources Control Human Numbers?" Archived 10 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Dieoff.org
  166. **^** Lester R. Brown, Gary Gardner, Brian Halweil (September 1998). Worldwatch Paper #143: Beyond Malthus: Sixteen Dimensions of the Population Problem Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Worldwatch Institute, ISBN 1-878071-45-9
  167. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2014-07-16.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  168. **^** "Earth's natural wealth: an audit". Environment.newscientist.com. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  169. **^** "Dominic Lawson: The population timebomb is a myth The doom-sayers are becoming more fashionable just as experts are coming to the view it has all been one giant false alarm". _The Independent_. UK. 18 January 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  170. **^** Post a Comment. "Misleading Math about the Earth: Scientific American". Sciam.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  171. **^** "NASA Earth Science Data and Services: Checking Earth's Vital Signs". Nasadaacs.eos.nasa.gov. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  172. **^** "Ecosystem Change: Scientific Facts on Ecosystem Change". Greenfacts.org. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  173. **^** "USGS OFR 02-349: Human Impact on the Planet: An Earth Science Perspective and Ethical Considerations". Pubs.usgs.gov. 7 October 2002. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  174. **^** "1. How have ecosystems changed?". Greenfacts.org. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  175. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ecosystem Change: Scientific Facts on Ecosystem Change". Greenfacts.org. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  176. **^** "3. How have ecosystem changes affected human well-being and poverty alleviation?". Greenfacts.org. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  177. **^** "UN World Population Report 2001" (PDF). p. 34. Retrieved 16 December 2008.
  178. **^** Brown, Lester R. and Halweil, Brian (1999-09-23). Population Outrunning Water Supply as World Hits 6 Billion. Worldwatch Institute.
  179. **^** Fred Pearce (2007). _When the Rivers Run Dry: Water—The Defining Crisis of the Twenty-first Century_. Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0-8070-8573-8.
  180. **^** Worldwatch, The (27 April 2012). _Outgrowing the Earth: The Food Security Challenge in an Age of Falling Water Tables and Rising Temperatures: Books: Lester R. Brown_. ISBN 978-0393060706.
  181. **^** "Nuclear Desalination". Archived from the original on 8 February 2007.
  182. **^** Cohen, Bernard L. (1983). "Breeder reactors: A renewable energy source" (PDF). _American Journal of Physics_. **51** (1): 75–76. Bibcode:1983AmJPh..51...75C. doi:10.1119/1.13440. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 January 2013.
  183. **^** "Who Owns Water?". Thenation.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  184. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "EJP | News | France | French-run water plant launched in Israel". Ejpress.org. 28 December 2005. Archived from the original on 13 December 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  185. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Black  & Veatch-Designed Desalination Plant Wins Global Water Distinction". Edie.net. 4 May 2006. Archived from the original on 24 March 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  186. **^** "Desalination gets a serious look". _lasvegassun.com_.
  187. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zhou, Yuan; Tol, Richard S. J. (2005). "Evaluating the costs of desalination and water transport". _Water Resources Research_. **41** (3): W03003. Bibcode:2005WRR....4103003Z. doi:10.1029/2004WR003749.
  188. **^** "100 Largest Desalination Plants Planned, in Construction, or in Operation—1 January 2005" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  189. **^** "Water, Water, Everywhere". _http://online.wsj.com_. External link in `|website=` (help)
  190. **^** "Desalination is the Solution to Water Shortages". _redorbit.com/_.
  191. **^** Wald, Chelsea (2012-02-15). Uncharted waters: Probing aquifers to head off war Archived 23 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. New Scientist
  192. **^** Haynes, Michael; Husan, Rumy (2000). "National inequality and the catch-up period: Some "growth alone" scenarios"". _Journal of Economic Issues_. **34** (3): 693–705. doi:10.1080/00213624.2000.11506301. JSTOR 4227593. " In a world that now produces more food than is necessary to feed all its population [UN 1994], there is no excuse for hunger and starvation."
  193. **^** Gilland, B. (2002). "World population and food supply". _Food Policy_. **27** : 47–63. doi:10.1016/S0306-9192(02)00002-7.
  194. **^** "Human Appropriation of the World's Food Supply". Globalchange.umich.edu. 15 December 2000. Archived from the original on 4 December 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  195. **^** "Pushing Beyond the Earth's Limits The Japan Syndrome". Earth-policy.org. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  196. **^** "UN World Population Report 2001" (PDF). p. 38. Retrieved 16 December 2008.
  197. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Food and Agriculture Organization Economic and Social Development Department. "The State of Food Insecurity in the World, 2018 : Building resilence for peace and food security. " . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2018, p. 1.
  198. **^** "The truth about the environment". _The Economist_. 2 August 2001.
  199. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pimm, Stuart; Harvey, Jeff (2001). "No need to worry about the future" (PDF). _Nature_. **414** (6860): 149. Bibcode:2001Natur.414..149P. doi:10.1038/35102629. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2007.
  200. **^** Kindall, Henery W; Pimentel, David (May 1994). "Constraints on the Expansion of the Global Food Supply". _AMBIO_. **23** (3).
  201. **^** "Feed the world? We are fighting a losing battle, UN admits Archived 25 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine". The Guardian (2008-02-26).
  202. **^** "Nearly 1 in 5 Chinese overweight or obese – Diet and nutrition". MSNBC. 18 August 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  203. **^** "Only wealthy people eat healthy food". _The Times of India_. 13 September 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2016.
  204. **^** "Relationship Between Poverty and Overweight or Obesity « Food Research  & Action Center". Frac.org. Retrieved 22 September 2013.
  205. **^** "Data sobering on Ohio kids' poverty, obesity". The Columbus Dispatch. 13 June 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2013.
  206. **^** "2008: The year of global food crisis". Sundayherald.com. 8 March 2008. Archived from the original on 22 August 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  207. **^** "The global grain bubble". Csmonitor.com. 18 January 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  208. **^** James Randerson, science correspondent (7 March 2008). "Food crisis will take hold before climate change, warns chief scientist". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  209. **^** John Vidal, environment editor (3 November 2007). "Global food crisis looms as climate change and fuel shortages bite". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
  210. **^** Walsoft (22 February 2008). "Experts: Global Food Shortages Could 'Continue for Decades'". Marketoracle.co.uk. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  211. **^** Moya K. Mason. "Has Urbanization Caused a Loss to Agricultural Land?". Moyak.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  212. **^** Walt, Vivienne (27 February 2008). "The World's Growing Food-Price Crisis". _Time_. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  213. **^** "The cost of food: Facts and figures". BBC News. 16 October 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  214. **^** Jonathan Watts in Beijing (4 December 2007). "Riots and hunger feared as demand for grain sends food costs soaring". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  215. **^** Roland Watson and Sam Fleming 30 November 2011 12:01 am (25 June 2009). "Already we have riots, hoarding, panic: the sign of things to come?". _The Times_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  216. **^** Julian Borger, diplomatic editor (26 February 2008). "Feed the world? We are fighting a losing battle, UN admits". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
  217. **^** Robin McKie; Xan Rice (22 April 2007). "Millions face famine as crop disease rages". _The Guardian_. UK. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  218. **^** "Billions at risk from wheat super-blight". _New Scientist_ (2598): 6–7. 3 April 2007. Retrieved 19 April 2007.
  219. **^** "IRAN: Killer fungus threatens wheat production in western areas". Alertnet.org. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  220. **^** " 'Peak Oil' and the German Government: Military Study Warns of a Potentially Drastic Oil Crisis". _spiegel.de_.
  221. **^** "Global threat to food supply as water wells dry up, warns top environment expert Archived 8 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine". _The Guardian_. 6 July 2013.
  222. **^** "World faces 'perfect storm' of problems by 2030, chief scientist to warn Archived 14 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine". The Guardian. 18 March 2009.
  223. **^** "Global crisis 'to strike by 2030' Archived 15 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine". BBC News. 19 March 2009.
  224. **^** "Global food production will have to increase 70% for additional 2.3 billion people by 2050 Archived 10 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Finfacts.com. 24 September 2009.
  225. **^** "Africa's population to double to 2.4 billion by 2050". The Telegrapth. 12 September 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2017.
  226. **^** "Birth rates 'must be curbed to win war on global poverty' Archived 27 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine". The Independent. 31 January 2007.
  227. **^** "Chinese concern at obesity surge". _BBC News_. 12 October 2004. Retrieved 20 May 2010.
  228. **^** Brown, Lester R. (2002-09-08). Global Water Shortages May Lead to Food Shortages—Aquifer Depletion. Greatlakesdirectory.org. Retrieved on 2012-08-29.
  229. **^** "Japan warned of food shortage". Archived from the original on 11 June 2006. Retrieved 1 June 2016., The Australian
  230. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Hopfenberg, Russell and Pimentel, David, "Human Population Numbers as a Function of Food Supply", _Environment, Development and Sustainability_ , vol. 3, no. 1, March 2001, pp. 1–15
  231. **^** Hopfenberg, R. (2003). "Human Carrying Capacity is Determined by Food Availability". _Population and Environment_. **25** (2): 109–117. doi:10.1023/B:POEN.0000015560.69479.c1.
  232. **^** Abernathy, Virginia, _Population Politics_ ISBN 0-7658-0603-7
  233. **^** Hardin, Garrett (1974). "Lifeboat Ethics: the Case Against Helping the Poor". _Psychology Today_. **8** : 38–43.
  234. **^** Manning, Richard (7 September 2011). "Richard Manning on the Green Revolution and the End of Cheap Oil". _YouTube_ (Interview). Interviewed by Sally Erickson and Timothy Scott Bennett. Retrieved 15 October 2013.
  235. **^** _Food Production & Population Growth_, video with Daniel Quinn and Alan Thornhill
  236. **^** Quinn, Daniel, _Ishmael_ Bantam/Turner, 1995, ISBN 0613080939
  237. **^** Zerzan, John (2 April 2008). _On Modernity and the Technosphere_ (Speech). Binghamton University.
  238. **^** Farb, Peter: 1978, _Humankind_. Boston, Houghton Mifflin.
  239. **^** Daniel Quinn (1996). _The Story of B_ , pp. 304–305, Random House Publishing Group, ISBN 0553379011.
  240. **^** Quinn, Daniel: "The Question (ID Number 122)", Retrieved October 2014 from "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2014-10-18.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link).
  241. **^** "Asia Times Online :: South Asia news – India grows a grain crisis". Atimes.com. 21 July 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  242. **^** "Domesticating the World: Conversion of Natural Ecosystems". World Resources Institute. September 2000. Archived from the original on 19 February 2007.
  243. **^** "Grasslands in Pieces: Modification and Conversion Take a Toll". World Resources Institute. December 2000. Archived from the original on 19 February 2007.
  244. **^** "GLOBIO, an initiative of the United Nations Environment Programme (Archive)". 30 June 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  245. **^** John Houghton, _Global Warming: The Complete Briefing_ , Cambridge University Press, 2009 ISBN 978-0-521-70916-3
  246. **^** Young, A. (1999). "Is there Really Spare Land? A Critique of Estimates of Available Cultivable Land in Developing Countries". _Environment, Development and Sustainability_. **1** : 3–18. doi:10.1023/A:1010055012699.
  247. **^** Tagliabue, John (7 November 2008). "The Dutch seek to claim more land from the sea". _New York Times_. Retrieved 9 February 2017.
  248. **^** Shepard, Wade (25 August 2015). ""The gift from the sea": through land reclamation, China keeps growing and growing". _CityMetric_. New Statesman. Retrieved 9 February 2017.
  249. **^** Cooke, Jeremy (19 June 2007). "Vertical farming in the big Apple". _BBC News_. Retrieved 20 May 2010.
  250. **^** "Overpopulation: The Making of a Myth". Retrieved 13 February 2010.
  251. **^** "World oil supplies are set to run out faster than expected, warn scientists Archived 8 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine". _The Independent_. 14 June 2007.
  252. **^** "Al Gore's Vision of Global Salvation". Crossroad.to. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  253. **^** "Gasoline – Energy Explained, Your Guide To Understanding Energy". Tonto.eia.doe.gov. Archived from the original on 9 March 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  254. **^** Hirsch, Robert L.; Bezdek, Roger; Wendling, Robert (February 2005). "Peaking Of World Oil Production: Impacts, Mitigation,  & Risk Management" (PDF). Science Applications International Corporation/U.S.Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 28 November 2009.
  255. **^** Hirsch, Robert L. (February 2007). "Peaking of World Oil Production: Recent Forecasts" (PDF). Science Applications International Corporation/U.S.Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2015.
  256. **^** "We Will Never Run Out of Oil". Economics.about.com. 27 June 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  257. **^** Lemley, Brad (1 May 2003). "Anything Into Oil | Alternative Energy". DISCOVER Magazine. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  258. **^** Lemley, Brad (2 April 2006). "Anything Into Oil | Alternative Energy". DISCOVER Magazine. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  259. **^** Damian Carrington 2015. Leave fossil fuels buried to prevent climate change, study urges. Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says
  260. **^** Forget 'developing' poor countries, it's time to 'de-develop' rich countries Archived 1 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. _The Guardian._ 23 September 2015.
  261. **^** "3. How have ecosystem changes affected human well-being and poverty alleviation?". Greenfacts.org. 17 October 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  262. **^** "Field Listing: Population size". _The World Factbook_. Retrieved 30 May 2017.
  263. **^** "Field Listing: Total Fertility Rate". _The World Factbook_. Retrieved 30 May 2017.
  264. **^** "Field Listing: GDP – per capita (PPP)". _The World Factbook_. Retrieved 30 May 2017.
  265. **^** "A plague of people". **Cosmos**. 13 May 2010. Archived fromthe original on 6 November 2016.
  266. **^** Human overpopulation. Animal Welfare Institute. Retrieved 2014/10/25 from "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 2014-12-01.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  267. **^** Daily, Gretchen C. and Ellison, Katherine (2003) _The New Economy of Nature: The Quest to Make Conservation Profitable_ , Island Press ISBN 1559631546
  268. **^** Rifkin, Jeremy (24 December 2006). "The risks of too much city in a crowded world". _Toronto Star_. Archived from the original on 22 May 2012.
  269. **^** "UN World Population Report 2001" (PDF). p. 31. Retrieved 16 December 2008.
  270. **^** "Booming nations 'threaten Earth'". BBC News (2006-01-12).
  271. **^** "State of the World 2006: China and India Hold World in Balance Archived 15 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Worldwatch Institute. 11 January 2006.
  272. **^** "Effects of Over-Consumption and Increasing Populations Archived 8 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine". 26 September 2001. Retrieved 19 June 2007.
  273. **^** John T. Houghton (2004)." _Global warming: the complete briefing Archived 3 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine_ ". Cambridge University Press. p.326. ISBN 0-521-52874-7
  274. **^** "Once taboo, population enters climate debate". _The Independent_. London. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 21 January 2010.
  275. **^** Champion, Tony (2005). "Chapter 4: Demographic transformations". In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James (eds.). _An Introduction to Human Geography Issues for the 21st Century Second edition_. Pearson Education. pp. 88–111. ISBN 978-0-131-21766-9.
  276. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Turchin P., Korotayev A. Population Dynamics and Internal Warfare: A Reconsideration Archived 3 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine. _Social Evolution & History_ 5/2 (2006): 112–147.
  277. **^** Korotayev A., Malkov A., Khaltourina D. _Introduction to Social Macrodynamics. Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends_ Archived 2 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Moscow: URSS, 2006
  278. **^** Korotayev A.V., Khaltourina D.A. _Introduction to Social Macrodynamics: Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends in Africa._ Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Moscow: URSS, 2006. ISBN 5-484-00560-4;
  279. **^** Jensen, Derrick (2006). _Endgame, Vol. 1: The Problem of Civilization_. Seven Stories Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1583227305.
  280. **^** "Utilizing social marketing and social norms to address problems in gambia". 13 August 2009. Retrieved 12 December 2010.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
  281. **^** "Put women's rights back on the afghan". Daily News Egypt. 27 August 2010. Retrieved 12 December 2010.
  282. **^** Huesemann, M.H. and Huesemann, J.A. (2011). _Techno-fix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment_ , New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, Canada
  283. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R; Ehrlich, Anne H (2004), _One with Nineveh: Politics, Consumption, and the Human Future_ , Island Press/Shearwater Books, pp. 138–180 (chapter 5)
  284. **^** "Population growth driving climate change, poverty: experts Archived 23 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine". Agence France-Presse (2009-09-21).
  285. **^** Finer, Lawrence B.; Henshaw, Stanley K. (2006). "Disparities in Rates of Unintended Pregnancy In the United States, 1994 and 2001". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **38** (2): 90–96. doi:10.1363/3809006. PMID 16772190.
  286. **^** "Netherlands Again Number One Donor to United Nations Population Fund". United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
  287. **^** "Maternal mortality ratio falling too slowly to meet goal Archived 31 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine". WHO (2007-10-12).
  288. **^** Fornos, Werner (10 December 2001). "Q: should the United Nations support more family-planning services for poor countries?". _Insight on the News_.
  289. **^** "Population Matters search on "reproductive rights "". _populationmatters.org_. Population Matters. [ _permanent dead link_ ]
  290. **^** "Sir David Attenborough on the roots of Climatic problems". _independent.co.uk_. The Independent, UK broadsheet newspaper.
  291. **^** Independent Newspapers Online (11 June 2008). "Population woes weigh down Egypt". IOL. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  292. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R; Ehrlich, Anne H (2004), _One with Nineveh: Politics, Consumption, and the Human Future_ , Island Press/Shearwater Books, pp. 181–205 (chapter 6)
  293. **^** Ehrlich, Paul R.; Ehrlich, Anne H.; Daily, Gretchen C. (1995), _The Stork and the Plow: The Equity Answer to the Human Dilemma_ , Grosset/Putnam Books
  294. **^** Eos magazine, April 2018
  295. **^** Lifeblood: How to Change the World One Dead Mosquito at a Time, Alex Perry p9
  296. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ryerson, William N. (2010). _The Post Carbon Reader: Managing the 21st Century's Sustainability Crises, "Ch.12: Population: The Multiplier of Everything Else"_. Healdsburg, Calif.: Watershed Media. pp. 153–174. ISBN 978-0970950062.
  297. **^** "Birth rates 'must be curbed to win war on global poverty '". _The Independent_. London. 31 January 2007. Archived from the original on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 20 May 2010.
  298. **^** Vinay Lal. Indira Gandhi Archived 29 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine, UCLA College of Letters and Science
  299. **^** "Interview: City Architect and Reconstructor Michael E. Arth by Alex Birch". Corrupt.org. 22 May 2008. Archived from the original on 5 January 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  300. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Arth, Michael E., _Democracy and the Common Wealth: Breaking the Stranglehold of the Special Interests_ , Golden Apples Media, 2010, Chapter 35: "Overpopulation" pp. 352–362
  301. **^** Goods for sterilization Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine
  302. **^** Kunzig, Robert, "A world with 11 billion people? New population projections shatter earlier estimates." National Geographic, 18 September 2014, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 19 December 2016. Retrieved 2015-02-25.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  303. **^** The High Frontier (1976, 2000) Gerard O'Neill, Apogee Books ISBN 1-896522-67-X
  304. **^** Marshall Savage, (1992, 1994) _The Millennial Project: Colonizing the Galaxy in Eight Easy Steps._ Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-77163-5
  305. **^** Freeman Dyson, _The Sun, The Genome, and The Internet_ (1999) Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513922-4
  306. **^** The Telegraph. Stephen Hawking: mankind must move to outer space within a century. (August 2010) "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 2014-10-25.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  307. **^** Nancy Atkinson (16 July 2008). "Colonizing Venus With Floating Cities". _Universe Today_. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
  308. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Greetings, Carbon-Based Bipeds!_ (1999) Arthur C. Clarke, Voyager ISBN 0-00-224698-8
  309. **^** _The Good Earth Is Dying_ (1971) Isaac Asimov (published in _Der Spiegel_ )
  310. **^** Mining the Sky (1996) John S. Lewis. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-201-47959-1
  311. **^** O'Neill, Gerard K. (1981). _2081: A Hopeful View of the Human Future_. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-44751-9.
  312. **^** "StarTram2010: Maglev Launch: Ultra Low Cost Ultra High Volume Access to Space for Cargo and Humans". startram.com. Retrieved 23 April 2011.
  313. **^** "UN Habitat calling urban living 'a good thing". BBC News. 27 June 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  314. **^** "National Geographic Magazine; Special report 2008: Changing Climate (Village Green-article by Michelle Nijhuis)". Michellenijhuis.com. 29 September 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
  315. **^** "UN Habitat calling to rethink urban planning". Unhabitat.org. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011.

## Further reading[edit]

  * Michael E. Arth, _Democracy and the Common Wealth: Breaking the Stranglehold of the Special Interests_ , (2010), Chapter 35: "Overpopulation"
  * Eileen Crist and Philip Cafaro (eds). _Life on the Brink: Environmentalists Confront Overpopulation._ University of Georgia Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0820343853
  * Ehrlich, Paul R.; Ehrlich, Anne H. (9 January 2013). "Can a collapse of global civilization be avoided?". _Proceedings of the Royal Society B_. **280** (1754): 20122845. doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.2845. PMC 3574335. PMID 23303549. Comment by Prof. Michael Kelly, disagreeing with the paper by Ehrlich and Ehrlich; and response by the authors
  * Stephen Emmott, _Ten Billion_ (2013)
  * Suzanne Goldenberg (24 September 2015). Pope's climate push is 'raving nonsense' without population control, says top US scientist, _The Guardian_
  * Fred Guter, _The Fate of the Species: Why the Human Race May Cause Its Own Extinction and How We Can Stop It_ (2012)
  * Rob Hengeveld, _Wasted World: How Our Consumption Challenges the Planet_ (2012). Focuses on the interrelationships and interactions between human overpopulation and most of the key challenges facing global society, and the pressures that overpopulation and resource consumption place on the natural environment
  * J.R. McNeill, Peter Engelke, _The Great Acceleration: An Environmental History of the Anthropocene since 1945_ (2016)
  * Motesharrei, Safa; Rivas, Jorge; Kalnay, Eugenia (2014). "Human and nature dynamics (HANDY): Modeling inequality and use of resources in the collapse or sustainability of societies". _Ecological Economics_. **101** : 90–102. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.02.014.
  * Thomas Robertson, _The Malthusian Moment: Global Population Growth and the Birth of American Environmentalism_ (2012), Rutgers University Press
  * Karen Shragg, _Move Upstream: A Call to Solve Overpopulation._ ISBN 978-0988493834 (published November 2015). Discussion of the book by the author, March 2017 (video, 91 minutes).
  * Alan Weisman. _Countdown: Our Last, Best Hope for a Future on Earth?_ Little, Brown and Company, (2013) ISBN 0316097756
  * Ozzie Zehner, The Environmental Politics of Population and Overpopulation. University of California, Berkeley.
  * "Overdevelopment, Overpopulation, Overshoot" (2014), a free book of photos of the social and ecological impact of human overpopulation. _The Population Institute,_ Washington, DC

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Wiktionary-logo-

en-v2.svg/40px-Wiktionary-logo-en-v2.svg.png) | Look up _**overpopulation**_
in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Wikibooks-logo-en-

noslogan.svg/40px-Wikibooks-logo-en-noslogan.svg.png) | Wikibooks has a book
on the topic of: _**Introduction to Sociology/Demography**_  
\---|---  
External
video![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Nuvola_apps_kaboodle.svg/16px-

Nuvola_apps_kaboodle.svg.png) Sir David Attenborough on Overpopulation on
YouTube  
\---

  * Overpopulation, overconsumption – in pictures (April 2015), _The Guardian_
  * Why we should have fewer children: to save the planet (September 2016), _The Guardian_
  * Overpopulated and Underfed: Countries Near a Breaking Point (June 2017), Bill Marsh, _The New York Times_
  * Earth's sixth mass extinction event under way, scientists warn (July 2017), _The Guardian._ "But the ultimate cause of all of these factors is “human overpopulation and continued population growth, and overconsumption, especially by the rich”, say the scientists."
  * _The biggest threats to humankind according to 50 Nobel prizewinners_ , _Times Higher Education_ , August 2017 . "... with one in three [of the Nobel laureates surveyed] citing issues such as global warming and overpopulation." 
  * Talking about overpopulation is still taboo. That has to change. (June 2018) Frances Kissling, Jotham Musinguzi and Peter Singer for the _Washington Post_.

Links to related articles

* * *

|

  * v
  * t
  * e

Human impact on the environment

* * *

General|

  * Environmental issues
    * list of issues
  * Human impact
  * Impact assessment
  * Planetary boundaries

|

![Planetary

boundaries](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/70/Planetary_boundaries.svg/140px-

Planetary_boundaries.svg.png)

Causes|

  * Agriculture
    * fishing
    * irrigation
    * meat production
    * cocoa production
    * palm oil
  * Energy industry
    * biofuels
    * biodiesel
    * coal
    * electricity generation
    * nuclear power
    * oil shale
    * petroleum
    * reservoirs
    * wind power
  * Genetic pollution
  * Industrialisation
  * Land use
  * Manufacturing
    * cleaning agents
    * concrete
    * plastics
    * nanotechnology
    * paint
    * paper
    * pesticides
    * pharmaceuticals and personal care
  * Mining
  * Overdrafting
  * Overfishing
  * Overgrazing
  * Overexploitation
  * Overpopulation
  * Particulates
  * Pollution
  * Quarrying
  * Reservoirs
  * Tourism
  * Transport
    * aviation
    * roads
    * shipping
  * Urbanization
    * urban sprawl
  * War

Effects|

  * Biodiversity threats
    * biodiversity loss
    * decline in amphibian populations
    * decline in insect populations
  * Climate change
    * global warming
    * runaway climate change
  * Coral reefs
  * Deforestation
  * Defaunation
  * Desertification
  * Ecocide
  * Erosion
  * Environmental degradation
  * Freshwater cycle
  * Habitat destruction
  * Holocene extinction
  * Nitrogen cycle
  * Land degradation
  * Land consumption
  * Land surface effects on climate
  * Loss of green belts
  * Phosphorus cycle
  * Ocean acidification
  * Ozone depletion
  * Resource depletion
  * Water degradation
  * Water scarcity

Mitigation|

  * Birth control
  * Cleaner production
  * Climate change mitigation
  * Climate engineering
  * Community resilience
  * Decoupling
  * Ecological engineering
  * Environmental engineering
  * Environmental mitigation
  * Industrial ecology
  * Mitigation banking
  * Organic farming
  * Reforestation
    * urban
  * Restoration ecology
  * Sustainable consumption
  * Waste minimization

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
  * by country
  * assessment
  * mitigation

  * v

  * t
  * e

Global human population

* * *

Major topics|

  * Biocapacity
  * Optimum population
  * Overpopulation
    * Malthusian catastrophe
  * Population
  * Population ethics
  * Population momentum
  * Sustainable development
  * Women's reproductive rights
  * Zero population growth

Biological and  
related topics|

  * Family planning
    * Pledge two or fewer
  * Human population planning
    * One-child policy
    * Two-child policy
  * Population biology
  * Population decline
  * Population density
    * Physiological density
  * Population dynamics
  * Population growth
  * Population model
  * Population pyramid
  * Projections of population growth

Human impact on  
the environment|

  * Deforestation
  * Desalination
  * Desertification
  * Environmental impact
    * of agriculture
    * of aviation
    * of biodiesel
    * of concrete
    * of electricity generation
    * of the energy industry
    * of fishing
    * of irrigation
    * of mining
    * of off-roading
    * of oil shale industry
    * of palm oil
    * of paper
    * of the petroleum industry
    * of reservoirs
    * of shipping
    * of war
  * Industrialisation
  * Land degradation
  * Land reclamation
  * Overconsumption
  * Pollution
  * Quarrying
  * Urbanization
    * Loss of green belts
    * Urban sprawl
  * Waste
  * Water scarcity
    * Overdrafting

Population  
ecology

|

  * Carrying capacity
  * Deep ecology
  * Earth's energy budget
  * Food security
  * Habitat destruction
  * I = P × A × T
  * Kaya identity
  * Malthusian growth model
  * Overshoot (population)
  * World energy consumption
  * World energy resources
  * World3 model

Literature|

  * _A Modest Proposal_
  * _Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc._
  * _An Essay on the Principle of Population_
  * "How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
  * _Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth_
  * _Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits_
  * _The Limits to Growth_
  * _The Population Bomb_
  * _The Skeptical Environmentalist_
  * _The Ultimate Resource_

Publications|

  * Population and Environment
  * Population and Development Review

Lists|

  * Population and housing censuses by country
  * Metropolitan areas by population
  * Population milestone babies

Events and  
organizations

|

  * 7 Billion Actions
  * International Conference on Population and Development
  * Population Action International
  * Population Connection
  * Population Matters
  * Population Research Institute
  * United Nations Population Fund
  * Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
  * World Population Day
  * World Population Foundation

Related topics|

  * Classic Maya collapse
  * Fertility and intelligence
  * Green Revolution
  * Holocene extinction
  * Migration

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Human overpopulation
  * Human activities with impact on the environment
  * Human migration

  * v

  * t
  * e

Lists of countries by population statistics

* * *

Global|

  * Current population
  * Current population (United Nations)

(Sub-)continents|

  * Africa
  * Asia
  * Europe
  * North America
    * Caribbean
  * Oceania
  * South America

Intercontinental|

  * Americas
  * Arab world
  * Commonwealth of Nations
  * Eurasia
  * European Union
  * Islands
  * Latin America
  * Middle East

Cities/urban regions|

  * National capitals
  * Cities proper
  * Metropolitan areas
  * Urban areas
  * Megacities
  * Megalopolises

Past and future|

  * Past and future population
  * 0
  * 1
  * 1000
  * 1500
  * 1600
  * 1700
  * 1800
  * 1900
  * 1907
  * 1939
  * 1989
  * 2000
  * 2005
  * 2010
  * population milestones

Population density|

  * Current density
  * Past and future population density
  * Current real density based on food growing capacity

Growth indicators|

  * Population growth rate
  * Natural increase
  * Birth rate
  * Mortality rate
  * Fertility rate
  * Past fertility rate

Other  
demographics|

  * Age at first marriage
  * Divorce rate
  * Ethnic and cultural diversity level
  * Immigrant population
  * Linguistic diversity
  * Median age
  * Age structure
  * Dependency ratio
  * Net migration rate
  * Number of households
  * Sex ratio
  * Urban population
  * Urbanization

Health|

  * Antidepressant consumption
  * Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza
  * HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate
  * Infant and under-five mortality rates
  * Maternal mortality rate
  * Life expectancy
  * Past life expectancy
  * Percentage suffering from undernourishment
  * Health expenditure covered by government
  * Suicide rate
  * Total health expenditure per capita
  * Body Mass Index (BMI)

Education  
and innovation|

  * Bloomberg Innovation Index
  * Education Index
  * International Innovation Index
  * Innovation Union Scoreboard
  * Literacy rate
  * Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
  * Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
  * Student skills
  * Tertiary education attainment
  * Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
  * Women's average years in school
  * World Intellectual Property Indicators

Economic|

  * Development aid given
    * Official Development Assistance received
  * Employment rate
  * Irrigated land area
  * Human Development Index
    * by country
    * inequality-adjusted
  * Human Poverty Index
  * Imports
  * Income equality
  * Labour force
  * Number of millionaires (US dollars)
  * Number of billionaires (US dollars)
  * Percentage living in poverty
  * Public sector
  * Sen social welfare function
  * Unemployment rate

  * List of international rankings

  * List of top international rankings by country
  * Lists by country

  * v

  * t
  * e

Sustainability

* * *

Principles|

  * Anthropocene
  * Earth system governance
  * Ecological modernization
  * Environmental governance
  * Environmentalism
  * Global catastrophic risk
  * Human impact on the environment
  * Planetary boundaries
  * Social sustainability
  * Stewardship
  * Sustainable development

Consumption|

  * Anthropization
  * Anti-consumerism
  * Earth Overshoot Day
  * Ecological footprint
  * Ethical
  * Over-consumption
  * Simple living
  * Sustainability advertising
  * Sustainability brand
  * Sustainability marketing myopia
  * Sustainable
  * Systemic change resistance
  * Tragedy of the commons

Population|

  * Birth control
  * Family planning
  * Control
  * Overpopulation
  * Zero growth

Technology|

  * Appropriate
  * Environmental
  * Sustainable

Biodiversity|

  * Biosecurity
  * Biosphere
  * Conservation biology
  * Deep ecology
  * Endangered species
  * Holocene extinction
  * Invasive species

Energy|

  * Carbon footprint
  * Climate change mitigation
  * Conservation
  * Descent
  * Efficiency
  * Emissions trading
  * Fossil-fuel phase-out
  * Peak oil
  * Poverty
  * Rebound effect
  * Renewable

Food|

  * Forest gardening
  * Local
  * Permaculture
  * Security
  * Sustainable agriculture
  * Sustainable fishery
  * Urban horticulture

Water|

  * Conservation
  * Crisis
  * Efficiency
  * Footprint
  * Reclaimed

Accountability|

  * Sustainability accounting
  * Sustainability measurement
  * Sustainability metrics and indices
  * Sustainability reporting
  * Standards and certification
  * Sustainable yield

Applications|

  * Advertising
  * Architecture
  * Art
  * Business
  * City
  * College programs
  * Community
  * Design
  * Ecovillage
  * Education for Sustainable Development
  * Fashion
  * Gardening
  * Geopark
  * Green marketing
  * Industries
  * Landscape architecture
  * Living
  * Low-impact development
  * Sustainable market
  * Organizations
  * Packaging
  * Practices
  * Procurement
  * Tourism
  * Transport
  * Urban drainage systems
  * Urban infrastructure
  * Urbanism

Management|

  * Environmental
  * Fisheries
  * Forest
  * Materials
  * Natural resource
  * Planetary
  * Waste

Agreements|

  * UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
  * Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
  * _Our Common Future_ (1987)
  * Earth Summit (1992)
  * Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
  * Agenda 21 (1992)
  * Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
  * ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
  * Earth Charter
  * Lisbon Principles
  * UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
  * Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
  * United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
  * Sustainable Development Goals

  * Category

  * Lists
  * Outline
  * Portal
  * Science
  * Studies
  * Degrees

  * v

  * t
  * e

Hierarchy of life

* * *

  * Biosphere > Biome > Ecosystem > Biocenosis > Population > Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Macromolecule > Biomolecule

  * v

  * t
  * e

Globalization

* * *

  * Journals
  * ![Outline](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Global_thinking.svg/10px-Global_thinking.svg.png) Outline
  * Studies

Aspects|

  * Alter-globalization
  * Anti-globalization
  * Counter-hegemonic globalization
  * Cultural globalization
  * Deglobalization
  * Democratic globalization
  * Economic globalization
  * Environmental globalization
  * Financial globalization
  * Global citizenship
    * education
  * Global governance
  * Global health
  * History of
    * archaic
    * early modern
  * Military globalization
  * Political globalization
  * Trade globalization
  * Workforce globalization

Issues|

| Global|

  * Disease
  * Digital divide
  * Labor arbitrage
  * Population
  * Tax avoidance
  * Warming
  * Water crisis

\---|---  
Other|

  * Base erosion and profit shifting
  * Brain drain
    * reverse
  * Climate change
  * Climate justice
  * Development aid
  * Economic inequality
  * Endangered languages
  * Fair trade
  * Forced migration
  * Human rights
  * Illicit financial flows
  * Invasive species
  * Investor-state disputes
  * New international division of labour
  * North–South divide
  * Offshoring
  * Race to the bottom
    * pollution havens
  * Transnational crime
  * McDonaldization
  * Westernization
  * American imperialism
  * British Empire
  * World war

Theories|

  * Capital accumulation
  * Dependency
  * Development
  * Earth system
  * Fiscal localism
  * Modernization
    * ecological
    * history of
  * Primitive accumulation
  * Social change
  * World history
  * World-systems

Notable  
scholars|

  * Samir Amin
  * Arjun Appadurai
  * K. Anthony Appiah
  * Daniele Archibugi
  * Giovanni Arrighi
  * Ravi Batra
  * Jean Baudrillard
  * Zygmunt Bauman
  * Ulrich Beck
  * Walden Bello
  * Jagdish Bhagwati
  * Robert Brenner
  * Manuel Castells
  * Noam Chomsky
  * Alfred Crosby
  * Christopher Chase-Dunn
  * Andre G. Frank
  * Thomas Friedman
  * Anthony Giddens
  * Peter Gowan
  * Michael Hardt
  * David Harvey
  * David Held
  * Paul Hirst
  * Michael Hudson
  * Paul James
  * Ibn Khaldun
  * Naomi Klein
  * Antonio Negri
  * Ronen Palan
  * Thomas Piketty
  * George Ritzer
  * Dani Rodrik
  * Jeffrey Sachs
  * Saskia Sassen
  * John R. Saul
  * Vandana Shiva
  * Joseph Stiglitz
  * John Urry
  * Immanuel Wallerstein
  * Gabriel Zucman

  * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * v

  * t
  * e

Global catastrophic risks

* * *

  * Future of the Earth
  * Ultimate fate of the universe

Technological|

  * Grey goo
  * Kinetic bombardment
  * Mutual assured destruction
    * Dead Hand
    * Doomsday device
  * Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence
    * Existential risk from artificial intelligence
    * AI takeover
  * Technological singularity
  * Transhumanism
  * Year 2000 problem

Sociological|

  * Malthusian catastrophe
  * New World Order (conspiracy theory)
  * Nuclear holocaust
    * winter
    * famine
    * cobalt
  * Societal collapse
  * World War III

Ecological|

| Climate change|

  * Extinction risk from global warming
    * Tipping points in the climate system
  * Global terrestrial stilling
  * Ice age
  * Ecocide
  * Human impact on the environment
  * Ozone depletion
  * Cascade effect
  * Supervolcano
    * winter

\---|---  
Earth Overshoot Day|

  * Overexploitation
  * Overpopulation
    * Human overpopulation

Biological|

| Extinction|

  * Extinction event
  * Human extinction
  * Genetic erosion
  * Genetic pollution

\---|---  
Others|

  * Dysgenics
  * Pandemic
    * Biological agent
  * Transhumanism

Astronomical|

  * Big Crunch
  * Big Rip
  * Coronal mass ejection
  * Gamma-ray burst
  * Hypercane
  * Impact event
    * Asteroid impact avoidance
    * Potentially hazardous object
  * Rogue planet
  * Solar flare

Mythological|

| Eschatology|

  * Buddhist
  * Hindu
  * Last Judgment
    * Christian
    * Book of Revelation
    * Islamic
    * Jewish
  * Norse
  * Zoroastrian

\---|---  
Others|

  * 2011 end times prediction
  * 2012 phenomenon
  * Apocalypse
  * Armageddon
  * Blood moon prophecy
  * Doomsday Clock
  * End time
  * List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events
  * Nibiru cataclysm
  * Rapture
  * Revelation 12 sign prophecy
  * Third Temple

Fictional|

  * Alien invasion
  * Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
    * List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
    * List of apocalyptic films
  * Climate fiction
  * Disaster films
    * List of disaster films
  * List of fictional doomsday devices
  * Zombie apocalypse

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Categories 

    * Apocalypticism
    * Future problems
    * Hazards
    * Risk analysis
    * Doomsday scenarios
  * ![Aegopodium podagraria1 ies.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/24px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_overpopulation&oldid=900656059"

Categories:

  * Human overpopulation
  * Population ecology
  * World population
  * Demographic economic problems
  * Doomsday scenarios
  * Environmental controversies
  * Political controversies

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * Pages with citations lacking titles
  * Pages with citations having bare URLs
  * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
  * CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id)
  * Articles needing more detailed references
  * Articles with inconsistent citation formats
  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * CS1 errors: external links
  * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from January 2018
  * Articles with permanently dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from November 2017
  * NPOV disputes from May 2019
  * All NPOV disputes
  * Articles with short description
  * Use dmy dates from September 2012
  * All articles lacking reliable references
  * Articles lacking reliable references from May 2018
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017
  * Articles contradicting other articles
  * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2016
  * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014
  * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008
  * Articles with attributed pull quotes
  * Articles with images not understandable by color blind users

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Asturianu
  * Български
  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Ελληνικά
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * हिन्दी
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * ქართული
  * Latina
  * Lietuvių
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Slovenščina
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * தமிழ்
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 吴语
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 6 June 2019, at 22:08 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

