
>

>> Jump to Content

>>

>> Enter Search Terms

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * Climate

>>  
>>                       * Oceans & Coasts

>>  
>>                       * Fisheries

>>  
>>                       * Satellites

>>  
>>                       * Research

>>  
>>                       * Marine & Aviation

>>  
>>                       * Charting

>>  
>>                       * Sanctuaries

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * About our agency

>>  
>>                       * News and features

>>  
>>                       * Our work

>>  
>>

>> MENU

>>

>> CLOSE

>>

>> ![NOAA

Home](/sites/all/themes/custom/noaa/images/noaa_logo_circle_bw_72x72.svg)National
Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationU.S. Department of Commerce

>>

>> Find your local weather

>>

>> Enter your ZIP code

>>

>> Enter Search Terms

>>

>> Content

>>

>> Home

>>

>> NEWS & FEATURES

>>

>> # 2018 was 4th hottest year on record for the globe

>>

>> The U.S. experienced 14 billion-dollar weather and climate disasters

>>

>> Climate

>>

>> Satellites

>>

>> climate analyses and statistics

>>

>> global average temperatures

>>

>> Share This

>>

>> ## SHARE

>>

>> Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share by email Print

>>

>> February 6, 2019

>>

>> ![A collage of typical climate and weather-related events: heatwaves,

drought, hurricanes, wildfires and changes in sea ice

coverage.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/scale_crop_1120x534/public/thumbnails/image/Photo%20collage-

climate%20scenarios-global%20climate%20reports-NOAA%20image-

landscapes.jpg?itok=rcowMNf5)

>>

>> Earth's long-term warming trend continued in 2018 as persistent warmth
across large swaths of land and ocean resulted in the globe's fourth hottest
year in NOAA's 139-year climate record. The year ranks just behind 2016
(warmest), 2015 (second warmest) and 2017 (third warmest).

>>

>> In separate analyses of global temperatures, scientists from NASA, the
United Kingdom Met Office and the World Meteorological Organizationoffsite
link also reached the same heat ranking.

>>

>> ![IMAGE - 020619 - World map - Annual-2018-Global-Temperature-Percentiles -

NOAA NCEI - Landscape -

Native](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/thumbnails/image/Annual-2018-Global-

Temperature-Percentiles-Map.png)

>>

>> Download Image

>>

>> Here are a few highlights from NOAA's findings:

>>

>> #### **2018 global temperatures**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The average global temperature
during 2018 was 1.42 degrees F

>>  
>>

>> above the 20th-century average. This marks the 42nd consecutive year (since
1977) with an above-average global temperature. Nine of the 10 warmest years
have occurred since 2005, with the last five years comprising the five
hottest.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The globally averaged sea
surface temperature was 1.19 degrees F

>>  
>>

>> above average, while the land surface temperature was 2.02 degrees above
average, both the fourth highest on record.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Much of Europe, New Zealand and
parts of the Middle East and

>>  
>>

>> Russia had record high land temperatures. Parts of the southern Pacific
Ocean and parts of the north and south Atlantic Ocean also tallied record-high
sea- surface temperatures.  
>

>>

>> ![The United States experienced 14 billion-dollar weather disasters in
2018,

which resulted in the deaths of at least 247 people and approximately $91

billion in

damage.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/thumbnails/image/Map-of-

January-to-December-2018-US-Billion-dollar-disaster-events.png)

>>

>> The United States experienced 14 billion-dollar weather disasters in 2018,
which resulted in the deaths of at least 247 people and approximately $91
billion in damage. (NOAA NCEI)

>>

>> Download Image

>>

>> #### 2018 U.S. billion-dollar weather and climate disasters

>>  
>>                 >>                       * In 2018, the U.S. experienced 14
weather and climate disasters,

>>  
>>

>> each with losses exceeding $1 billion and all totaling around $91 billion
in damages. Both the number of events and their cumulative cost ranked fourth
highest since records began in 1980.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Topping the list were Hurricane
Michael, which caused $25

>>  
>>

>> billion in damages, followed by the western U.S. wildfires and Hurricane
Florence, which each caused $24 billion in damages.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Most important was the human
toll: At least 247 people died and

>>  
>>

>> many more were injured by the 14 disasters.

>>

>> #### 2018 U.S. climate highlights

>>  
>>                 >>                       * In the U.S., last year's weather
story was more about wetness

>>  
>>

>> than heat. Precipitation for the contiguous U.S. averaged 34.63 inches
(4.69 inches above average), the third wettest year in the 124-year record.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Much-above-average precipitation
to record-high precipitation

>>  
>>

>> fell across much of the contiguous U.S. east of the Rockies.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The average temperature for the
contiguous U.S. was 53.5 degrees

>>  
>>

>> F (1.5 degrees above average), making 2018 the 14th warmest year on record.
This was the 22nd consecutive warmer-than-average year for the U.S.  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Much of the contiguous U.S. was
warmer than average,

>>  
>>

>> particularly west of the Rockies and across the coastal Southeast. Most of
the Northern Plains and Upper Midwest experienced near-normal temperatures.

>>

>> **More** > Access NOAA's full reports on the 2018 global climate analysis
and the U.S. billion-dollar weather and climate disasters.

>>

>> Media contacts

>>

>> John Leslie, 301-713-0214  
>  Brady Phillips, 202-407-1298

>>

>> Share This

>>

>> ## SHARE

>>

>> Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share by email Print

>>

>> ## Rain-soaked U.S. had its 2nd-wettest month on record in May

>>

>> ![People survey the heavy damage to a home west of Bonner Springs, Kansas,

from an EF-2 tornado that occurred May 28, 2019.

](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/crop_528x294/public/thumbnails/image/PHOTO%20-%20tornado%20damage%20to%20home%20_bonnersprings_KS_052819%20-%20NWS_0.jpg?itok=IkRrPqom)

>>

>> ## April 2019 was 2nd hottest on record for the globe

>>

>> ![A collage of typical climate and weather-related events: heatwaves,

drought, hurricanes, wildfires and changes in sea ice

coverage.](https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/styles/crop_528x294/public/thumbnails/image/Photo%20collage-

climate%20scenarios-global%20climate%20reports-NOAA%20image-

landscapes.jpg?itok=0LGJma3P)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About our agency

>>  
>>                       * News and features

>>  
>>                       * Our work

>>  
>>

>> ## Stay connected

>>

>> Share to Twitter Share to Facebook NOAA on Instagram NOAA on YouTube

>>

>> NOAA HomeScience. Service. Stewardship.

>>

>> ## How are we doing?

>>

>> Feedbackopens in new window

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Protecting Your Privacy

>>  
>>                       * FOIA

>>  
>>                       * Information Quality

>>  
>>                       * Accessibility

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimer

>>  
>>                       * USA.gov

>>  
>>                       * Ready.gov

>>  
>>                       * EEO

>>  
>>                       * Employee Check-In

>>  
>>                       * Contact us

>>  
>>                       * Staff Directory

>>  
>>                       * Need help?

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

