

Toggle navigation beginningCatholic.com

Home Freebies Starting Points Common Questions Catholic Faith Catholic Bible
Study Catholic Prayers Catholic Morality Catholic Sacraments How to Pray
Spiritual Treasures Catholic Ezine eBookstore Contact Me Link to Us

# Straight Talk About The Catholic Teaching on Masturbation

The full Catholic teaching on masturbation seems to be a secret to most
people.

It is a challenging teaching.

But because this teaching calls us to live in a fully human way, it’s **good
news!**

## “Is masturbation wrong?”

Yes. The Catholic teaching on masturbation says that masturbation is always
morally wrong.

Sex is intended to be both an expression of love for your spouse, and a
beautiful means of procreation.

Sex is so special, powerful, and **valuable** that it is properly used only
within marriage. If you’re not married, you should abstain from sexual
activity.

I know: this is all very counter-cultural.

The truth sometimes is!

Sex is the ultimate gift husbands and wives can give: a total gift of self,
body and soul. Sex is how you fulfill your wedding vows to love totally,
freely, and completely. As long as you both shall live. The secret of life is
hidden in that intimate sharing.

The Catholic teaching on masturbation says that masturbation denies every
aspect of that promise of sex — of that promise of your vows!

Masturbation is:

  * Focused on yourself
  * A withholding from your spouse
  * A statement that sex is only about pleasure — _your own_ pleasure
  * Inherently sterile
  * Often accompanied by “adultery in your heart” through pornography and fantasy

Catholics don’t condemn masturbation just because of some lofty idea of what
the natural purpose of sex is. We speak the truth about the **harm** it does
to people.

That is the true reason for the Catholic teaching on masturbation: it denies
the meaning of sex. It makes you **less** than fully human.

## “But everyone else says masturbation is healthy!”

Yes, they do.

The world has a way of saying that a lot of disordered things are “good”.

Masturbation is radically self-centered, and radically un-Christian. That’s
why the Catholic teaching on masturbation says it’s wrong. It turns us and our
sexuality away from God and toward **ourselves** by:

  * Training our sexuality in the habit of self-indulgence, not self-giving
  * Divorcing the pleasure of orgasm from union with the “other”, your spouse
  * Turning away from the risks of loving another
  * Refusing fertility & the full responsibility of sex

I know — many educators and health professionals seem to be having a love
affair with self-centered, self-indulgent sexuality. Why that is, I don’t
know.

They’re wrong. They’re not telling you the truth about sex, about yourself, or
about life.

You and your sexuality are worth **more** than you can imagine.

The Catholic teaching on masturbation is centered on a virtue called
**chastity**. It means giving sexuality its proper place in our lives. Not
snuffing it out, but not giving it free reign. A proper place. Chastity is one
of the Fruits of the Holy Spirit. (See _Catechism_ , 2337 - 2359)

The deep truth of the Catholic teaching on masturbation is confirmed by the
enormous damage this so-called “private” act causes in people’s lives and
marriages. Large numbers of men and women are starting to name their habit of
masturbation for what it is: sexual addiction.

If we tell our teens that masturbation is normal and healthy, we’re setting
them up with a habit that can yield a lifetime of difficulty. We’re telling
them that self-indulgence and lack of self-control are positive things. This
**cannot** form a strong foundation for mature, loving sexuality.

How is that either loving or healthy?

## Freedom & responsibility

This talk of _habit_ raises an important point: when is masturbation a
**sin?** And how bad a sin is it?

The Catholic teaching on masturbation says that masturbation is a grave sin,
what we call a mortal sin, by which we reject God’s offer of life.

However, Catholic morality also acknowledges that the force of **habit** can
reduce or even eliminate our responsibility for our actions.

  * We have to freely consent in order to be fully responsible. 
  * If a habit makes something less than a free choice, it also reduces our responsibility for our actions.

This does **not** give us free reign if we just call something a habit! Sinful
actions still harm us greatly, even if we may not be fully charged with the
guilt of committing them.

We have a responsibility to seek help and diligently strive to overcome our
habits.

The Lord is patient & merciful. He desperately wants to **free** us from the
slavery of sin. But we have to do our part, too.

If you think you’re trapped in the habit of masturbation or one of its close
cousins (pornography, infidelity, prostitution, etc.), seek the competent
**help** of a priest who supports the Church’s sexual morality, and
specifically the Catholic teaching on masturbation. (Don’t be shy! They’ve
heard it all before. Sadly, it’s quite common.)

## “Does the Catholic teaching on masturbation say we should repress our

sexuality?”

There’s a difference between repression and **self-control**.

Repression means to “stuff” those feelings down when they arise, denying them
and wishing they weren’t there.

Repression doesn’t work. Many people try this route and fail.

Self-control is different. You don’t **deny** the reality of your sexual
drive, but seek to control it according to your will. That’s called being
**free!** If you’re a slave to your urges (sexual or otherwise), you’re not
free.

“For you were called to freedom, brethren; only do not use your freedom as an
opportunity for the flesh, but through love be servants of one another.” _(Gal
5:13)_

The key to this is to **redeem** our sexuality, not to repress it. Christopher
West makes this point about the Catholic teaching on masturbation in _Good
News About Sex and Marriage_ :

> When sexual feelings, desires, and temptations present themselves, as they
inevitably do, instead of trying to ignore them or “stuff” them by pushing
them down and under, we need to bring them up and out. Not up and out in the
sense of indulging them, but up and out and into the hands of Christ our
Redeemer. You might simply say a prayer such as this: _Lord Jesus, I give you
my sexual desires. Please undo in me what sin has done so that I might know
freedom in this area and experience sexual desire as you intend. Amen._ The
more we invite Christ into our passions and desires and allow him to purify
them, the more we find we’re able to exercise proper control of them. And we
begin more and more to experience our sexuality, not as the desire for selfish
gratification but as the desire to give ourselves away in imitation of Christ.
This is what redemption is all about. ( _Good News About Sex and Marriage_ ,
p.81)

The Catholic teaching on masturbation reminds us that we need to redeem our
self-centered, disordered desires.

It’s a matter of bringing our disorders to Christ, naming them for what they
are, and letting Christ **heal** us. We experience that healing as the gradual
increase of self-control.

It _is_ possible.

You’re worth far too much to live according to a lie about yourself. For your
freedom was bought at a great price: the price of the blood of Christ.

So go on: Let yourself be redeemed. Live in the “glorious freedom of the
children of God” (Rom 8:21).

Alleluia!

* * *

The _Couple to Couple League_ website has a wonderful pastoral letter about
chastity written in 2004 by Bishop Martino of the Diocese of Scranton, PA. It
provides good background about sexuality in general, as well as the Catholic
teaching on masturbation (opens in a new window).

_This article is one of a set aboutChristian sex. All are part of this
website’s section on Catholic morality._

_Also check ourhome page for more articles about the Catholic faith!_

Copyright (C) 2016 beginningCatholic.com. All rights reserved.

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

