
>

>> __

>>

>> ![AnimalSake](https://animalsake.com/images/logos/animalsake.png)

>>

>> __

>>

>> **Follow Us:** __

>>

>> ![announcement](/images/ann-speaker.gif)

>>

>> Share animal photographs or incredible animal facts.

>>

>> ![What Do Cows

Eat?](https://www.buzzle.com/img/articleImages/609545-20421-57.jpg)

>>

>> # What Do Cows Eat?

>>

>> Have you ever thought, what went into that piece of steak that winds up on
your lunch table? Grass is a dietary staple for cows, but what else do they
eat? Read on to know more.

>>

>> __ Ashmeet Bagga

>>

>> __ Last Updated: Mar 13, 2019

>>

>> Cows are Ruminants!

>>

>> ![Cows](https://pixfeeds.com/images/animals/cows/640-92185605-herd-of-cows-

grazing-on-field.jpg)

>>

>> Cows have the ability regurgitate food, called _cud_ , to chew it some more
until it is completely digested.

>>

>> Cows are herbivores with four digestive systems in their stomach, to help
them digest tough food. They are two-toed or cloven hooved, horned or hornless
depending on the breed. and are mostly found in the tropical, and sub-tropical
parts of the world except New Zealand and Australia. They are basically
domesticated for milk, beef, and transportation.

>>

>> Cows thrive on plants, and unlike other animals, they don't have upper
front teeth rather a tough dental pad on the top. After a cow is chomping on
grass, it has the ability to bring back the grass from the stomach to their
mouth to re-chew it. They re-chew it with their strong molars to break it down
for easy digestion.

>>

>> ![cow](https://pixfeeds.com/images/animals/cows/640-502062972-cow-grazing-

on-a-green-summer-meadow.jpg)

>>

>> Cows are known as our foster mothers as they bring forth large quantities
of milk that is fit for human consumption. They primarily eat grass, but they
feed on other things too, which helps to give good quality milk, and fatten
them up for superior quality beef.

>>

>> What Do Dairy Cows Eat?

>>

>> ✦ Dairy cows require lot of nutrition and energy to produce delicious and
healthy milk for our consumption. Hence, farmers provide them with a healthy
and balanced diet.

>>

>> ![cow](https://pixfeeds.com/images/animals/cows/640-488442155-close-up-
of-a-

cow.jpg)

>>

>> ✦ Cows eat a mixture of food which includes grass silage, hay, alfalfa hay,
grains, and let's not forget corn. Ensure that food for cows will be available
all yearlong, grass and alfalfa are dried to make hay. This makes it easier
for farmers to stock up on hay, especially during winters.

>>

>> ✦ Cows even like to eat silage, while hay is generally dry, silage is
usually moist. Silage goes through a fermentation process, which adds extra
nutrients. To make corn silage, farmers utilize each and every part of corn,
including its cob and husk.

>>

>> ✦ Just like humans, even cows need added minerals and vitamins, grains
which comprises barley, oats, and corn, plus the added minerals and vitamins
mixed into their feed, to ensure healthy growth.

>>

>> ✦ On an average, a cow consumes more than 100 pounds of food everyday.
Sometimes, farmers work with nutritionists to ensure that their cow has a
healthy diet.

>>

>> ✦ Cows are also picky about their food, so to ensure that they don't skip
any particular food item, farmers use a trick known as Total Mixed Ratio or
TMR. All dairies have their own different recipes for mixing, and it also
depends on the cow's growth stage.

>>

>> But, typically, a TMR consists of cottonseed, energy nugget, alfalfa hay,
pelleted soybean hulls, wet gluten, straw and dried distillers grains. These
food items are full of proteins, calcium, and vitamins. It is specially
beneficial for lactating cows.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Apart from the aforementioned food, they also feed on cereal grains,
forages, barley, and molasses.

>>

>> ✦ Water is absolutely essential for dairy cows, there should be a provision
of fresh clean water all the time. Cows that are producing large quantities of
milk can gulp down at least 25 gallons of water per day.

>>

>> What Do Beef Cows Eat?

>>

>> ✦ There is hardly any difference in the dietary habits of a dairy cow and a
beef cow, apart from the fact, that beef cows are bred for a different
purpose. They primarily eat pasture throughout their lives, but in the
winters, they eat silage and hay.

>>

>> ✦ Most of the beef cattle feed on fresh grass. They also consume legumes
such as clover, trefoil, sainfoin, lespedeza. Grasses that they thrive on
include wheat grass, fescue, orchard grass, bromegrass, and timothy.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Some cows are fed sweet treats, especially those who have to gain weight,
are growing, and the ones which are to be slaughtered. Oats, sorghum, barley,
insalage, cracked corn are other items fed to cows.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Water, although not a nutrient, is still essential for them to regulate
body temperature, growth, lactation, hydration. An animal won't die from lack
of nutrients, but definitely through dehydration.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Lentil, pea, chickpea straw, slough hay, grass hay, clover silage are
other food items that beef cows eat. A beef cow will eat at least 2% to 2.5%
of its body weight per day.

>>

>> ✦ Roughage are indigestible components that are heavy, but provides less
energy, but they are relatively high in fiber. Grains such as corn, barley,
and milo are less in fiber but high in energy. Cows are fed more grain items
when they grow older, this helps to beef them up.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Oilseed like soybeans, canola meal are highly required in their diet.
They not only provide fiber, but are filled with essential proteins and
energy.  
>

>>

>> ✦ Many by-products that are left-over ingredients from food production for
humans can be a meal for a cow. By-products includes candy waste, bakery
waste, beet pulp, cotton seeds, citrus pulp, brewers grains, and corn gluten
feed. Corn, candy, and bakery waste should be fed in minimum due to its high
sugar content.  
>

>>

>> Many cows in factory farms are fed supplements to provide them with
adequate vitamins and minerals. Some are even fed fish to make their flesh
rich with omega-3. Cows have a varied diet and eat a variety of foods and
different kinds of grass.

>>

>> __ **Share This**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![Facts About Jersey

Cows](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE2M3B4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Facts About Jersey Cows

>>

>> ![Information About the Guernsey

Cow](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMyMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjMyMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Information About the Guernsey Cow

>>

>> ![Cow

Breeds](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMyMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIxNHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Cow Breeds

>>

>> ![Cow

Names](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjI2MHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjI1M3B4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Cow Names

>>

>> ![Is Cattle Farming Worth

it?](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMyMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjMyMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Is Cattle Farming Worth it?

>>

>> ![Facts About the Texas Longhorn

Cattle](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NXB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Facts About the Texas Longhorn Cattle

>>

>> ![Biggest Snake in the

World](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE5MnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Biggest Snake in the World

>>

>> ![Smartest Animals in the

World](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Smartest Animals in the World

>>

>> ![List of 20 Animals That are Black and

White](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> List of 20 Animals That are Black and White

>>

>> ![Sahara Desert

Animals](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Sahara Desert Animals

>>

>> ![List of Animals with Protective

Armor](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> List of Animals with Protective Armor

>>

>> ![Caterpillar

Identification](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Caterpillar Identification

>>

>> ![Types of Flying

Insects](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE2M3B4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Types of Flying Insects

>>

>> ![Facts About

Snakes](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Facts About Snakes

>>

>> ![Facts about

Crickets](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Facts about Crickets

>>

>> ![Interesting Facts About

Starfish](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Interesting Facts About Starfish

>>

>> ![Cheetah

Facts](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Cheetah Facts

>>

>> ![Snake Identification by

Characteristics](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Snake Identification by Characteristics

>>

>> ![Fastest Animal on

Earth](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE4OHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Fastest Animal on Earth

>>

>> ![26 Burrowing Animals \(With

Pictures\)](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> 26 Burrowing Animals (With Pictures)

>>

>> ![Polar Bear Facts For

Kids](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Polar Bear Facts For Kids

>>

>> ![Are Sharks Mammals or

Fish?](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NXB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Are Sharks Mammals or Fish?

>>

>> ![Extinct Animals in the Last 100

Years](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Extinct Animals in the Last 100 Years

>>

>> ![Jaguar's Habitat: What Do Jaguars

Eat?](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE4OHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Jaguar's Habitat: What Do Jaguars Eat?

>>

>> ![How are Chicken Eggs

Fertilized?](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> How are Chicken Eggs Fertilized?

>>

>> ![Komodo Dragon Facts for

Kids](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Komodo Dragon Facts for Kids

>>

>> ![Pros and Cons of

Zoos](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Pros and Cons of Zoos

>>

>> ![List of Jungle

Animals](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> List of Jungle Animals

>>

>> ![Green Caterpillar

Identification](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE5MnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Green Caterpillar Identification

>>

>> ![Rainforest Animal

Adaptations](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> Rainforest Animal Adaptations

>>

>> ![10 Examples of Predator-Prey

Relationships](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjE3NnB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> 10 Examples of Predator-Prey Relationships

>>

>> ![7 Dumbest Animals in the

World](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZlcnNpb249IjEuMSIgd2lkdGg9IjMwMHB4IiBoZWlnaHQ9IjIwMHB4IiB2aWV3Qm94PSIwIDAgMTAwIDEwMCIgcHJlc2VydmVBc3BlY3RSYXRpbz0ibm9uZSI+PHJlY3QgZmlsbD0iI2NjYyIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMDAiIHdpZHRoPSIxMDAiIC8+PC9zdmc+)

>>

>> 7 Dumbest Animals in the World

>>

>> (C)2019. All rights reserved.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Service

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

