
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> ![Home](/sites/all/themes/wri/images/logo.png)
![Home](https://www.wri.org/sites/all/themes/wri/logo.png)

>>

>> ## Making Big Ideas Happen™

>>

>> ## Donate to WRI

>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Other Sites

>>  
>>                 >>                       * WRI Brasil

>>  
>>                       * WRI China

>>  
>>                       * WRI India

>>  
>>                       * WRI Indonesia

>>  
>>                       * WRI Mexico

>>  
>>                       * Resource Watch

>>  
>>                       * WRI Ross Center for Sustainable Cities

>>  
>>                       * CAIT – WRI’s climate data explorer

>>  
>>                       * Greenhouse Gas Protocol

>>  
>>                       * Global Forest Watch

>>  
>>                       * The Access Initiative

>>  
>>                       * Climate Watch

>>  
>>                       * PREPData

>>  
>>                       * LandMark

>>  
>>

>> ## Menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                         * Topics

>>  
>>                           * Climate

>>  
>>                           * Energy

>>  
>>                           * Food

>>  
>>                           * Forests

>>  
>>                           * Gender

>>  
>>                           * Sustainable Cities

>>  
>>                           * Water

>>  
>>                           * Business

>>  
>>                           * Economics

>>  
>>                           * Finance

>>  
>>                           * Governance

>>  
>>                         * Project Directory

>>  
>>                         * Top Outcomes

>>  
>>                         * Our Approach

>>  
>>                         * Support our Work

>>  
>>                       * Where We Work

>>  
>>                         * Africa

>>  
>>                         * Brazil

>>  
>>                         * China

>>  
>>                         * Europe

>>  
>>                         * India

>>  
>>                         * Indonesia

>>  
>>                         * Mexico

>>  
>>                         * United States

>>  
>>                         * More...

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                         * WRI Publications

>>  
>>                         * World Resources Report

>>  
>>                       * Maps & Data

>>  
>>                         * Data Platforms

>>  
>>                         * Data Library

>>  
>>                         * Presentations

>>  
>>                         * Videos

>>  
>>                       * Blog

>>  
>>                         * Commentaries

>>  
>>                         * Podcasts

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Events

>>  
>>                         * All WRI Events

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * Mission & Goals

>>  
>>                         * Strategic Plan

>>  
>>                         * Managing for Results

>>  
>>                         * Experts & Staff

>>  
>>                         * Board of Directors

>>  
>>                         * Annual Reports

>>  
>>                         * Recognized Donors

>>  
>>                         * Sustainability at WRI

>>  
>>                         * Open Data Commitment

>>  
>>                         * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * Get Involved: Corporations

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>                           * Internships

>>  
>>                         * Contact

>>  
>>                         * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                         * Procurement Opportunities

>>  
>>

>> ## Topics

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate

>>  
>>                       * Energy

>>  
>>                       * Food

>>  
>>                       * Forests

>>  
>>                       * Water

>>  
>>                       * Cities

>>  
>>                       * Ocean

>>  
>>

>> ## Search

>>

>> Search

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Business

>>  
>>                       * Economics

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Governance

>>  
>>

>> ## You are here

>>

>> Home > Blog > This Interactive Chart Explains World’s Top 10 Emitters, and
How They’ve Changed

>>

>> # This Interactive Chart Explains World’s Top 10 Emitters, and How They’ve

>>

>> Changed

>>

>> by ![Johannes Friedrich](https://wriorg.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-

public/styles/tiny/public/johannes-friedrich-wri.jpg?itok=3M74wITt) Johannes
Friedrich, Mengpin Ge and Andrew Pickens - April 11, 2017

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Comments

>>

>> |

>>

>> Add Comment

>>

>> |

>>

>> Print

>>

>> Tweet

>>

>> ![Data Visualization of GHG
Emissions](https://wriorg.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-

public/styles/large/public/Circle2017-Title.png?itok=26EaN3C9)

>>

>> Data Visualization of GHG Emissions. Photo from CAIT Climate Data Explorer

>>

>> _EDITOR'S NOTE 11/21/2017: The newClimate Watch platform is now available,
allowing you to explore historical and projected emissions, countries' climate
targets and their linkages with the Sustainable Development Goals._

>>

>> A lot has happened since countries met in Paris in 2015 and agreed on an
accord to combat climate change. So far, more than 170 countries have ratified
or otherwise joined the Paris Agreement, representing more than 80 percent of
global emissions. Several major economies, including Canada, Germany and
Mexico, have also developed long-term plans to decarbonize their economies.

>>

>> As countries implement their targets and policies and develop more detailed
pathways to reduce their emissions, it’s important to fully understand our
global emissions picture and how it has changed over time. WRI recently
updated its CAIT Climate Data Explorer on the world’s top greenhouse gas-
emitting countries with the latest global data available (2013). Here’s an
interactive chart to explore it by country and by economic sector, showing how
the top emitters have changed in recent years.

>>

>> ### 1) The World’s Top 3 Emitters Contribute 14 Times the Emissions of the

>>

>> Bottom 100

>>

>> The top three greenhouse gas emitters— China, the European Union and the
United States—contribute more than half of total global emissions, while the
bottom 100 countries only account for 3.5 percent.1 Collectively, the top 10
emitters account for nearly three-quarters of global emissions. The world
can’t successfully tackle the climate change challenge without significant
action from these countries.

>>

>> ### 2) The Energy Sector Is the Major Culprit, but Action in Every Sector

>>

>> Counts

>>

>> Over the past 10 years, the energy sector has remained the largest
contributor to emissions over any other sector, representing 72 percent of
global emissions in 2013.

>>

>> China saw the largest increase in single-sector emissions from 2012 to 2013
from its energy production, which increased by 365 million metric tons of
carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e), or 4 percent. The majority of these
emissions came from an increase in electricity production, heating and
transportation. However, this does represent a lower rate of increase than the
historical average —China’s average annual growth rate for coal consumption
from 2000 to 2013 was 8.8 percent.

>>

>> On the other hand, Australia, the world’s 15th -largest emitter, saw the
largest emissions decrease in a single sector, with its agricultural emissions
dropping by 65 MtCO2e, or a reduction of 34.6 percent since 2012. The majority
of those reductions came from a decrease in the area of burning savannah2,
which reduced methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions.

>>

>> ### 3) Some Major Emitters are Reversing their Trends

>>

>> From 2012 to 2013, the top 10 emitters cumulatively increased their
emissions by 2.2 percent, compared to the average annual growth of 2.4 percent
over the last 10 years. Within that same period, the top two global emitters,
China and the United States, saw the largest single year percentage increase
in greenhouse gas emissions, with a rise of 4.3 and 1.4 percent respectively.

>>

>> Even with that growth of emissions from 2012-2013 by top emitters, if we
expand the timescale, their combined emissions have remained the same for the
past decade.3 In that time, the United States peaked its emissions in 2007,
and the European Union, the third-largest emitter, saw steady reductions.
Others have stabilized their emissions over the last 10 years, including
Russia and Canada.

>>

>> More recent data looking only at energy-related carbon dioxide emissions
shows that this type of emission stayed flat globally between 2014 and 2016,
even as the global economy grew during the same period. Since carbon dioxide
is the most abundant greenhouse gas, this is an encouraging trend. We await
further data to see whether other types of greenhouse gases are growing or
shrinking, and whether this trend will continue.

>>

>> As 21 countries are already proving, decoupling carbon dioxide emissions
from economic growth is happening. But to avoid the worst impacts of climate
change, we need to bend the emissions curve significantly downward.

>>

>> ### Explore CAIT Data

>>

>> Learn more about global emissions by visiting WRI’s CAIT Climate Data
Explorer. You can sift through data covering 186 countries, multiple economic
sectors, several types of emissions and a 162-year timespan. We also provide
tools to explore other dimensions of climate policy, including countries’
Paris Agreement mitigation contributions, projections of emissions from major
emitters through 2100, and various dimensions of climate equity.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> 1 Please note that this circle chart visualization excludes emissions and
removals from land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and bunker fuels
sectors. For the complete inventory with sectoral breakdown, please refer to
CAIT Climate Data Explorer.

>>

>> 2 The emissions data are sourced from FAOSTAT – “Burning Savannah”.
Available at: https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/GH. According to its
documentation
[https://fenixservices.fao.org/faostat/static/documents/GH/GH_e.pdf], the
yearly burned area is “produced from monthly statistics of the Global Fire
Emission Database v.4, based on MODIS remote-sensing data.” It is hard to
conclude solely from the data whether this reduction is caused by natural
disturbance, or policy/action implemented. However, it is important to note
Australia’s Carbon Farming Initiative Savannah burning methodology
[https://www.environment.gov.au/climate-change/emissions-reduction-
fund/cfi/methodologies/determinations/savanna-burning] which could potentially
have contributed to this reduction
[https://www.csiro.au/en/Research/LWF/Areas/Ecosystems-biodiversity/Managing-
landscapes-for-biodiversity/Fire-ecology/Burning-emissions]

>>

>> 3 Ranking and the trend analysis are based on CAIT Country GHG Emissions
data of total GHG emissions excluding Land-use Change and Forestry (LUCF) from
2003-2013.

>>

>> Tags: climatewatch, climatewatch-pinned, paris agreement, climate change,
emissions, emissions inventories, international climate policy, UNFCCC

>>

>> ## Related Blog Posts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### Climate Science, Explained
in 10 Graphics

>>  
>>

>> April 26, 2017

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### 8 Interactive Graphics
Answer Top Climate Change Questions

>>  
>>

>> September 24, 2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### Staying on Track: A New Tool
for Designing and Meeting

>>  
>>

>> Emissions-Reduction Goals

>>

>> November 18, 2014

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### The World Is Moving On Since
Trump Announced Intent to

>>  
>>

>> Withdraw From the Paris Agreement on Climate Change

>>

>> May 30, 2018

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### 7 Signs of Progress: A Year
of National Climate Action

>>  
>>

>> May 29, 2018

>>

>> ## Stay Connected

>>

>> ## SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTERS

>>

>> Get our latest commentary, upcoming events, publications, maps, and data.
Sign up for the weekly WRI Digest.

>>

>> Sign Up

>>

>> Leave this field blank

>>

>> ## Donate to WRI

>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Get Involved

>>

>> For corporations  
>  For individuals

>>

>> ## Follow WRI

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>                       * LinkedIn

>>  
>>                       * RSS

>>  
>>

>> ## WRI Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Data Platforms

>>  
>>                       * Data Library

>>  
>>                       * Presentations

>>  
>>                       * Videos

>>  
>>

>> ![](/sites/all/themes/wri/images/logo.png)

>>

>> 10 G Street NE Suite 800  
>  Washington, DC 20002, USA

>>

>> Phone +1 (202) 729-7600  
>  Fax +1 (202) 729-7610

>>

>> ## Footer Menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Support WRI

>>  
>>                       * Charity Ratings

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Donor Privacy Policy

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

