

  * Abortion

![\[Photo: Senator Renee Unterman looks at the camera while she sits in the

senate chamber.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/unterman_2-530x350.jpg)

News Politics

## Renee Unterman Helped Bring a Near-Total Abortion Ban to Georgia. Now She's

Running for Congress.

Jun 6, 2019 Ally Boguhn

### Trending on Abortion

    
    
    1. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
    2. Biden Lied About the Hyde Amendment. Or He Is Very Confused.
    3. I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
    

More on Abortion

  * Contraception

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Contraception

    
    
    1. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
    2. An Anti-Choice Group Pledged It Would 'Never' Provide Contraception as It Pursued Title X Funds
    3. Family Research Council: The Extreme Anti-Choice Group Molding Trump's Reproductive Rights Policy
    

More on Contraception

  * Economic Justice

![\[Photo: A food service employee works in a fast food

kitchen.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/working_1-530x350.jpg)

News Economic Justice

## There's a New Standard for Paid Family Leave Policy in the United States

Jun 6, 2019 Auditi Guha

### Trending on Economic Justice

    
    
    1. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
    2. Pro-Choice Laws Are Winning in These States (Updated)
    3. 'They’ve Moved the Goalpost': How Missouri Lawmakers Are Regulating Legal Abortion Out of Existence
    

More on Economic Justice

  * Politics

![\[Photo: Senator Renee Unterman looks at the camera while she sits in the

senate chamber.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/unterman_2-530x350.jpg)

News Politics

## Renee Unterman Helped Bring a Near-Total Abortion Ban to Georgia. Now She's

Running for Congress.

Jun 6, 2019 Ally Boguhn

### Trending on Politics

    
    
    1. Biden Lied About the Hyde Amendment. Or He Is Very Confused.
    2. Anti-Choice Democrats Made Louisiana's Near-Total Abortion Ban Possible
    3. Elizabeth Warren Understands Political Power. And She Intends to Use It.
    

More on Politics

  * Race

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Race

    
    
    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
    2. The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter
    3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
    

More on Race

  * Law and Policy

![\[Photo: A scientists wearing scrubs looks at samples under a

microscope.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/scientist_1-530x350.jpg)

News Law and Policy

## Trump Administration Bans Government Scientists From Using Fetal Tissue

Jun 6, 2019 Sony Salzman

### Trending on Law and Policy

    
    
    1. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
    2. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
    3. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
    

More on Law and Policy

  * LGBTQ

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on LGBTQ

    
    
    1. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
    2. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
    3. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
    

More on LGBTQ

  * Religion

Evann Normandin ![Evann Normandin](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Evann-Normandin-Headshot-200x200.png)

Commentary Contraception

## Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.

May 24, 2019

### Trending on Religion

    
    
    1. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
    

More on Religion

  * Media

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Media

    
    
    1. The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter
    2. Protecting and Expanding Social Security Doesn't Mean Policing Reproduction
    3. In Tupac's 'Dear Mama,' a Backstory About His Mother's Activism, Mass Incarceration, and Bail
    

More on Media

  * Immigration

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Immigration

    
    
    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
    2. The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter
    3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
    

More on Immigration

  * Violence

![\[Photo: Johana Medina smiles while taking a

selfie.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/jo_1-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Media

## The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter

Jun 6, 2019 Tina Vasquez

### Trending on Violence

    
    
    1. The Escalation of Anti-Abortion Violence Ten Years After Dr. George Tiller’s Murder
    2. The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter
    3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
    

More on Violence

  * Human Rights

![\[Photo: A food service employee works in a fast food

kitchen.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/working_1-530x350.jpg)

News Economic Justice

## There's a New Standard for Paid Family Leave Policy in the United States

Jun 6, 2019 Auditi Guha

### Trending on Human Rights

    
    
    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
    2. Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
    3. Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
    

More on Human Rights

  * Science

![\[Photo: A scientists wearing scrubs looks at samples under a

microscope.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/scientist_1-530x350.jpg)

News Law and Policy

## Trump Administration Bans Government Scientists From Using Fetal Tissue

Jun 6, 2019 Sony Salzman

### Trending on Science

    
    
    1. Trump Touted Gilead's Donation of HIV-Prevention Medication, But Doctors Want Generics—Not Charity
    2. Trump Administration Bans Government Scientists From Using Fetal Tissue
    

More on Science

  * Sexual Health

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Sexual Health

    
    
    1. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
    2. Dr. Leana Wen: A State of Emergency in Missouri and Across the Country
    3. Our So-Called Health Department Is Doing Everything It Can to Deny Care to Millions
    

More on Sexual Health

  * Sexuality

![\[Photo: Two queer people of color tenderly caress each other in bed. One

looks concerned, the other looks understanding.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/queers-bed_2-530x350.jpg)

Culture & Conversation LGBTQ

## Ask a Queer Chick: How Can I Get Excited About My Sex Life With My

Girlfriend?

Apr 19, 2019 Lindsay King-Miller

  * Health Systems

Dr. Oxiris Barbot Dr. Demetre Daskalakis ![Dr. Demetre

Daskalakis](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/DD-

headshotsquare-200x200.jpg)

Commentary Sexual Health

## A Breakthrough Strategy for Ending the HIV Epidemic

Jun 6, 2019

### Trending on Health Systems

    
    
    1. My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
    2. Catholic Hospitals Can Deny Patients Contraception. This Is My Story.
    3. OB-GYN Says U.S. Marshals Service Is Shackling Detained Pregnant Migrants
    

More on Health Systems

  * Family

![\[Photo: A Black mom tenderly caresses her young

child.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/adoption-1-530x350.jpg)

Culture & Conversation Race

## Adopting While Black

Jun 5, 2019 Sakena Jwan Washington

### Trending on Family

    
    
    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
    2. Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
    3. What It's Like to Be a Disabled Parent in an Inaccessible World
    

More on Family

  * Maternity and Birthing

Jeni Putalavage-Ross ![Jeni Putalavage-Ross](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/indeed-austin-day1-3574-200x133.jpg)

Commentary Abortion

## I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put

Me in Greater Danger.

Jun 4, 2019

### Trending on Maternity and Birthing

    
    
    1. Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention
    2. Ethics Over Economics: Building a Better Adoption System Amid Baby 'Shortages'
    3. I Needed a Second-Trimester Abortion. A Proposed Texas Bill Would Have Put Me in Greater Danger.
    

More on Maternity and Birthing

  * Environment

![](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2016/03/shutterstock_360509222-530x350.jpg)

Roundups Environment

## On World Water Day, a Spotlight on U.S. Public Water Systems

Mar 22, 2016 Kanya D'Almeida

  * Sections
  * Search

Rewire.News

## Every Reason for an Abortion Is a Good Reason

Jun 07, 2019 Hyde Amendment Fetal Tissue Research

  * SUBSCRIBE
  * Donate

### Your Reading List

  1. ![](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/oreilly-powers-obenshain.jpg) Every Reason for an Abortion Is a Good Reason
  2. ![\[Photo: A food service employee works in a fast food kitchen.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/working_1-320x320.jpg) There's a New Standard for Paid Family Leave Policy in the United States
  3. ![\[Photo: An illustration of an alarm clock superimposed on a map of the United States. The alarm clock has text that reads ](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/soe-320x320.jpg) Dr. Leana Wen: A State of Emergency in Missouri and Across the Country

Search Rewire.News Go __

Commentary Abortion

# Every Reason for an Abortion Is a Good Reason

Jul 15, 2013, 8:33am Amanda Marcotte

Both pro- and anti-choice activists often dwell on women's reasons for
abortion, even though they're legally unimportant. Unfortunately, this
discourse distracts from the real issue here, which is women's basic right to
bodily autonomy and self-determination.

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Linked In
  * Email
  * Permalink
  * Instapaper
  * Print

![](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/oreilly-powers-

obenshain.jpg) (From the left) Bill O'Reilly, Kirsten Powers, and Kate
Obenshain.  
__ Fox News

### Trending

  * Today
  * This Week

  * ![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-530x350.jpg) Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention

  * 20 Years for Giving Water to Migrants? A Religious Freedom Case of Little Interest to 'Religious Freedom' Industry
  * The Details of Johana Medina's Detainment and Death Matter
  * Dr. Leana Wen: A State of Emergency in Missouri and Across the Country
  * Biden Lied About the Hyde Amendment. Or He Is Very Confused.
  * What It's Like to Be a Disabled Parent in an Inaccessible World
  * Renee Unterman Helped Bring a Near-Total Abortion Ban to Georgia. Now She's Running for Congress.
  * Adopting While Black

  * ![\[Photo: A newborn baby in a hospital.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/migrant-mothers-530x350.jpg) Trump Administration Separates Some Migrant Mothers From Their Newborns Before Returning Them to Detention

  * 20 Years for Giving Water to Migrants? A Religious Freedom Case of Little Interest to 'Religious Freedom' Industry
  * Trump Proposed Allowing Anti-Gay Discrimination in Adoption Just Before the Holiday Weekend
  * Four Ways to Destigmatize Abortion in Everyday Conversations
  * Supreme Court Declines to Hear Anti-Transgender Fearmongering Case
  * When It Comes to Birth Control and Eugenics, Clarence Thomas Gets It All Wrong
  * My First Pap Smear as an Openly Nonbinary Person Was Wildly Disorienting
  * What It's Like to Be a Disabled Parent in an Inaccessible World

### **The Breach**

A podcast about pregnancy and drug use, Native people and tribal sovereignty.
It’s a story nobody has told beyond a small community, but one everybody needs
to hear.

__

While spouting a series of lies, Bill O’Reilly whined recently on Fox News
that women in Texas are providing what he considers insufficient reasons for
getting an abortion. The exchange between him and Fox’s official fake feminist
Kirsten Powers went like this:

> Powers shot back: “The current status quo in Texas that these people are
fighting for, who are fighting the bill, is to be able to abort your baby up
until the third trimester.”

>

> “Yeah!” O’Reilly jabbed. “For any reason! Women’s health! ‘Hey! Look I
sprained my hand!’”

>

> “Yeah,” Powers said. “For any reason. For any reason. Yeah.”

>

> ### Get the facts, direct to your inbox.

>

> Want more Rewire.News? Get the facts, direct to your inbox.

>

> SIGN UP

To hear O’Reilly and Powers talk, one would think that in order to get a safe,
legal abortion under the standards set out by _Roe v Wade_ , one has to go in
and provide a “reason” that you “deserve” this abortion, and some kind of
authority figure determines if it’s good enough before you get an
abortion—their only concern is that women are supposedly not giving good
enough reasons. Obviously, these two pundits know better and are just being
dishonest with the viewers, but that they are engaging in this rhetoric in the
first place speaks to a serious problem in how abortion is discussed in this
country.

Abortion is often framed as a mercy bestowed upon a woman who has committed
the “crime” of having had sex. Mercy is something that someone else grants
you, however, and not something you can simply decide for yourself that you
deserve. That’s what people are stabbing at when they say they don’t want
women to use abortion “as birth control.” The fear is that a woman might get
an abortion without feeling remorseful or may, gasp, even feel like she’s
entitled to it without having to apologize or grovel. Basically, people are
uneasy with leaving the decision of whether or not an abortion is deserved to
the woman seeking it herself. What a lot of people in the gray area between
pro- and anti-choice want is for women to have to justify themselves in order
to get abortions, even if it’s something as simple as making women feel
ashamed of themselves for what they supposedly did wrong.

The problem with that, beyond the inherent sexism of it, is that there’s no
real legal way to make women justify themselves, besides maybe making them
sign a piece of paper that says, “I’m sorry I was a naughty girl who had sex.
Can I please have my abortion now?” _Roe v Wade_ sets things like time limits
and _Planned Parenthood v Casey_ says that there can be no “undue burden” to
access, but the court decisions that shape abortion law don’t speak to “good”
vs. “bad” reasons to have abortions, and for good reason. Abortion is medical
treatment. It goes against basic medical ethics to require a patient to argue
their moral worth before they are permitted access to health care they
require.

The confusion between how ordinary people talk about abortion in terms of
deserving-ness and how the law handles abortion, as a matter of rights, is why
so much polling data on abortion is bunk. Gallup is notoriously bad on this
front, showing that somehow half of Americans call themselves “pro-life” but a
majority still want abortion to be legal. In other words, a lot of Americans
call themselves “pro-life” but disagree with the “pro-life,” i.e. anti-choice
movement about abortion access. I believe that speaks to a longing a lot of
people have for women to be able to access abortion, but only if they provide
a good reason for it. Of course, there’s no legal way to determine the
difference between a good and a bad reason, to separate the “good girls” who
just “made a mistake” from those deemed unrepentant sluts.

That is the legal reality, but the anti-choice movement knows that they gain
ground when they can appeal to the mushy middle’s desire to make abortion
available, but only if you somehow have proved yourself worthy of mercy for
your supposed sins. Restrictions like waiting periods and mandatory ultrasound
shaming rituals are sold to the public as ways to make the woman seeking
abortion “earn” it by inducing shame—forcing her to feel bad about what she
supposedly did, basically a time out in the corner for the naughty girls. In
reality, they instead attack access, adding time and expense to the abortion.
Instead of separating the good girls from the sluts, they are more likely to
separate those who are privileged enough to be able to afford both the expense
and the time off and those who can’t.

This is also why anti-choicers like to talk about women “regretting” abortion.
The underlying narrative, aimed at the mushy middle: Abortion is clearly too
easy to get. Women are impetuously rushing into it, only to realize later that
they were bad girls who didn’t pay enough for their sins. We need to make it
harder to get, so that only the truly deserving, those who feel remorse, can
get it. The idea is to shift focus to reasons and to get people thinking about
those who have “good” ones vs. those who supposedly do not.

Unfortunately, I fear that pro-choicers may be making this problem worse by
our rhetoric. Every time anti-choicers try to restrict abortion, we trot out
women who’ve had abortions to put a face on the situation. It’s a good idea,
but as Jessica Grose of XX Factor writes, the women in these stories almost
always feel the need to justify their abortions, to explain that they are
deserving—which in turn implies that others are not.

> First-person abortion stories in major publications are almost always about
“appropriate” abortions. Shrouded in mournful tones, regretting the baby that
couldn’t be, reflecting on that upsetting choice. But this is such a narrow
way of looking at an experience that a third of women in America have. Most
people who get abortions aren’t teenagers or terminating unviable babies. Six
in 10 women who get abortions are already mothers, and 3 in 10 women have two
or more children. The abortion rate is highest among women in their 20s. And
there is a range of emotions that women feel when they’re getting what is
essentially a medical procedure. Some feel relief, some feel nothing, others
even feel joy.

Pro-choicers definitely don’t mean it this way! Most of us believe that women
are entitled to abortions if they want them, and you don’t need to have to
provide your reasons for the rest of us to judge. But it’s inescapable: If you
trot out your sob story to convince people you deserved your abortion, you end
up implying, even if accidentally, that some women don’t deserve theirs. When
both pro- and anti-choice people are forever debating what is and isn’t an
acceptable reason to have an abortion, it shouldn’t be surprising that the
people in the middle think that’s what this debate is about.

Because of this, I have to sign off on Grose’s suggestion: Tell your abortion
stories, but don’t try to justify yourself! We need to get the message out
that, as with every other medical intervention out there, pre-viability
abortions don’t need to be earned. You don’t need to be a “good girl” who is
full of remorse. The woman who slept with 30 guys and accidentally got
pregnant because she foolishly took her chances without a condom deserves her
abortion just as much as the loving mother of two who has discovered a fetal
defect incompatible with life. We believe this to be true, and we can only
start convincing the public that it’s true if we start talking about this
belief more straightforwardly.

### Topics and Tags:

Abortion restrictions, Abortion Stigma, Access to abortion, Bill O'Reilly,
kirsten powers

### Related Articles

Dr. Leana Wen ![Dr. Leana Wen](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/PPFA_Dr_Wen_Portrait_18_11_12_0004-1-192x200.jpg)

Commentary Abortion

### Dr. Leana Wen: A State of Emergency in Missouri and Across the Country

Jun 6, 7:39am

![\[Photo: A split-screen image of Corey Booker \(L\), Kamala Harris and

Elizabeth Warren \(R\).\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/elections-2020-530x350.jpg)

Analysis Politics

### With 'Roe' on the Line, Some Democrats Seek Federal Codification of

Abortion Rights

Jun 5, 10:34am Ally Boguhn

![\[Photo: A mother with Down syndrome plays with her

toddler.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/down-syndrome-

mom-530x350.jpg)

Culture & Conversation Family

### What It's Like to Be a Disabled Parent in an Inaccessible World

Jun 4, 11:19am Robyn Powell

![\[Photo: The exterior of a Planned Parenthood Reproductive Health Services

Center in St Louis, Missouri.\]](https://rewire.news/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/PP-Missouri-530x350.jpg)

News Abortion

### 'They’ve Moved the Goalpost': How Missouri Lawmakers Are Regulating Legal

Abortion Out of Existence

Jun 3, 11:40am Erin Heger

Load More

  * Abortion
  * Contraception
  * Economic Justice
  * Environment
  * Family
  * Family Planning
  * Health Systems
  * Human Rights
  * Immigration
  * Law and Policy
  * LGBTQ
  * Maternity and Birthing
  * Media
  * Politics
  * Race
  * Religion
  * Science
  * Sexual Health
  * Sexuality
  * Violence

  * False Witnesses

  * State of Abortion
  * Tracking Texas Abortion Access

  * Legislative Tracker

    * Laws
    * Cases
    * States
    * Topics
  * Multimedia

    * Videos
    * Podcasts
    * Photos
  * About Us

    * About Rewire.News
    * Staff
    * Jobs
    * Contributors
    * Pitching Guidelines
    * Board of Directors
    * Finances
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Service
    * RSS
    * Subscribe
    * Contact Us

### Rewire.News

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram

© 2019 Rewire.News. All rights reserved.

  * SUBSCRIBE
  * Donate

Front page

#### Sections

  * Editorial
  * News
  * Commentary
  * Analysis
  * Investigations
  * Religion Dispatches
  * Culture & Conversation
  * ABLC Blog
  * Roundups
  * Archive

  * Legislative Tracker

    * Cases
    * Laws
    * Organizations
    * People
    * States
    * Topics
  * Multimedia
    * Podcasts
    * Videos
    * Photos
  * About Us

    * About Rewire.News
    * Staff
    * Jobs
    * Contributors
    * Pitching Guidelines
    * Press Releases
    * Board of Directors
    * Finances
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Terms of Service
    * RSS
    * Subscribe
    * Contact Us
  * Appalachia Reporting Project

  * False Witnesses
  * State of Abortion
  * Tracking Texas Abortion Access

  * Facebook

  * Twitter
  * Instagram

#### Topics

  * Abortion
  * Contraception
  * Economic Justice
  * Politics
  * Race
  * Law and Policy
  * LGBTQ
  * Religion
  * Media
  * Sexual Health
  * Immigration
  * Violence
  * Human Rights
  * Science
  * Family Planning
  * Sexuality
  * Health Systems
  * Family
  * Maternity and Birthing
  * Environment

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-GJfaG9CUSLudj.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

