
>

>> Accessibility links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Skip to article

>>  
>>                       * Skip to navigation

>>  
>>

>> ![](/template/ver1-0/i/telegraph_print_190.gif)

>>

>> Telegraph.co.uk

>>

>> Tuesday 04 June 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>                       * Sport

>>  
>>                       * Business

>>  
>>                       * Money

>>  
>>                       * Comment

>>  
>>                       * Culture

>>  
>>                       * Travel

>>  
>>                       * Life

>>  
>>                       * Women

>>  
>>                       * Fashion

>>  
>>                       * Luxury

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Film

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Investigations

>>  
>>                       * Obits

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Science

>>  
>>                       * Earth

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Royal

>>  
>>                       * Celebrity

>>  
>>                       * Defence

>>  
>>                       * Scotland

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Environment

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change

>>  
>>                       * Wildlife

>>  
>>                       * Picture Galleries

>>  
>>                       * Earth Video

>>  
>>                       * Tree diseases

>>  
>>

>> Advertisement

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Home»

>>  
>>                       2. News»

>>  
>>                       3. Earth»

>>  
>>                       4. Environment»

>>  
>>                       5. Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> # Al Gore 'profiting' from climate change agenda

>>

>> ## Al Gore has been accused of profiting from the climate change agenda

>>

>> amid claims he is on course to become the world's first "carbon
billionaire".

>>

>> ![Al Gore: Al Gore could become world's first carbon billionaire

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01515/alGore_1515233c.jpg)

>>

>> Since leaving office Mr Gore has campaigned relentlessly on green issues.
Photo: AP

>>

>> By Nick Allen in Los Angeles

>>

>> 7:13PM GMT 03 Nov 2009

>>

>> The former US vice president is in line to make a large profit from a firm
producing smart meters which monitor household electricity use.

>>

>> He is a partner in a Silicon Valley venture capital firm which invested £45
million in Silver Spring Networks, a small California company which has been
developing technology to monitor household power use to make the electricity
grid more efficient.

>>

>> Last week the US Energy Department announced £2 billion in grants and a
proportion of that, thought to be more than £305 million, will go to utility
operators with which Silver Spring has contracts.

>>

>> The venture capitalists who invested, including Mr Gore, now look set to
receive a handsome return.

>>

>> Since leaving office Mr Gore has campaigned relentlessly on green issues.
His 2006 film "An Inconvenient Truth", which followed his attempts to educate
people about the dangers of global warming, won an Oscar for best documentary.
It showed Mr Gore giving comprehensive slide shows about the catastrophic
effects of climate change. He has presented the slide show more than 1,000
times.

>>

>> Mr Gore, who won a Nobel Prize in 2007, has also just published his latest
book on global warming "Our Choice: A Plan to Solve the Climate Crisis" which
advocates new energy saving technologies and policies.

>>

>> Since he quit mainstream politics, Mr Gore's personal fortune has risen
from £1.2 million to an estimated £60 million.

>>

>> He has made significant investments in environmentally friendly projects
like carbon trading markets, solar power, biofuels, electric vehicles,
sustainable fish farming and waterless lavatories. He has also invested in
non-climate change related investments, including putting money into Google
and Apple.

>>

>> Mr Gore said it was "certainly not true" that he was going to become a
"carbon billionaire" and that the suggestion came from global warming deniers.

>>

>> He said: "I am proud to put my money where my mouth is for the past 30
years. And though that is not the majority of my business activities, I
absolutely believe in investing in accordance with my beliefs and my values."
At a hearing earlier this year on clean energy legislation, Mr Gore was
challenged by Republican congresswoman, Marsha Blackburn, over his
investments.

>>

>> She said: "The legislation that we are discussing here today, is that
something that you are going to personally benefit from?"

>>

>> Mr Gore said: "I believe that the transition to a green economy is good for
our economy and good for all of us, and I have invested in it."

>>

>> He added that he had put "every penny" he has made from his investments
into the non-profit Alliance for Climate Protection, which campaigns for
solutions to climate change.

>>

>> In a heated exchange Mr Gore said: "If you believe that the reason I have
been working on this issue for 30 years is because of greed, you don't know
me."

>>

>> Mr Gore said he was "proud" of his record of investing in green technology.

>>

>> But global warming sceptics are not convinced. Marc Morano of
climatedepot.com said: "Al Gore wants to become the first carbon billionaire
and he is poised to do it.

>>

>> "As much as Gore's made now, it is going to be a piker league compared to
what he is going to make in five years if all these new carbon trading
mandates go through."

>>

>> ## Climate Change

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### News »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### World News »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### North America »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### USA »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### Earth »

>>  
>>

>> In Climate Change

>>

>> ![Fisherman Rene Valero, from the Urus ethnic group, is seen on his boat on

the bed of a dried Lake Poopo in Oruro, south of La Paz,

Bolivia](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03530/bolivia-

draught_Fi_3530426g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Bolivia's second largest lake dries up

>>

>> ![Smoke billows from stacks as Chinese men pull a tricycle in a
neighborhood

next to a coal fired power plant in Shanxi,

China](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03530/china-

summ_3530343g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### China's dirty old town

>>

>> ![Flooding in

Somerset](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02798/Somerset-

SUM_2798829g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Somerset Levels flooding

>>

>> ![Britain’s wind farms have generated an income of £2 billion for their

operators. Of that sum, only £900 million came from actually selling

electricity to the National Grid – the remaining £1.1 billion was earned

through a consumer subsidy added on to electricity

bills.](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02640/wind1_2640641g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Communities are still powerless to stop wind farms

>>

>> ![Swimming

pool](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02244/Q333-Swimming-

pool_2244338g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### The weather prophets should be chucked in the deep end

>>

>> ![Climate change MP: humans may not be to blame for global warming

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02576/tim-

yeo_2576024g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Climate change MP: humans may not be to blame for global warming

>>

>> ![Fracking of one kind or another has been used in Britain for

decades](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/02418/C7JT9T_2418058g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Ignore the doom merchants, Britain should get fracking

>>

>> Top news galleries

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> ![](http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/imp.gif?client=ca-

telegraph_uk_420x200&event=noscript)

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Latest Video»

>>

>> ![Rat climbs over

man](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Rat_climbs_over_ma_3602877g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Large rat climbs on sleeping commuter

>>

>>
![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/grandad_3602577g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Disabled great-grandfather denied stairlift and forced to crawl

>>

>> ![Old and frail wombat is

rescued](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Wombat-1-e_3602888g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Elderly wombat rescued after being attacked

>>

>> ![Scientist in lab

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03549/scientist-in-

lab_3549159g.jpg)

>>

>> Sponsored

>>

>> ### When media meets medicine

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> More from the web

>>

>> Loading

>>

>> More from The Telegraph

>>

>> Loading

>>

>> News

>>

>> ![Progress 17 supply vehicle departs from the International Space

Station](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03285/Progress_17__3285797f.jpg)

>>

>> ### The latest news, opinion and analysis

>>

>> View

>>

>> Football

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03101/old-

trafford_3101399f.jpg)

>>

>> ### Catch up on all the latest football news and results

>>

>> View

>>

>> Film

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03208/oscars-

summary-2_3208754f.jpg)

>>

>> ### All the latest film trailers, reviews and features

>>

>> View

>>

>> Competitions

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03614/Malta-

TD_3614608f.jpg)

>>

>> ### Enter one of our exciting new competitions

>>

>> View

>>

>> Back to top

>>  
>>                 >>                       * HOME

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * UK News

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Long Reads

>>  
>>                       * Wikileaks

>>  
>>                       * Jobs

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * World News

>>  
>>                       * Europe

>>  
>>                       * USA

>>  
>>                       * China

>>  
>>                       * Royal Family News

>>  
>>                       * Celebrity news

>>  
>>                       * Dating

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Defence

>>  
>>                       * Weird News

>>  
>>                       * Editor's Choice

>>  
>>                       * Financial Services

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pictures

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * Matt

>>  
>>                       * Alex

>>  
>>                       * Comment

>>  
>>                       * Blogs

>>  
>>                       * Crossword

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Contact us

>>  
>>                       * Privacy and Cookies

>>  
>>                       * Advertising

>>  
>>                       * Fantasy Football

>>  
>>                       * Tickets

>>  
>>                       * Announcements

>>  
>>                       * Reader Prints

>>  
>>                       *           * Follow Us

>>  
>>                       * Apps

>>  
>>                       * Epaper

>>  
>>                       * Expat

>>  
>>                       * Promotions

>>  
>>                       * Subscriber

>>  
>>                       * Syndication

>>  
>>

>> (C) Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019

>>

>> Terms and Conditions

>>

>> Today's News

>>

>> Archive

>>

>> Style Book

>>

>> Weather Forecast

>>

>> ![](//secure-uk.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=uk-101665h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

