
>

>> MENUMENU

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
*             * #### Social

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                           * View mediabiasfactcheck's profile on Facebook

>>  
>>                           * View MBFC_News's profile on Twitter

>>  
>>

>> # Media Bias/Fact Check

>>

>> ## The Most Comprehensive Media Bias Resource

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Search

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Methodology

>>  
>>                       * MBFC News

>>  
>>                       * Original Articles/News

>>  
>>                       * Apps/Extensions

>>  
>>                       * Submit Source

>>  
>>                       * Sources Pending

>>  
>>                       * Factual News Search

>>  
>>                       * RSS

>>  
>>                       * Help Us Fact Check

>>  
>>                       * Corrections Policy

>>  
>>                       * Filtered Search

>>  
>>                       * Changes/Corrections (NEW)

>>  
>>

>> BIAS CATEGORIES MENUBIAS CATEGORIES MENU

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Left Bias

>>  
>>                       * Left-Center Bias

>>  
>>                       * Least Biased

>>  
>>                       * Right-Center Bias

>>  
>>                       * Right Bias

>>  
>>                       * Pro-Science

>>  
>>                       * Conspiracy-Pseudoscience

>>  
>>                       * Questionable Sources

>>  
>>                       * Satire

>>  
>>                       * (NEW) Re-Evaluated Sources

>>  
>>

>> Home » NBC News

>>

>> # NBC News

>>

>> _**Has this Media Source failed a fact check?**_ **LET US KNOW HERE.**

>>

>> Share:

>>

>> # ![NBC News - Left Center

>>

>> Bias](https://i2.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/leftcenter04.png?resize=600%2C67&ssl=1)![NBC News -

Left Center Bias](https://i2.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/leftcenter04.png?resize=600%2C67&ssl=1)LEFT-CENTER
BIAS

>>

>> These media sources have a slight to moderate liberal bias. They often
publish factual information that utilizes loaded words (wording that attempts
to influence an audience by using appeal to emotion or stereotypes) to favor
liberal causes. These sources are generally trustworthy for information, but
may require further investigation. See all Left-Center sources.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Overall, we rate NBC News
Left-Center biased based on story

>>  
>>

>> selection and word choices that moderately favor the left and High for
factual reporting due to proper sourcing and a clean fact check record.**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Detailed Report

>>

>> Factual Reporting: **HIGH  
>  ** Country: **USA  
>  ** World Press Freedom Rank: **USA 45/180**

>>

>> _**History**_

>>

>> _Founded in 1940, NBC News is the news division of the American broadcast
television network NBC, formerly known as the National Broadcasting Company.
The division operates under NBCUniversal News Group, a subsidiary of
NBCUniversal, in turn a subsidiary of Comcast. The President of NBC News is
Noah Oppenheim._

>>

>> _**Funded by / Ownership**_

>>

>> _NBC News is owned by Comcast and funded through advertising._

>>

>> _**Analysis / Bias**_

>>

>> _NBC News is what some call amainstream media source. They typically
publish/report factual news that uses moderately loaded words in headlines
such as this: Trump threatens border security shutdown, GOP cool to idea.
Story selection tends to favor the left through both wording and bias by
omission where they under report some news stories that are favorable to the
right. NBC always sources their information to credible sources that are
either low biased or high for factual reporting. _

>>

>> _Afactual search reveals that NBC News has not failed a fact check by an
IFCN fact checker._

>>

>> _Overall, we rate NBC News Left-Center biased based on story selection and
word choices that moderately favor the left and High for factual reporting due
to proper sourcing and a clean fact check record. (5/18/2016) Updated (D. Van
Zandt 7/30/2018)_

>>

>> Source: http://www.nbcnews.com/

>>

>> Take Our Poll

>>

>> ### Share this:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Click to share on Twitter (Opens
in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new
window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to print (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * ### *** Voting Polls DO NOT influence overall bias
ratings**

>>  
>>

>> ### ****

>>

>> ![](https://i1.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/btn_donatecc_lg.gif?w=940&ssl=1)![](https://i1.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/btn_donatecc_lg.gif?w=940&ssl=1)

>>

>> ![](https://i0.wp.com/www.protruthpledge.org/hotlink-

ok/ptpBacked.gif?w=940&ssl=1)![](https://i0.wp.com/www.protruthpledge.org/hotlink-

ok/ptpBacked.gif?w=940&ssl=1)  
>  We signed the Pro-Truth Pledge:  
>  please hold us accountable.

>>

>> Ads do not necessarily reflect the views of MBFC

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> ![](https://i1.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/btn_donatecc_lg.gif?w=940&ssl=1)![](https://i1.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/btn_donatecc_lg.gif?w=940&ssl=1)

>>

>> ![](https://i2.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/02/Become-our-

patron.jpg?resize=300%2C92&ssl=1)![](https://i2.wp.com/mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/02/Become-our-patron.jpg?resize=300%2C92&ssl=1)

>>

>> #### Recently Added Sources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Mothership posted on June 6,
2019

>>  
>>                       * Daily Hampshire Gazette posted on June 4, 2019

>>  
>>                       * AllAfrica posted on June 4, 2019

>>  
>>                       * Autism Investigated posted on June 4, 2019

>>  
>>                       * Times Free Press posted on June 1, 2019

>>  
>>                       * DC Alert posted on June 1, 2019

>>  
>>                       * FBNewsCycle posted on May 29, 2019

>>  
>>                       * OffGuardian posted on May 29, 2019

>>  
>>                       * The Herald News (Massachusetts) posted on May 29,
2019

>>  
>>                       * The Monitor (Texas) posted on May 26, 2019

>>  
>>

>> #### News by Bias

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Least

>>  
>>                       * Left

>>  
>>                       * Left-Center

>>  
>>                       * Right-Center

>>  
>>                       * Right

>>  
>>                       * Fact Checks

>>  
>>

>> As Mexico-U.S. talks progress, markets rise on hopes a deal could be close

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> Mexican and U.S. officials held a second day of talks on trade and
migration on Thursday, with marke [...]

>>

>> Mexico foreign minister says national guard to deploy to southern border

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> Mexico will deploy its national guard to its southern border with
Guatemala, the Mexican foreign min [...]

>>

>> Colorado school officials consider razing site of Columbine massacre

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> Public education officials in Colorado are considering a plan to tear down
and rebuild Columbine Hig [...]

>>

>> Biden reverses position on federal funding for abortion

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> U.S. Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden said on Thursday he no
longer supported a ban on th [...]

>>

>> Exclusive: U.S. will not accept more Turkish F-35 pilots over Russia
defenses - sources

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> The United States has decided to stop accepting any additional Turkish
pilots who planned to come to [...]

>>

>> Jay Inslee Says He May Defy the DNC on a Climate Change Debate

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> Washington Governor Jay Inslee says he won’t rule out participating in a
primary debate on climate c [...]

>>

>> On the 75th Anniversary of D-Day, Trump Obsesses Over Media Coverage

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> World leaders gathered in Normandy, France, on Thursday to mark the 75th
anniversary of the D-Day la [...]

>>

>> After a Mass Shooting, Virginia Is Rethinking Its Gun Laws—and Rewiring the
2020 Race

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> In the wake of last week’s shooting at a municipal building in Virginia
Beach—which left 12 dead, ma [...]

>>

>> The Suspicious Twitter Network Trolling for Regime Change in Iran

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> As the Trump administration has ramped up economic sanctions against Iran
and aimed increasingly thr [...]

>>

>> Alabama Banned Abortions. Then Its Lawmakers Remembered Rapists Can Get
Parental Rights.

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> A few months after Jessica Stallings’ 13th birthday, her uncle raped her
for the first time. He was [...]

>>

>> ‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves,
and businesses, on European trip

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> ![‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves,

and businesses, on European

trip](https://www.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_606w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2019/06/06/National-

Politics/Images/2019-06-05T223751Z_1503795824_RC11550A8DF0_RTRMADP_5_USA-

TRUMP-IRELAND.jpg?t=20170517)The president’s four adult children tagged along
during events in London, Normandy and Doonbeg, Irel [...]

>>

>> House likely to hold William Barr, Wilbur Ross in contempt after subpoena
demands are rejected

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> ![House likely to hold William Barr, Wilbur Ross in contempt after subpoena

demands are

rejected](https://www.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_606w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2019/06/05/National-

Security/Images/AFP_1GA1KQ-2044.jpg?t=20170517)The Justice Department sent a
letter to Oversight Committee Chairman Elijah E. Cummings saying it wo [...]

>>

>> Joe Biden reverses position on federal funding of abortion after Democratic
outcry

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> ![Joe Biden reverses position on federal funding of abortion after

Democratic

outcry](https://www.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_606w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2019/06/07/National-

Politics/Images/Election_2020_Joe_Biden_95421.jpg-9e920.jpg?t=20170517)The
former vice president announced his new stance after activists, lawmakers and
presidential campa [...]

>>

>> ‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves,
and businesses, on European trip

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> ![‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves,

and businesses, on European

trip](https://www.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_606w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2019/06/06/National-

Politics/Images/2019-06-05T223751Z_1503795824_RC11550A8DF0_RTRMADP_5_USA-

TRUMP-IRELAND.jpg?t=20170517)The president’s four adult children tagged along
during events in London, Normandy and Doonbeg, Irel [...]

>>

>> Joe Biden’s views on abortion aren’t as uncommon among Americans as some
might believe

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> ![Joe Biden’s views on abortion aren’t as uncommon among Americans as some

might

believe](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/oZldKyzgJPpp8KACq2gOTEAk7MM=/606x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/YU6HXOUH6UI6THLT4K5GXPY3TM.jpg)The former
vice president's stance puts him in line with many of the voters some
Democrats want [...]

>>

>> Arrest of Senior Huawei Executive Steps Up U.S.-China Confrontation

>>

>> 6 December 2018

>>

>> The arrest of a senior executive of networking-gear maker Huawei
Technologies Co. intensifies the co [...]

>>

>> Oil Slides After OPEC Delays Decision on Level of Output Cuts

>>

>> 6 December 2018

>>

>> OPEC members on agreed to production curbs but will wait to hear from
Russia before making a final d [...]

>>

>> North Korea Expands Long-Range Missile Base

>>

>> 6 December 2018

>>

>> North Korea is expanding military facilities thought to house long-range
missiles that can hit the U [...]

>>

>> Talks to End War in Yemen Begin Under U.S. Pressure

>>

>> 6 December 2018

>>

>> Yemen’s government and Houthi rebels begin U.S.-backed talks Thursday to
end a nearly four-year war [...]

>>

>> In Tanzania, a Crackdown Sends LGBT People Into Hiding

>>

>> 6 December 2018

>>

>> A crackdown on LGBT rights in Tanzania has forced people into hiding and
sparked an international ba [...]

>>

>> Florida woman stabbed herself because she was 'tired of living in Trump’s
country'

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> A Florida woman stabbed herself three times with a kitchen knife and told
responding officers that P [...]

>>

>> Elizabeth Warren says John Kelly 'cashing in' on Trump policies with new
job

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> Sen. Elizabeth Warren, the Democratic presidential candidate who wants to
limit corporate recruitmen [...]

>>

>> Pelosi says she wants to see Trump ‘in prison’

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> At a huddle among top Democratic lawmakers Tuesday night, House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi reportedly said [...]

>>

>> Biden says GOP governor of Massachusetts 'a decent guy'

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> Joe Biden once again called a prominent Republican a “decent guy." This
time, it was Massachuse [...]

>>

>> Justin Amash faces rally by critics in home district

>>

>> 5 June 2019

>>

>> Calls by Rep. Justin Amash for President Trump's impeachment aren't going
over well with s [...]

>>

>> Donald Trump - Republicans support Donald Trump, but not as much as he said

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> The Truth-o-Meter says: Half-True | Republicans support Donald Trump, but
not as much as he said Pre [...]

>>

>> Kirsten Gillibrand - Kirsten Gillibrand wrong about Donald Trump and bump
stocks

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> The Truth-o-Meter says: Pants on Fire! | Kirsten Gillibrand wrong about
Donald Trump and bump stocks [...]

>>

>> Michael Bennet - Michael Bennet is right that a majority say the effects of
global warming are happening

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> The Truth-o-Meter says: Mostly True | Michael Bennet is right that a
majority say the effects of glo [...]

>>

>> Taylor Swift - Taylor Swift says most Democrats, independents, Republicans
back nondiscrimination for LGBTQ people

>>

>> 5 June 2019

>>

>> The Truth-o-Meter says: Mostly True | Taylor Swift says most Democrats,
independents, Republicans ba [...]

>>

>> Donald Trump - Donald Trump said the UK is America’s largest trading
partner. It ranks 5th

>>

>> 5 June 2019

>>

>> The Truth-o-Meter says: False | Donald Trump said the UK is America’s
largest trading partner. It ra [...]

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> My Tweets

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> #### MBFC News

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Latest Fact Checks from the
International Fact Checking

>>  
>>

>> Network (IFCN) 6/6/2019 June 6, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Daily Source Bias Check: Bustle
June 6, 2019

>>  
>>                       * The Latest Fact Checks from the International Fact
Checking

>>  
>>

>> Network (IFCN) 6/5/2019 June 5, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Daily Source Bias Check: Waking
Times June 5, 2019

>>  
>>                       * BREAKING: Trump says Senate Republicans would be
'foolish' to

>>  
>>

>> try to block his tariffs on Mexico June 4, 2019

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> Terms and Conditions  
>  Fair Use Policy

>>

>> Disclaimer

>>

>> Links/FAQ

>>

>> Contact

>>

>> Copyright © Media Bias Fact Check, LLC

>>

>>
![sponsored](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

>>

>> Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

>>

>> Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

>>

>> Email check failed, please try again

>>

>> Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

