
>

>> ### ![ZME Science](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>

>> content/uploads/2014/08/zme-logo.png)

>>

>> Skip to content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Environment

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Health & Medicine

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Space

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Feature

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * More

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * ### ZME Science

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                           * About

>>  
>>                           * Authors

>>  
>>                           * Archives

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * ### Advertise

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                           * Advertise

>>  
>>                           * Media Kit

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * ### Legal

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                           * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                           * Comment Policy

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * ### Contact

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                           * Contact Info

>>  
>>                           * Subscribe

>>  
>>                           * Contribute

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * ![](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2014/08/trans2.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       *  __

>>  
>>

>> # How much renewable energy does the world use

>>

>> __Last updated on June 26th, 2018 at 1:46 pm by Tibi Puiu ![E-mail

author](https://image.flaticon.com/icons/svg/259/259550.svg)

>>

>> ShareTweet

>>

>> According to an IEA estimate, we humans produced and used 5.67 Ã— 1020
joules of energy in 2013, equivalent to about 18.0 terawatt-hour (TWh). One
TWh is equivalent to 5 billion barrels of oil per year or 1 billion tons of
coal per year, it also used to be the globe's entire energy consumption in
1890. How far we've grown, and how fast. What our fellow Earthlings didn't
know more than a century ago, however, is that you can only get so far burning
fossils fuels until 1) they run out and 2) the planetary system collapses
under catastrophic climate change.

>>

>> ![renewable energy](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/renewables1-1024x576.jpg)

>>

>> Image: Nova World

>>

>> Energy is everything. Our bodies can not function without it and, nowadays,
we literally can't survive without electricity either. Our civilization is so
dependent on it, that it would simply collapse without it. Just the other day,
the Venezuelan government ordered a two day work week for state employees
because there isn't enough electricity to spare. Their economy is in collapse,
looting is rampant and the population is threatened with widespread hunger.

>>

>> Luckily, there are means to get plenty of clean energy without disturbing
the planet's climate and without having to be afraid that it will someday run
out. Of course, you've heard about renewable energy -- this is energy that can
be cycled sustainably from self-replenishing sources like the sun, flowing
water, wind, oceans' waves and more.

>>

>> According to the Renewables Global Status Report (GSR) from REN21, roughly
a fifth of the world's electrical power production now comes from renewable
sources. To be more precise, in 2013 renewable energy accounted for 22% of the
global energy mix, up from 21% in 2012 and 18% in 2007.

>>

>> The International Energy Agency says renewable energy could make up over a
quarter of global electricity generation by 2020 thanks to the rapid
deployment of wind and solar energy, as well as new hydro. A report by
Frankfurt School UNEP Centre and Bloomberg New Energy Finance says carbon-free
renewable power plants in 2014 surpassed 100,000 megawatts of capacity for the
first time. A year before, in 2013, it seems like interest in renewable energy
surpassed conventional energy sources for the first time as 143 gigawatts of
renewable electricity capacity were added, compared with 141 gigawatts in new
plants that burn fossil fuels.

>>

>> ![fossil fuel clean energy](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/fossil-fuel-clean-energy-1024x504.png)

>>

>> New power generation capacity added by year. Credit: Bloomberg New Energy
Finance

>>

>> Investors have also finally caught on. In 2014, energy investment in rose
17% over the previous year, surging to $270bn, according to the report. At the
same time, money is being moved away from fossil fuels -- almost $3.4 trillion
have been divested away from oil, gas and coal so far; $800 billion happened
in only two months!

>>

>> While a lot of renewable energy has been installed in the past decade, its
share in the total energy mix is still a minority because demand, and total
energy production, has grown. In the graph below, you can see the "orange"
line representing wind, solar and geothermal energy as a small dint but rising
very fast.

>>

>> ![World energy use by source, 1965-2014. Source: Carbon

Brief](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/billions-of-

toe.png)

>>

>> World energy use by source, 1965-2014. Source: Carbon Brief

>>

>> ### When will renewable energy become the dominant source of energy on the

>>

>> planet?

>>

>> This is an important question to answer. It's clear there are no "IFs":
renewable energy will one day power most if not all the planet's energy needs
-- but when? Oil prices are at their lowest in six years, which has weakened
demand and put the breaks somewhat on renewable energy development. Even so,
progress is strong. In the United States, 1,393 megawatts of solar PV were
added in Q2 2015, marking the seventh consecutive quarter in which the U.S.
added more than 1 gigawatt of PV installations. At over 20 gigawatts of
installed solar electric capacity, we now have enough solar in the U.S. to
power 4.6 million homes, reducing harmful carbon emissions by more than 25
million metric tons a year. That's 31 times more than 10 years ago. Since the
ITC was passed in 2006, U.S. solar growth has exploded and more than 150,000
American solar jobs have been created.

>>

>> ![June_US_Solar_Gen](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/June_US_Solar_Gen.png)

>>

>> According to the EIA, utility-scale solar PV capacity in June 2015
increased by 47.5%, when compared to June 2014.

>>

>> Some areas and countries are transitioning faster than others, depending on
their available resources and political climate. Costa Rica functioned on 99%
renewable power for 2015, Germany is 35% powered by renewables, while Denmark
on a good day produces 140% of its energy needs from wind.

>>

>> By 2030, doubling the renewable energy capacity installed today is not only
feasible, it would be expensive not to! Helped by market incentives which have
made solar energy dirt cheap, many will choose to transition simply because it
makes economic sense -- nevermind offsetting global warming, cleaning the air
of pollution and creating a new economy which serves millions of jobs.

>>

>> ![](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/power-2.png)

>>

>> One scenario in which renewable energy becomes dominant by 2030. More about
it here.

>>

>> Fossil fuels are subsidized $14.5 billion a day. Imagine if all that money
went to subsidizing solar, which is cheaper than fossil fuels even un-
subsidized in many places already. If fossil fuels lost their subsidies, while
also being hit by a carbon tax which is expected, renewable energy progress
would be fantastic. But it's a big IF, since the fossil fuel industry is still
strong with lobbyist tentacles extended through any government office that
matters in this world.

>>

>> It might take anything from 20 to 50 years for renewable energy to become
the primary source of energy on this planet. There's no question of "if this
happens", only of "when this may happen". We can only hope it won't be too
late.

>>

>> ### Editor's Pick

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2019/05/fabella-320x190.jpg)

>>

>> Some people have extra bones, teeth, and even nipples. Here are some
examples

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![Grinder.](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2019/04/grinder-1412226_960_720-320x190.jpg)

>>

>> What are the different types of energy

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2019/04/Thomas-Edison-Contribution-Featured-320x190.jpg)

>>

>> Who really invented the light bulb?

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/2019/04/powder-snow-496875_960_720-320x190.jpg)

>>

>> Why is snow white?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Obsidian is one of the only
few substanes that can kill the

>>  
>>

>> undead from Game of Thrones. Credit: HBO //
YouTube](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/2f60fc30-ccd2-0132-45c5-0ebc4eccb42f-320x190.gif)

>>

>> Why Game of Thrones' Dragonglass is so deadly

>>

>> (C) 2007-2017 **ZME Science**. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy | About
| Authors | Contact.

>>

>> Back to top

>>

>> * * *

>>  
>>                 >>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Environment __

>>  
>>                         * Animals

>>  
>>                         * Climate

>>  
>>                         * Renewable Energy

>>  
>>                         * Eco tips

>>  
>>                         * Environmental Issues

>>  
>>                         * Green Living

>>  
>>                       * Health & Medicine __

>>  
>>                         * Alternative Medicine

>>  
>>                         * Anatomy

>>  
>>                         * Diseases

>>  
>>                         * Genetics

>>  
>>                         * Mind & Brain

>>  
>>                         * Nutrition

>>  
>>                       * Space __

>>  
>>                         * Astronomy

>>  
>>                         * Astrophysics

>>  
>>                         * Remote sensing

>>  
>>                       * Feature __

>>  
>>                         * Feature Post

>>  
>>                         * Art

>>  
>>                         * Great Pics

>>  
>>                         * Design

>>  
>>                         * Fossil Friday

>>  
>>                         * AstroPicture

>>  
>>                         * GeoPicture

>>  
>>                         * Did you know?

>>  
>>                         * Offbeat

>>  
>>                       * More __

>>  
>>                         * ZME Science

>>  
>>                         * Advertise

>>  
>>                         * Legal

>>  
>>                         * Contact

>>  
>>                         * logo

>>  
>>

>> ### Search the site

>>

>> __

>>

>> Ã—

>>

>> ENJOYED THIS ARTICLE?

>>

>> Subscribe To Our Newsletter

>>

>> Join 50,000+ subscribers and be among the first to get the latest insights
and updates from science.

>>

>> Email

>>

>> Stay Updated

>>

>> By subscribing you agree to our Privacy Policy. Give it a try, you can
unsubscribe anytime.

>>

>> ![close-link](https://cdn.zmescience.com/wp-

content/plugins/convertplug/modules/modal/functions/config/img/cross.png)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

