
>

>> Menu

>>

>> Home

>>

>> The Effects of Global Warming on Wildlife

>>

>> Search

>>

>> Search the site GO

>>

>> #### Social Sciences

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Environment

>>  
>>                         * Climate Change and Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Green Living

>>  
>>                         * Environment Health

>>  
>>                         * Pollution

>>  
>>                         * Alternative Fuels

>>  
>>                       * Psychology

>>  
>>                       * Sociology

>>  
>>                       * Archaeology

>>  
>>                       * Economics

>>  
>>                       * Ergonomics

>>  
>>                       * Maritime

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Science, Tech, Math

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                         * Math

>>  
>>                         * Social Sciences

>>  
>>                         * Computer Science

>>  
>>                         * Animals & Nature

>>  
>>                       * Humanities

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * History & Culture

>>  
>>                         * Visual Arts

>>  
>>                         * Literature

>>  
>>                         * English

>>  
>>                         * Geography

>>  
>>                         * Philosophy

>>  
>>                         * Issues

>>  
>>                       * Languages

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * English as a Second Language

>>  
>>                         * Spanish

>>  
>>                         * French

>>  
>>                         * German

>>  
>>                         * Italian

>>  
>>                         * Japanese

>>  
>>                         * Mandarin

>>  
>>                         * Russian

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * For Students & Parents

>>  
>>                         * For Educators

>>  
>>                         * For Adult Learners

>>  
>>

>> Science, Tech, Math › Social Sciences

>>

>> # The Effects of Global Warming on Wildlife

>>

>> ##

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Share

>>  
>>                       * Flipboard

>>  
>>                       * Email

>>  
>>

>> Print

>>

>> ![Female polar bear and cub on a small ice

floe](https://www.thoughtco.com/thmb/DBpi8FBCdMtitDdnhX4BCvBwNg0=/768x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/GettyImages-155141288-5c513be646e0fb00014a2f4c.jpg)

>>

>> SeppFriedhuber/Getty Images

>>

>> ![Social

Sciences](https://www.thoughtco.com/thmb/-B-CSDjNxWHDPJfwpLHHTj_eBJY=/220x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/left_rail_social_science-58a22da468a0972917bfb5e2.png)

>>

>> #### Social Sciences

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Environment

>>  
>>                         * Climate Change and Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Green Living

>>  
>>                         * Environment Health

>>  
>>                         * Pollution

>>  
>>                         * Alternative Fuels

>>  
>>                       * Psychology

>>  
>>                       * Sociology

>>  
>>                       * Archaeology

>>  
>>                       * Economics

>>  
>>                       * Ergonomics

>>  
>>                       * Maritime

>>  
>>

>> by Earth Talk

>>

>> Updated January 30, 2019

>>

>> Global warming, scientists say, is responsible not only for shrinking ice
caps but also for a surge in extreme weather that is causing heat waves,
forest fires, and droughts. The polar bear standing on a chunk of shrinking
ice, apparently stranded, has become a familiar image, a symbol of the
devastating effects of climate change.

>>

>> This image is somewhat misleading since polar bears are powerful swimmers
and climate change will primarily affect them by restricting access to prey.
Nevertheless, researchers agree that even small changes in temperature are
enough to threaten hundreds of already struggling animals. Time is of the
essence: A 2003 study in the journal Nature concluded that 80 percent of some
1,500 wildlife species sampled are already showing signs of stress from
climate change.

>>

>> ### Habitat Disruption

>>

>> The key impact of global warming on wildlife is habitat disruption, in
which ecosystems—places where animals have spent millions of years
adapting—rapidly transform in response to climate change, reducing their
ability to fulfill the species' needs. Habitat disruptions are often due to
changes in temperature and water availability, which affect the native
vegetation and the animals that feed on it.

>>

>> Affected wildlife populations can sometimes move into new spaces and
continue to thrive. But concurrent human population growth means that many
land areas that might be suitable for such “refugee wildlife” are fragmented
and already cluttered with residential and industrial development. Cities and
roads can act as obstacles, preventing plants and animals from moving into
alternative habitats.

>>

>> A report by the Pew Center for Global Climate Change suggests that creating
“transitional habitats” or “corridors” could help migrating species by linking
natural areas that are otherwise separated by human development.

>>

>> ### Shifting Life Cycles

>>

>> Beyond habitat displacement, many scientists agree that global warming is
causing a shift in the timing of various natural cyclical events in the lives
of animals. The study of these seasonal events is called phenology. Many birds
have altered the timing of long-held migratory and reproductive routines to
better sync up with the warming climate. And some hibernating animals are
ending their slumbers earlier each year, perhaps due to warmer spring
temperatures.

>>

>> To make matters worse, research contradicts the long-held hypothesis that
different species coexisting in a particular ecosystem respond to global
warming as a single entity. Instead, different species within the same habitat
are responding in dissimilar ways, tearing apart ecological communities
millennia in the making.

>>

>> ### Effects on Animals Affect People Too

>>

>> As wildlife species struggle and go their separate ways, humans can also
feel the impact. A World Wildlife Fund study found that a northern exodus from
the United States to Canada by some types of warblers led to a spread of
mountain pine beetles that destroy valuable balsam fir trees. Similarly, a
northward migration of caterpillars in the Netherlands has eroded some forests
there.

>>

>> ### Which Animals Are Hardest Hit by Global Warming?

>>

>> According to Defenders of Wildlife, some of the wildlife species hardest
hit by global warming include caribou (reindeer), arctic foxes, toads, polar
bears, penguins, gray wolves, tree swallows, painted turtles, and salmon. The
group fears that unless we take decisive steps to reverse global warming, more
and more species will join the list of wildlife populations pushed to the
brink of extinction.

>>

>> Continue Reading

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Melting Horizons](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### Could There Be Any Advantages of Global Warming?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Global Health](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### How Global Warming Negatively Affects Our Health and Longevity

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Global warming, conceptual
image](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### If Global Warming Persists, Unfortunately These Animals Won't Survive

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![March And Rally At Golden Gate
Bridge Protests Keystone XL

>>  
>>

>> Pipeline](//:0)

>>

>> #### No Rhetoric: What Are the Facts About Climate Change?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Coral Reef](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### How Does Global Warming Affect Marine Life?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![illustration of the Earth in a
frying pan](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### Are Climate Change and Global Warming the Same Thing?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Poisoned emissions from
towers](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### What Are the Causes of Global Warming?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Polar ice melt with polar
bear](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### Global Climate Change and Evolution

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Yellow-rumped warbler in
spring red maple woods](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### Climate Change Is Disrupting Signs of Spring

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![view of earth from
space](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### What Is the Greenhouse Effect?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Icebergs near Greenland -
Arctic](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### Explore the Geography, Climate, and Animals of the Arctic

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Coastal Villages Fear The
Worst As Tides Continue To

>>  
>>

>> Rise](//:0)

>>

>> #### AR4: How Will Climate Change Really Affect Us?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Close up of melting snow on
tree branch over Crater Lake,

>>  
>>

>> Oregon, United States](//:0)

>>

>> #### Is Global Warming Melting Away Our Winters?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![jaxartosaurus](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### What Can Dinosaurs Tell Us About Global Warming?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Dutch Steel Mill](//:0)

>>  
>>

>> #### How Greenhouse Gases Cause Climate Change

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Picture of a giant panda, an
example of an endangered

>>  
>>

>> species.](//:0)

>>

>> #### Endangered Species: A Closer Look

>>

>> Home

>>

>> Learn Something New Every Day

>>

>> Email Address Sign up

>>

>> There was an error. Please try again.

>>

>> You're in! Thanks for signing up.

>>

>> There was an error. Please try again.

>>

>> Thank you for signing up.

>>

>> Follow Us

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Facebook Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Flipboard Flipboard

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Science, Tech, Math

>>  
>>                       * Humanities

>>  
>>                       * Languages

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * Advertise

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Cookie Policy

>>  
>>                       * Careers

>>  
>>                       * Editorial Guidelines

>>  
>>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>

>> ThoughtCo is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Verywell Family

>>  
>>                       * Verywell Mind

>>  
>>                       * The Balance

>>  
>>                       * Lifewire

>>  
>>                       * and more

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

