

  * Skip to main navigation
  * Skip to main content

This content does not have an English version.

This content does not have an Arabic version.

![Mayo Clinic](/-/media/images/mayologo.png)

Search

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now

  * Log in to Patient Account

  * English

    * Español
    * Português
    * العربية
    * 中文
  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

  * English

    * Español
    * Português
    * العربية
    * 中文

![mayo-mobile-logo-image](/styles/img/gbs/logo-mayoclinic-mobile.png)

  * Menu
  * Search

All Mayo Clinic Topics

  * Patient Care & Health Info

    * Overview
    * Healthy Lifestyle
    * Symptoms A-Z
    * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
    * Tests & Procedures A-Z
    * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
    * Appointments
    * Patient & Visitor Guide
    * Billing & Insurance
    * Patient Online Services

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

patientcare.jpg) **Quality Care** _Find out why Mayo Clinic is the right place
for your health care._ Make an appointment.

  * Departments & Centers

    * Overview
    * Doctors & Medical Staff
    * Medical Departments & Centers
    * International Services
    * Research Centers & Programs
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Contact Us

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

docsdepts.jpg) **Meet the Staff** _Find a directory of doctors and departments
at all Mayo Clinic campuses._ Visit now.

  * Research

    * Overview
    * Explore Research Labs
    * Find Clinical Trials
    * Research Faculty
    * Postdoctoral Fellowships
    * Discovery's Edge Magazine
    * Search Publications
    * Training Grant Programs

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

research.jpg) **Research and Clinical Trials** _See how Mayo Clinic research
and clinical trials advance the science of medicine and improve patient care._
Explore now.

  * Education

    * Overview
    * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
    * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
    * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
    * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
    * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
    * Alumni Center

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-meded.jpg)
**Visit Our Schools** _Educators at Mayo Clinic train tomorrow’s leaders to
deliver compassionate, high-value, safe patient care._ Choose a degree.

  * For Medical Professionals

    * Overview
    * Provider Relations
    * Referring Physician Portal
    * AskMayoExpert
    * Video Center
    * Publications
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

medprofs.jpg) **Professional Services** _Explore Mayo Clinic's many resources
and see jobs available for medical professionals._ Get updates.

  * Products & Services

    * Overview
    * Health Books
    * Healthy Living Program
    * International Advisory Services
    * Sports Medicine
    * Licensable Content
    * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
    * Medical Products and Stores
  * Giving to Mayo Clinic

    * Overview
    * Give Now
    * Philanthropy in Action
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Contact Us to Give

> ![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2018/04/25/20/54/globalnav-

transform-3col.jpg) **Philanthropy at Mayo Clinic** _Your support accelerates
powerful innovations in patient care, research and education._ Give today.

Healthy Lifestyle

# Pregnancy week by week

Print

Sections

  1. Basics
    1. Healthy pregnancy
    2. First trimester
    3. Second trimester
    4. Third trimester
    5. Pregnancy problems
  2. In-Depth
  3. Expert Answers
  4. Multimedia
  5. Resources
  6. News From Mayo Clinic
  7. What's New

_Products and services_

![The Mayo Clinic Handbook for Happiness: A 4-step plan for resilient living.

Learn more.](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2015/10/08/16/12/130x195-mayo-clinic-handbook-for-

happiness.jpg)

__

## Free E-newsletter

**Subscribe to Housecall**

Our general interest e-newsletter keeps you up to date on a wide variety of
health topics.

Sign up now

## Fetal development: The 1st trimester

_

Fetal development begins soon after conception. Find out how your baby grows
and develops during the first trimester.

_By Mayo Clinic Staff

You're pregnant. Congratulations! You'll undoubtedly spend the months ahead
wondering how your baby is growing and developing. What does your baby look
like? How big is he or she? When will you feel the first kick?

Fetal development typically follows a predictable course. Find out what
happens during the first trimester by checking out this weekly calendar of
events. Keep in mind that measurements are approximate.

### Weeks 1 and 2: Getting ready

It might seem strange, but you're not actually pregnant the first week or two
of the time allotted to your pregnancy. Yes, you read that correctly!

Conception typically occurs about two weeks after your last period begins. To
calculate your due date, your health care provider will count ahead 40 weeks
from the start of your last period. This means your period is counted as part
of your pregnancy -- even though you weren't pregnant at the time.

### Week 3: Fertilization

![Egg being fertilized and implanting in the

uterus](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/02/pr00112_im04045_mcdc7_fertilization_implantationthu_jpg.jpg?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=8e548a74b8f46a9a4409f4063808dd7083185d56)

The sperm and egg unite in one of your fallopian tubes to form a one-celled
entity called a zygote. If more than one egg is released and fertilized or if
the fertilized egg splits into two, you might have multiple zygotes.

The zygote typically has 46 chromosomes -- 23 from the biological mother and
23 from the biological father. These chromosomes help determine your baby's
sex and physical traits.

Soon after fertilization, the zygote travels down the fallopian tube toward
the uterus. At the same time, it will begin dividing to form a cluster of
cells resembling a tiny raspberry -- a morula.

### Week 4: Implantation

The rapidly dividing ball of cells -- now known as a blastocyst -- has begun
to burrow into the uterine lining (endometrium). This process is called
implantation.

Within the blastocyst, the inner group of cells will become the embryo. The
outer layer will give rise to part of the placenta, which will nourish your
baby throughout the pregnancy.

### Week 5: Hormone levels increase

![Embryo three weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/02/pr00112_im04047_mcdc7_fetal_development_week3thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=f5bf38713f7138d8e16f38d972ee2aed3756ae21)

Fetal development three weeks after conception

The fifth week of pregnancy, or the third week after conception, the levels of
HCG hormone produced by the blastocyst quickly increase. This signals your
ovaries to stop releasing eggs and produce more estrogen and progesterone.
Increased levels of these hormones stop your menstrual period, often the first
sign of pregnancy, and fuel the growth of the placenta.

The embryo is now made of three layers. The top layer -- the ectoderm -- will
give rise to your baby's outermost layer of skin, central and peripheral
nervous systems, eyes, and inner ears.

Your baby's heart and a primitive circulatory system will form in the middle
layer of cells -- the mesoderm. This layer of cells will also serve as the
foundation for your baby's bones, ligaments, kidneys and much of the
reproductive system.

The inner layer of cells -- the endoderm -- is where your baby's lungs and
intestines will develop.

### Week 6: The neural tube closes

![Embryo four weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/02/pr00112_im04046_mcdc7_fetal_development_week4thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=10d5418a61d149c435f105920550d659377d558e)

Fetal development four weeks after conception

Growth is rapid this week. Just four weeks after conception, the neural tube
along your baby's back is closing. The baby's brain and spinal cord will
develop from the neural tube. The heart and other organs also are starting to
form.

Structures necessary to the development of the eyes and ears develop. Small
buds appear that will soon become arms. Your baby's body begins to take on a
C-shaped curvature.

### Week 7: Baby's head develops

![Embryo five weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/03/pr00112_im04050_mcdc7_fetal_development_week5thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=53659ce5440b59090267ddcc08d390d865c85597)

Fetal development five weeks after conception

Seven weeks into your pregnancy, or five weeks after conception, your baby's
brain and face are growing. Depressions that will give rise to nostrils become
visible, and the beginnings of the retinas form.

Lower limb buds that will become legs appear and the arm buds that sprouted
last week now take on the shape of paddles.

### Week 8: Baby's nose forms

![Embryo six weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/03/pr00112_im04051_mcdc7_fetal_development_week6thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=84045c2a1c5fe258155e75302310d6c5c94e8600)

Fetal development six weeks after conception

Eight weeks into your pregnancy, or six weeks after conception, your baby's
lower limb buds take on the shape of paddles. Fingers have begun to form.
Small swellings outlining the future shell-shaped parts of your baby's ears
develop and the eyes become obvious. The upper lip and nose have formed. The
trunk and neck begin to straighten.

By the end of this week, your baby might be about 1/2 inch (11 to 14
millimeters) long from crown to rump -- about half the diameter of a quarter.

### Week 9: Baby's toes appear

![Embryo seven weeks after conception](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/11/03/pr00112_im04052_mcdc7_fetal_development_week7thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=9c4863edaade8418911857e60ef0ba2167f3ee82)

Fetal development seven weeks after conception

In the ninth week of pregnancy, or seven weeks after conception, your baby's
arms grow and elbows appear. Toes are visible and eyelids form. Your baby's
head is large but still has a poorly formed chin.

By the end of this week, your baby might be a little less than 3/4 inch (16 to
18 millimeters) long from crown to rump -- the diameter of a penny.

### Week 10: Baby's elbows bend

![Embryo eight weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/10/18/pr00112_im04610_mcdc7_fetal_development_week8thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=3c602aafed7d4eedd32017575d397f659e3f331a)

Fetal development eight weeks after conception

By the 10th week of pregnancy, or eight weeks after conception, your baby's
head has become more round.

Your baby can now bend his or her elbows. Toes and fingers lose their webbing
and become longer. The eyelids and external ears continue to develop. The
umbilical cord is clearly visible.

### Week 11: Baby's genitals develop

At the beginning of the 11th week of pregnancy, or the ninth week after
conception, your baby's head still makes up about half of its length. However,
your baby's body is about to catch up.

Your baby is now officially described as a fetus. This week your baby's face
is broad, the eyes widely separated, the eyelids fused and the ears low set.
Buds for future teeth appear. Red blood cells are beginning to form in your
baby's liver. By the end of this week, your baby's external genitalia will
start developing into a penis or clitoris and labia majora.

By now your baby might measure about 2 inches (50 millimeters) long from crown
to rump -- the length of the short side of a credit card -- and weigh almost
1/3 ounce (8 grams).

### Week 12: Baby's fingernails form

![Embryo 10 weeks after conception ](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-

consumer/images/2013/08/26/10/18/pr00112_im04611_mcdc7_fetal_development_week10thu_jpg.png?h=124&w=222&bc=eeeeec&as=1&hash=6aa787d8274b799541348ec0efcb69e0dd24414d)

Fetal development 10 weeks after conception

Twelve weeks into your pregnancy, or 10 weeks after conception, your baby is
sprouting fingernails. Your baby's face now has taken on a more developed
profile. His or her intestines are in the abdomen.

By now your baby might be about 2 1/2 inches (61 millimeters) long from crown
to rump -- the length of the short side of a U.S. bill -- and weigh about 1/2
ounce (14 grams).

  * Share
  * Tweet

July 12, 2017

### References

  1. Pregnancy: Stages of pregnancy. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.womenshealth.gov/pregnancy/youre-pregnant-now-what/stages-pregnancy. Accessed June 6, 2017.
  2. Frequently asked questions. Pregnancy FAQ156. Prenatal development: How your baby grows during pregnancy. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. http://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Prenatal-Development-How-Your-Baby-Grows-During-Pregnancy. Accessed June 6, 2017.
  3. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Your Pregnancy and Childbirth Month to Month. 6th ed. Washington, D.C.: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2015.
  4. Moore KL, et al. The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology. 10th ed. Philadelphia, Pa.: Saunders Elsevier; 2016.

See more In-depth

## Products and Services

  1. Book: Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy

## See also

  1. Can birth control pills cause birth defects?
  2. Ovulation
  3. First trimester pregnancy
  4. Implantation bleeding
  5. Nausea during pregnancy
  6. Pregnancy due date calculator
  7. Prenatal care: 1st trimester
  8. Pregnancy exercises
  9. Pregnancy stretches

Show more related contentShow less related content

## Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue
supports our not-for-profit mission.

**Advertising & Sponsorship**

  * Policy
  * Opportunities
  * Ad Choices

### Mayo Clinic Marketplace

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic.

  * Live stronger, longer and healthier
  * 4 simple steps to a joy-filled life
  * Mayo Clinic on Arthritis
  * Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
  * The Mayo Clinic Diet

## Other Topics in Patient Care & Health Info

  * Healthy Lifestyle
  * Symptoms A-Z
  * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
  * Tests & Procedures A-Z
  * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
  * Appointments
  * Patient & Visitor Guide
  * Billing & Insurance
  * Patient Online Services

.

ART-20045302

  1. Healthy Lifestyle
  2. Pregnancy week by week
  3. In-Depth
  4. Fetal development The 1st trimester

## Mayo Clinic Footer

  * Request Appointment
  * Give Now
  * Contact Us
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Employees
  * Site Map
  * About This Site

### Legal Conditions and Terms

Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions
and Privacy Policy linked below.

  * Terms and Conditions
  * **Privacy Policy**
  * **Notice of Privacy Practices**
  * Notice of Nondiscrimination
  * Manage Cookies

### Reprint Permissions

A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal
use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy
Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

### HON

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct636199_hr1.gif) This
site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All
rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

