
>

>> Sections

>>

>> SEARCH

>>

>> Skip to contentSkip to site index

>>

>> SubscribeLog In

>>

>> Log In

>>

>> Today’s Paper

>>

>> The Upshot|Climate Change’s Giant Impact on the Economy: 4 Key Issues

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
*           *           *

>>  
>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Upshot

>>

>> Supported by

>>

>> # Climate Change’s Giant Impact on the Economy: 4 Key Issues

>>

>> Many of the big economic questions in coming decades will come down to just
how extreme the weather will be, and how to value the future versus the
present.

>>

>> ![Neil Irwin](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2016/11/15/upshot/neil-

irwin/neil-irwin-thumbLarge-v3.jpg)

>>

>> By Neil Irwin

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Jan. 17, 2019

>>  
>>                       *             *             *             *
*

>>  
>>

>>           * *
Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2019/01/20/business/up-climate-

econ1/merlin_147230052_6059e6df-

bef0-4144-9c89-285e45b229f7-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

>>

>> Wading through flood waters from Tropical Storm Harvey in Houston in August
2017. "We know we can adapt to slow changes," a Yale economist said. "Rapid
changes are the ones that would be most damaging and painful."CreditJonathan
Bachman/Reuters

>>

>> By now, it’s clear that climate change poses environmental risks beyond
anything seen in the modern age. But we’re only starting to come to grips with
the potential economic effects.

>>

>> Using increasingly sophisticated modeling, researchers are calculating how
each tenth of a degree of global warming is likely to play out in economic
terms. Their projections carry large bands of uncertainty, because of the
vagaries of human behavior and the remaining questions about how quickly the
planet will respond to the buildup of greenhouse gases.

>>

>> A government report in November raised the prospect that a warmer planet
could mean a big hit to G.D.P. in the coming decades.

>>

>> And on Thursday, some of the world’s most influential economists called for
a tax on carbon emissions in the United States, saying climate change demands
“immediate national action.” The last four people to lead the Federal Reserve,
15 former leaders of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, and 27
Nobel laureates signed a letter endorsing a gradually rising carbon tax whose
proceeds would be distributed to consumers as “carbon dividends.”

>>

>> The Trump administration has long rejected prescriptions like a carbon tax.
But policy debates aside, many of the central economic questions of the
decades ahead are, at their core, going to be climate questions. These are
some of the big ones.

>>

>> ## How permanent will the costs be?

>>

>> When we think about the economic damage from a hotter planet, it’s
important to remember that not all costs are equivalent, even when the dollar
values are similar. There is a big difference between costs that are high but
manageable versus those that might come with catastrophic events like food
shortages and mass refugee crises.

>>

>> Consider three possible ways that climate change could exact an economic
cost:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A once-fertile agricultural area
experiences hotter weather and

>>  
>>

>> drought, causing its crop yields to decrease.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A road destroyed by flooding
because of rising seas and more

>>  
>>

>> frequent hurricanes must be rebuilt.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * An electrical utility spends
hundreds of millions of dollars to

>>  
>>

>> build a more efficient power grid because the old one could not withstand
extreme weather.

>>

>> The farmland’s yield decline is a permanent loss of the economy’s
productive capacity — society is that much poorer, for the indefinite future.
It’s worse than what happens in a typical economic downturn. Usually when
factories sit idle during a recession, there is a reasonable expectation that
they will start cranking again once the economy returns to health.

>>

>> The road rebuilding might be expensive, but at least that money is going to
pay people and businesses to do their work. The cost for society over all is
that the resources that go to rebuilding the road are not available for
something else that might be more valuable. That’s a setback, but it’s not a
permanent reduction in economic potential like the less fertile farmland. And
in a recession, it might even be a net positive, under the same logic that
fiscal stimulus can be beneficial in a downturn.

>>

>> By contrast, new investment in the power grid could yield long-term
benefits in energy efficiency and greater reliability.

>>

>> There’s some parallel with military spending. In the 1950s and ’60s, during
the Cold War, the United States spent more than 10 percent of G.D.P. on
national defense (it’s now below 4 percent).

>>

>> Most of that spending crowded out other forms of economic activity; many
houses and cars and washing machines weren’t made because of the resources
that instead went to making tanks, bombs and fighter jets. But some of that
spending also created long-term benefits for society, like the innovations
that led to the internet and to reliable commercial jet aircraft travel.

>>

>> Certain types of efforts to reduce carbon emissions or adapt to climate
impacts are likely to generate similar benefits, says Nicholas Stern, chair of
the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the
London School of Economics.

>>

>> “You couldn’t provide sea defenses at large scale without very heavy
investment, but it’s not investment of the kind that you get from the things
that breed technological progress,” Mr. Stern said. “The defensive adaptations
don’t carry anything like the dynamism that comes from different ways of doing
things.”

>>

>> There is more fertile ground in areas like transportation and
infrastructure, he said. Electric cars, instead of those with internal
combustion engines, would mean less air pollution in cities, for example.

>>

>> ## How should we value the future compared with the present?

>>

>> Seeking a baseline to devise environmental regulations, the Obama
administration set out to calculate a “social cost of carbon,” the amount of
harm each new ton of carbon emissions will cause in decades ahead.

>>

>> At the core of the project were sophisticated efforts to model how a hotter
earth will affect thousands of different places. That’s necessary because a
low-lying region that already has many hot days a year is likely to face
bigger problems, sooner, than a higher-altitude location that currently has a
temperate climate.

>>

>> Michael Greenstone, who is now director of the Becker Friedman Institute at
the University of Chicago and of the Energy Policy Institute there, as well as
a contributor to The Upshot, was part of those efforts. ****

>>

>> “We’ve divided the world into 25,000 regions and married that with very
precise geographic predictions on how the local climate will change,” Mr.
Greenstone said. “Just having the raw computing power to be able to analyze
this at a more disaggregated level is a big part of it.”

>>

>> But even once you have an estimate of the cost of a hotter climate in
future decades, some seemingly small assumptions can drastically alter the
social cost of carbon today.

>>

>> Finance uses something called the discount rate to compare future value
with present value. What would the promise of a $1,000 payment 10 years from
now be worth to you today? Certainly something less than $1,000 — but how much
less would depend on what rate you use.

>>

>> Likewise, the cost of carbon emissions varies greatly depending on how you
value the well-being of people in future decades — many not born yet, and who
may benefit from technologies and wealth we cannot imagine — versus our well-
being today.

>>

>> The magic of compounding means that the exact rate matters a great deal
when looking at things far in the future. It’s essentially the inverse of
observing that a $1,000 investment that compounds at 3 percent a year will be
worth about $4,400 in 50 years, whereas one that grows 7 percent per year will
be worth more than $29,000.

>>

>> In the Obama administration’s analysis, using a 5 percent discount rate —
which would put comparatively little weight on the well-being of future
generations — would imply a social cost of $12 (in 2007 dollars) for emitting
one metric ton of carbon dioxide. A metric ton is about what would be released
as a car burns 113 gallons of gasoline. A 2.5 percent rate would imply a cost
of $62, which adds up to hundreds of billions of dollars a year in society-
wide costs at recent rates of emissions.

>>

>> The Obama administration settled on a 3 percent discount rate that put the
social cost of carbon at $42 per metric ton. The Trump administration has
subsequently revised that estimate to between one dollar and seven dollars.

>>

>> That sharp decrease was achieved in part by measuring only the future
economic costs to the United States, not factoring in the rest of the world.
And the Trump administration analyzed a discount rate of up to 7 percent — a
rate at which even costs far into the future become trivial.

>>

>> Mr. Greenstone favors substantially lower discount rates, based on evidence
that financial markets also place high value on investments that protect
against risk.

>>

>> Understood this way, spending today to reduce carbon emissions tomorrow is
like insurance against some of the most costly effects of a hotter planet —
and part of the debate is over how much that insurance is really worth, given
that the biggest benefits are far in the future.

>>

>> Image

>>

>> Fires devastated Paradise, Calif., in November. Climate change increases
the odds of such wildfires in the state. CreditNoah Berger/Associated Press

>>

>> ## How might climate change fuel inequality?

>>

>> When a government report raises the possibility of a 10 percent hit to
G.D.P. as a result of a warming climate, it can be easy to picture everyone’s
incomes being reduced by a tenth.

>>

>> In reality there is likely to be enormous variance in the economic impact,
depending on where people live and what kind of jobs they have.

>>

>> Low-lying, flood-prone areas are at particularly high risk of becoming
unlivable — or at least uninsurable. Certain industries in certain places will
be dealt a huge blow, or cease to exist; many ski slopes will turn out to be
too warm for regular snow, and the map of global agriculture will shift.

>>

>> Adaptation will probably be easier for the affluent than for the poor.
Those who can afford to move to an area with more favorable impacts from a
warmer climate presumably will.

>>

>> So the economic implications of climate change include huge shifts in
geography, demographics and technology, with each affecting the other.

>>

>> “To look at things in terms of G.D.P. doesn’t really capture what this
means to people’s lives,” said William Nordhaus, a Yale economist who
pioneered the models on which modern climate economics is based and who won a
Nobel for that work. “If you just look at an average of all the things we
experience, some in the marketplace and some not in the marketplace, it’s
insufficient. The impact is going to be highly diverse.”

>>

>> ## Can we adapt to a warmer climate?

>>

>> Despite all these risks, it’s important to remember that humanity tends to
be remarkably adaptable. A century ago, most people lived without an
automobile, a refrigerator, or the possibility of traveling by airplane. A
couple of decades before that, almost no one had indoor plumbing.

>>

>> Changes in how people live, and the technology they use, could both
mitigate the impact of climate change and ensure that the costs are less about
a pure economic loss and more about rewiring the way civilization works.

>>

>> Most capital investments last only a decade or two to begin with; people
are constantly rebuilding roads, buildings and other infrastructure. And a
warmer climate could, if it plays out slowly enough, merely shift where that
reinvestment happens.

>>

>> But a big risk is that the change happens too quickly. Adaptation that
might be manageable over a generation could be impossible — and cause mass
suffering or death — if it happens over a few years.

>>

>> Imagine major staple food crops being wiped out for a few consecutive years
by drought or other extreme weather. Or a large coastal city wiped out in a
single extreme storm.

>>

>> “Whether it’s jobs, consumption patterns or residential patterns, if things
are changing so fast that we can’t adapt to them, that will be very, very
costly,” Mr. Nordhaus said. “We know we can adapt to slow changes. Rapid
changes are the ones that would be most damaging and painful.”

>>

>> It’s clear that climate change and its ripple effects are likely to be a
defining challenge of the 21st-century economy. But there are wide ranges of
possible results that vary based on countless assumptions. We should also
recognize that the economic backdrop of society is always changing. Projecting
what that will mean for ordinary people is not simply a matter of dollars.

>>

>> “I’ve spent the last 20 years trying to communicate it and it’s not easy to
process,” Joseph Aldy, who teaches at Harvard’s Kennedy School for Public
Policy, said of the connection between climate change and the economy. “It’s
really hard to convey something that is long term and gradual until it’s not.”

>>

>> Neil Irwin is a senior economics correspondent for The Upshot. He
previously wrote for The Washington Post and is the author of "The Alchemists:
Three Central Bankers and a World on Fire." @Neil_Irwin • Facebook

>>

>> A version of this article appears in print on , on Page BU1 of the New York
edition with the headline: How to Think About the Costs of Climate Change.
Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
* Advertisement

>>  
>>

>> ## Site Index

>>

>> Go to Home Page »

>>

>> news

>>  
>>                 >>                       * home page

>>  
>>                       * world

>>  
>>                       * U.S.

>>  
>>                       * politics

>>  
>>                       * New York

>>  
>>                       * business

>>  
>>                       * tech

>>  
>>                       * science

>>  
>>                       * climate

>>  
>>                       * sports

>>  
>>                       * obituaries

>>  
>>                       * the upshot

>>  
>>                       * today's paper

>>  
>>                       * corrections

>>  
>>

>> opinion

>>  
>>                 >>                       * today's opinion

>>  
>>                       * op-ed columnists

>>  
>>                       * editorials

>>  
>>                       * op-ed Contributors

>>  
>>                       * letters

>>  
>>                       * sunday review

>>  
>>                       * video: opinion

>>  
>>

>> arts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * today's arts

>>  
>>                       * art & design

>>  
>>                       * books

>>  
>>                       * dance

>>  
>>                       * movies

>>  
>>                       * music

>>  
>>                       * Pop Culture

>>  
>>                       * television

>>  
>>                       * theater

>>  
>>                       * watching

>>  
>>                       * video: arts

>>  
>>

>> living

>>  
>>                 >>                       * automobiles

>>  
>>                       * Cooking

>>  
>>                       * crossword

>>  
>>                       * education

>>  
>>                       * food

>>  
>>                       * health

>>  
>>                       * jobs

>>  
>>                       * magazine

>>  
>>                       * parenting

>>  
>>                       * real estate

>>  
>>                       * style

>>  
>>                       * t magazine

>>  
>>                       * travel

>>  
>>                       * weddings

>>  
>>

>> listings & more

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reader Center

>>  
>>                       * Wirecutter

>>  
>>                       * Live Events

>>  
>>                       * The Learning Network

>>  
>>                       * tools & services

>>  
>>                       * N.Y.C. events guide

>>  
>>                       * multimedia

>>  
>>                       * photography

>>  
>>                       * video

>>  
>>                       * Newsletters

>>  
>>                       * NYT store

>>  
>>                       * times journeys

>>  
>>                       * manage my account

>>  
>>

>> ### news

>>  
>>                 >>                       * home page

>>  
>>                       * world

>>  
>>                       * U.S.

>>  
>>                       * politics

>>  
>>                       * New York

>>  
>>                       * business

>>  
>>                       * tech

>>  
>>                       * science

>>  
>>                       * climate

>>  
>>                       * sports

>>  
>>                       * obituaries

>>  
>>                       * the upshot

>>  
>>                       * today's paper

>>  
>>                       * corrections

>>  
>>

>> ### opinion

>>  
>>                 >>                       * today's opinion

>>  
>>                       * op-ed columnists

>>  
>>                       * editorials

>>  
>>                       * op-ed Contributors

>>  
>>                       * letters

>>  
>>                       * sunday review

>>  
>>                       * video: opinion

>>  
>>

>> ### arts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * today's arts

>>  
>>                       * art & design

>>  
>>                       * books

>>  
>>                       * dance

>>  
>>                       * movies

>>  
>>                       * music

>>  
>>                       * Pop Culture

>>  
>>                       * television

>>  
>>                       * theater

>>  
>>                       * watching

>>  
>>                       * video: arts

>>  
>>

>> ### living

>>  
>>                 >>                       * automobiles

>>  
>>                       * Cooking

>>  
>>                       * crossword

>>  
>>                       * education

>>  
>>                       * food

>>  
>>                       * health

>>  
>>                       * jobs

>>  
>>                       * magazine

>>  
>>                       * parenting

>>  
>>                       * real estate

>>  
>>                       * style

>>  
>>                       * t magazine

>>  
>>                       * travel

>>  
>>                       * weddings

>>  
>>

>> ### more

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reader Center

>>  
>>                       * Wirecutter

>>  
>>                       * Live Events

>>  
>>                       * The Learning Network

>>  
>>                       * tools & services

>>  
>>                       * N.Y.C. events guide

>>  
>>                       * multimedia

>>  
>>                       * photography

>>  
>>                       * video

>>  
>>                       * Newsletters

>>  
>>                       * NYT store

>>  
>>                       * times journeys

>>  
>>                       * manage my account

>>  
>>

>> ### Subscribe

>>  
>>                 >>                       * home delivery

>>  
>>                       * digital subscriptions

>>  
>>                       * Crossword

>>  
>>                       * Cooking

>>  
>>                       * email newsletters

>>  
>>                       * corporate subscriptions

>>  
>>                       * education rate

>>  
>>                       * mobile applications

>>  
>>                       * replica edition

>>  
>>

>> ## Site Information Navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * © 2019 The New York Times
Company

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Work with us

>>  
>>                       * Advertise

>>  
>>                       * Your Ad Choices

>>  
>>                       * Privacy

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Service

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Sale

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>                       * Help

>>  
>>                       * Help

>>  
>>                       * Subscriptions

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

