
>

>> Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

>>

>> ![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-
real.html

>>

>> (C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National
Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Reference

>>

>> # Is global warming real?

>>

>> ## Scientific consensus is overwhelming: The planet is getting warmer, and

>>

>> humans are behind it.

>>

>> Climate 101: Causes and Effects

>>

>> The climate is certainly changing. But what is causing this change? And how
does the rising temperature affect the environment, and our lives?

>>

>> Reference

>>

>> # Is global warming real?

>>

>> ## Scientific consensus is overwhelming: The planet is getting warmer, and

>>

>> humans are behind it.

>>

>> Climate 101: Causes and Effects

>>

>> The climate is certainly changing. But what is causing this change? And how
does the rising temperature affect the environment, and our lives?

>>

>> 3 Minute Read

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> By **Christina Nunez**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> PUBLISHED January 31, 2019

>>

>> In recent years, global warming and climate change have been the subject of
a great deal of political controversy, especially in the U.S. But as the
science becomes clearer and consensus grows impossible to ignore, debate is
moving away from whether humans are causing warming and toward questions about
how best to respond.

>>

>> ## Temperatures rising

>>

>> View Images

>>

>> Global Land-Ocean Temperature Index Chart courtesy NASA/GISS

>>

>> Evidence of rising temperatures is pervasive and striking: Thermometer
records kept over the past century and a half show Earth's average temperature
has risen more than 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.9 degrees Celsius), and about twice
that in parts of the Arctic.

>>

>> That doesn’t mean temperatures haven't fluctuated among regions of the
globe or between seasons and times of day. But by analyzing average
temperatures all over the world, scientists have demonstrated an unmistakable
upward trend.

>>

>> This trend is part of climate change, which many people consider synonymous
with global warming. Scientists prefer to use “climate change” when describing
the complex shifts now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems.
Climate change encompasses not only rising average temperatures but also
extreme weather events, shifting wildlife populations and habitats, rising
seas, and a range of other impacts.

>>

>> All of these changes are emerging as humans continue to add heat-trapping
greenhouse gases to the atmosphere.

>>

>> ## **How is climate change measured?**

>>

>> Although we can't look at thermometers going back thousands of years, we do
have other records that help us figure out what temperatures were like in the
distant past. For example, trees store information about the climate in the
place they’re rooted. Each year trees grow thicker and form new rings. In
warmer and wetter years, the rings are thicker. Old trees and wood can tell us
about conditions hundreds or even thousands of years ago.

>>

>> Windows on the past are also buried in lakes and oceans. Pollen, particles,
and dead creatures fall to the bottom of oceans and lakes each year, forming
sediments. Sediments contain a wealth of information about what was in the air
and water when they fell. Scientists reveal this record by inserting hollow
tubes into the mud to collect layers of sediment going back millions of years.

>>

>> For a direct look at the atmosphere of the past, scientists drill cores
through the Earth's polar ice sheets. Tiny bubbles trapped in the ice are
actually samples from the Earth's past atmosphere, frozen in time. That's how
we know that the concentrations of greenhouse gases since the Industrial
Revolution are higher than they've been for hundreds of thousands of years.

>>

>> Computer models help scientists to understand the Earth's climate, or long-
term weather patterns. Models also allow scientists to make predictions about
the future climate by simulating how the atmosphere and oceans absorb energy
from the sun and transport it around the globe.

>>

>> ## **We are the reason**

>>

>> Several factors **** affect how much of the sun's energy reaches Earth's
surface and how much of that energy gets absorbed. Those include greenhouse
gases, particles in the atmosphere (from volcanic eruptions, for example), and
changes in energy coming from the sun itself.

>>

>> Climate models are designed to take such factors into account. For example,
models have found that changes in solar irradiance and volcanic aerosols have
contributed only about two percent of the recent warming effect over 250
years. The balance comes from greenhouse gases and other human-caused factors,
such as land-use changes.

>>

>> The speed and duration of this recent warming is remarkable as well.
Volcanic eruptions, as an example, emit particles that temporarily cool the
Earth's surface. But they have no lasting effect beyond a few years. Events
like El Niño also work on fairly short and predictable cycles. On the other
hand, the types of global temperature fluctuations that have contributed to
ice ages occur on cycles of hundreds of thousands of years.

>>

>> The answer to the question, “Is global warming real?” is yes: Nothing other
than the rapid rise of greenhouse gas emissions from human activity can fully
explain the dramatic and relatively recent rise in global average
temperatures.

>>

>>> Click here to see all climate change videos from National Geographic.

>>

>> Climate Change 101 with Bill Nye Climate Change is a real and serious
issue. In this video Bill Nye, the Science Guy, explains what causes climate
change, how it affects our planet, why we need to act promptly to mitigate its
effects, and how each of us can contribute to a solution.  
>

>>

>> Continue Reading

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

