
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> SubscribeMenu

>>

>> Scientific American

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Cart 0

>>  
>>                       * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot

>>  
>>

>> password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-

eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * |Stay Informed

>>  
>>

>> SearchSubscribe

>>

>> Close

>>

>> SearchClose

>>

>> Advanced Search

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Sciences

>>  
>>                       * Mind

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Sustainability

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * Podcasts

>>  
>>                       * Blogs

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Current Issue

>>  
>>                       * Cart0

>>  
>>                       * Sign In

>>  
>>                       * Stay Informed

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share

>>  
>>                       * Latest

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       *           *           *           * Environment

>>  
>>

>> # Deforestation and Its Extreme Effect on Global Warming

>>

>> From logging, agricultural production and other economic activities,
deforestation adds more atmospheric CO2 than the sum total of cars and trucks
on the world's roads

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           * Share on Facebook

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on Twitter

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on Reddit

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share on LinkedIn

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share via

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Print

>>  
>>

>> ![Deforestation and Its Extreme Effect on Global

Warming](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/9A210F81-A9B1-4DB9-9C42FF28FE971EF5_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&EBD29103-F8AC-4242-B689CBCC4576531B)

>>

>> Land cleared of forest by timber industry. Credit: Nazar Abbas _Getty
Images_

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> **_Dear EarthTalk_ : Is it true that cutting and burning trees adds more
global warming pollution to the atmosphere than all the cars and trucks in the
world combined?** _-- Mitchell Vale, Houston_

>>

>> By most accounts, deforestation in tropical rainforests adds more carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere than the sum total of cars and trucks on the world's
roads. According to the World Carfree Network (WCN), cars and trucks account
for about 14 percent of global carbon emissions, while most analysts attribute
upwards of 15 percent to deforestation.

>>

>> The reason that logging is so bad for the climate is that when trees are
felled they release the carbon they are storing into the atmosphere, where it
mingles with greenhouse gases from other sources and contributes to global
warming accordingly. The upshot is that we should be doing as much to prevent
deforestation as we are to increase fuel efficiency and reduce automobile
usage.

>>

>> According to the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), a leading green group,
32 million acres of tropical rainforest were cut down each year between 2000
and 2009--and the pace of deforestation is only increasing. "Unless we change
the present system that rewards forest destruction, forest clearing will put
another 200 billion tons of carbon into the atmosphere in coming decades…,"
says EDF.

>>

>> "Any realistic plan to reduce global warming pollution sufficiently--and in
time--to avoid dangerous consequences must rely in part on preserving tropical
forests," reports EDF. But it's hard to convince the poor residents of the
Amazon basin and other tropical regions of the world to stop cutting down
trees when the forests are still worth more dead than alive. "Conservation
costs money, while profits from timber, charcoal, pasture and cropland drive
people to cut down forests," adds EDF. Exacerbating global warming isn't the
only negative impact of tropical deforestation. It also wipes out
biodiversity: More than half of the world's plant and animal species live in
tropical rainforests.

>>

>> One way some tropical countries are reducing deforestation is through
participation in the United Nations' Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation (REDD) program. REDD essentially works to establish
incentives for the people who care for the forest to manage it sustainably
while still being able to benefit economically. Examples include using less
land (and therefore cutting fewer trees) for activities such as coffee growing
and meat and milk production. Participating nations can then accrue and sell
carbon pollution credits when they can prove they have lowered deforestation
below a baseline. The REDD program has channeled over $117 million in direct
financial aid and educational support into national deforestation reduction
efforts in 44 developing countries across Africa, Asia and Latin America since
its 2008 inception.

>>

>> Brazil is among the countries embracing REDD among other efforts to reduce
carbon emissions. Thanks to the program, Brazil has slowed deforestation
within its borders by 40 percent since 2008 and is on track to achieve an 80
percent reduction by 2020. Environmentalists are optimistic that the initial
success of REDD in Brazil bodes well for reducing deforestation in other parts
of the tropics as well.

>>

>> **CONTACTS** : WCN, www.worldcarfree.net; EDF, www.edf.org; REDD, www.un-
redd.org.

>>

>> **EarthTalk ®** is written and edited by Roddy Scheer and Doug Moss and is
a registered trademark of **E - The Environmental Magazine**
(www.emagazine.com). **Send questions to:** earthtalk@emagazine.com.
**Subscribe** : www.emagazine.com/subscribe. **Free** **Trial Issue** :
www.emagazine.com/trial.

>>

>> ## Latest News

>>

>> ![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Policy & Ethics

>>

>> ### My Next Chapter

>>

>> 9 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

>>

>> ![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> ### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

>>

>> 10 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

>>

>> ![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Physics

>>

>> ### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

>>

>> 10 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

>>

>> ![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> ### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

>>

>> 10 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

>>

>> ![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> Policy & Ethics

>>

>> ### Rethinking National Security

>>

>> 12 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

>>

>> ![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

>>

>> ### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

>>

>> 13 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> ## Newsletter

>>

>> ## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

>>

>> Sign Up

>>

>> ## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

>>

>> Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

>>

>> Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

>>

>> Follow us

>>  
>>                 >>                       * instagram

>>  
>>                       * soundcloud

>>  
>>                       * youtube

>>  
>>                       * twitter

>>  
>>                       * facebook

>>  
>>                       * rss

>>  
>>

>> Scientific american arabic

>>

>> العربية

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Store

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Press Room

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * FAQs

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Advertise

>>  
>>                       * SA Custom Media

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Use of Cookies

>>  
>>                       * International Editions

>>  
>>

>> Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has
commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them
can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a
strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science
to our readers.

>>

>> (C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

>>

>> All Rights Reserved.

>>

>> Scroll To Top

>>

>> ![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

>>

>> **You have free article s left.**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

>>

>> Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

>>

>> See subscription options

>>

>> Already a subscriber? Sign in.

>>

>> You have no free articles left.

>>

>> Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

>>

>> Sign In

>>

>> See Subscription Options

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

