
>

>> Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

>>

>> ![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/sea-level-
rise.html

>>

>> (C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National
Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Photograph by Kennedy Warne

>>

>> Read Caption

>>

>> Families in Kiribati, especially those new to the island nation, are often
forced to live in marginal areas, where flooding from high tides is
increasing.

>>

>> Photograph by Kennedy Warne

>>

>> Reference

>>

>> # Sea level rise, explained

>>

>> ## Oceans are rising around the world, causing dangerous flooding. Why is

>>

>> this happening, and what can we do to stem the tide?

>>

>> 4 Minute Read

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> By **Christina Nunez**

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> As humans continue to pour greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, oceans
have tempered the effect. The world's seas have absorbed more than 90 percent
of the heat from these gases, but it’s taking a toll on our oceans: 2018 set a
new record for ocean heating.

>>

>> Many people think of global warming and climate change as synonyms, but
scientists prefer to use “climate change” when describing the complex shifts
now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems.

>>

>> Rising seas is one of those climate change effects. Average sea levels have
swelled over 8 inches (about 23 cm) since 1880, with about three of those
inches gained in the last 25 years. Every year, the sea rises another .13
inches (3.2 mm).

>>

>> Floods 101 No other kind of natural disaster in America has caused more
death and destruction than floods.

>>

>> The change in sea levels is linked to three primary factors, all induced by
ongoing global climate change:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Thermal expansion:** When
water heats up, it expands. About

>>  
>>

>> half of the sea-level rise over the past 25 years is attributable to warmer
oceans simply occupying more space.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Melting glaciers:** Large ice
formations such as mountain

>>  
>>

>> glaciers naturally melt a bit each summer. In the winter, snows, primarily
from evaporated seawater, are generally sufficient to balance out the melting.
Recently, though, persistently higher temperatures caused by global warming
have led to greater-than-average summer melting as well as diminished snowfall
due to later winters and earlier springs. That creates an imbalance between
runoff and ocean evaporation, causing sea levels to rise.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * **Loss of Greenland and
Antarctica’s ice sheets:** As with

>>  
>>

>> mountain glaciers, increased heat is causing the massive ice sheets that
cover Greenland and Antarctica to melt more quickly. Scientists also believe
that meltwater from above and seawater from below is seeping beneath
Greenland's ice sheets, effectively lubricating ice streams and causing them
to move more quickly into the sea. While melting in West Antarctica has drawn
considerable focus from scientists, especially with the 2017 break in the
Larsen C ice shelf, glaciers in East Antarctica are also showing signs of
destabilizing.

>>

>> ## **Consequences**

>>

>> When sea levels rise as rapidly as they have been, even a small increase
can have devastating effects on coastal habitats farther inland, it can cause
destructive erosion, wetland flooding, aquifer and agricultural soil
contamination with salt, and lost habitat for fish, birds, and plants.

>>

>> Higher sea levels are coinciding with more dangerous hurricanes and
typhoons that move more slowly and drop more rain, contributing to more
powerful storm surges that can strip away everything in their path. One study
found that between 1963 and 2012, almost half of all deaths from Atlantic
hurricanes were caused by storm surges.

>>

>> Already, flooding in low-lying coastal areas is forcing people to migrate
to higher ground, and millions more are vulnerable from flood risk and other
climate change effects. The prospect of higher coastal water levels threatens
basic services such as Internet access, since much of the underlying
communications infrastructure lies in the path of rising seas.

>>

>> ## **Adapting to the threat**

>>

>> As a result of these risks, many coastal cities are already planning
adaptation measures to cope with the long-term prospects of higher sea levels,
often at considerable cost. Building seawalls, rethinking roads, and planting
mangroves or other vegetation to absorb water are all being undertaken.

>>

>> In Jakarta, a $40 billion project will aim to protect the city with an
80-foot-high seawall. Rotterdam, home to the Global Center on Adaptation, has
offered a model to other cities seeking to combat flooding and land loss. The
Dutch city has built barriers, drainage, and innovative architectural features
such as a “water square” with temporary ponds.

>>

>> Of course, communities vulnerable to rising seas can only go so far in
holding back the tide. In the Marshall Islands, where rising sea levels are
forcing a choice between relocating or building up the land, residents will
need help from other nations if they decide to undertake the expensive latter
option.

>>

>> Climate 101: Causes and Effects The climate is certainly changing. But what
is causing this change? And how does the rising temperature affect the
environment, and our lives?

>>

>> ## **How high will it go?**

>>

>> Most predictions say the warming of the planet will continue and is likely
to accelerate, causing the oceans to keep rising. This means hundreds of
coastal cities face flooding. But forecasting how much and how soon seas will
rise remains an area of ongoing research.

>>

>> The most recent special report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change says we can expect the oceans to rise between 10 and 30 inches (26 to
77 centimeters) by 2100 with temperatures warming 1.5 °C. That’s enough to
seriously affect many of the cities along the U.S. East Coast. Another
analysis based on NASA and European data skewed toward the higher end of that
range, predicting a rise of 26 inches (65 centimeters) by the end of this
century if the current trajectory continues.

>>

>> If all the ice that currently exists on Earth in glaciers and sheets melted
it would raise sea level by 216 feet. That could cause entire states and even
some countries to disappear under the waves, from Florida to Bangladesh.
That’s not a scenario scientists think is likely, and it would probably take
many centuries, but it could eventually happen if the world keeps burning
fossil fuels indiscriminately.

>>

>> In the meantime, scientists keep refining their models of sea-level
changes. They also point out that the extent to which countries work together
to limit release of more greenhouse gases may have a significant impact on how
quickly seas rise, and how much.

>>

>> PUBLISHED February 19, 2019

>>

>> Continue Reading

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

