
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> # Union of Concerned Scientists

>>

>> # ![Union of Concerned

>>

>>
Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

>>

>> en español __

>>

>> ## Search form

>>

>> Search

>>

>> ## Main Menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Our Work

>>  
>>                         * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                         * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                         * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                         * Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                         * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * Accomplishments & History

>>  
>>                         * Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                         * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                         * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * News Center

>>  
>>                         * Jobs at UCS

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                         * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!

>>  
>>                       * Take Action

>>  
>>                         * Science Network

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Donate

>>  
>>                         * Renew Your Membership

>>  
>>                         * Become a Member

>>  
>>                         * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                         * Make a Planned Gift

>>  
>>                         * More Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * Gifts in Honor or Memory

>>  
>>                         * Gift Memberships

>>  
>>                       * Science Network Leaders

>>  
>>

>> **search**

>>

>> ![Dark storm clouds over

farm](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/herospace/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-storm-clouds-and-dry-fields.jpg?itok=_09Z2SPC)

>>

>> Photo: Jim Reed/Corbis

>>

>> # Global Warming Impacts

>>

>> The consequences of climate change are already here.

>>

>> ## You are here

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Global Warming

>>  
>>

>> Global warming is already having significant and costly effects on our
communities, our health, and our climate.

>>

>> Unless we take immediate action to reduce global warming emissions, these
impacts will continue to intensify, grow ever more costly and damaging, and
increasingly affect the entire planet — including you, your community, and
your family.

>>

>> ## Rising seas and increased coastal flooding

>>

>> ![Flooded neighborhood in Portsmouth, New

Hampshire](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/10/gw-

impacts-sea-level-rise-tidal-flooding-portsmouth-new-

hampshire.jpg?itok=iGHspbE7)

>>

>> Photo: Tim Hayes/Puddleduck Photo

>>

>> Average global sea level has increased eight inches since 1880, but is
rising much faster on the U.S. East Coast and Gulf of Mexico. Global warming
is now accelerating the rate of sea level rise, increasing flooding risks to
low-lying communities and high-risk coastal properties whose development has
been encouraged by today's flood insurance system.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Underwater: Rising Seas, Chronic
Floods, and the Implications

>>  
>>

>> for US Coastal Real Estate

>>  
>>                 >>                       * When Rising Seas Hit Home: Hard
Choices Ahead for Hundreds of US

>>  
>>

>> Coastal Communities

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Causes of Sea Level Rise: What
the Science Tells Us

>>  
>>                       * Encroaching Tides: How Sea Level Rise and Tidal
Flooding

>>  
>>

>> Threaten U.S. East Coast and Gulf Coast Communities over the Next 30 Years

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Surviving and Thriving in the
Face of Rising Seas

>>  
>>

>> ## Longer and more damaging wildfire seasons

>>

>> ![wildfire at

night](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-wildfires-line-of-fire-at-night.jpg?itok=syKW2qwm)

>>

>> Photo: milehightraveler/iStock

>>

>> Wildfires are increasing and wildfire season is getting longer in the
Western U.S. as temperatures rise. Higher spring and summer temperatures and
earlier spring snow-melt result in forests that are hotter and drier for
longer periods of time, priming conditions for wildfires to ignite and spread.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Playing with Fire: How Climate
Change and Development Patterns

>>  
>>

>> Are Contributing to the Soaring Costs of Western Wildfires

>>

>> ## More destructive hurricanes

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2016/08/gw-

impacts-hurricane-ike-damage-gilchrist-tx.jpg?itok=bmKFcw8e)

>>

>> Photo: Jocelyn Augusitno/FEMA CC BY (Wikipedia)

>>

>> While hurricanes are a natural part of our climate system, recent research
indicates that their destructive power, or intensity, has been growing since
the 1970s, particularly in the North Atlantic region.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Hurricanes and climate change >

>>  
>>

>> ## More frequent and intense heat waves

>>

>> ![jogger

sweating](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-heat-jogger-sweating.jpg?itok=SNZu8CpM)

>>

>> Photo: Ridofranz/iStock

>>

>> Dangerously hot weather is already occuring more frequently than it did 60
years ago—and scientists expect heat waves to become more frequent and severe
as global warming intensifies. This increase in heat waves creates serious
health risks, and can lead to heat exhaustion, heat stroke, and aggravate
existing medical conditions.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Heat in the Heartland: 60 Years
of Warming in the Midwest

>>  
>>

>> ## Military bases at risk

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2016/07/gw-

impacts-sea-level-rise-military-lejeune-troops-marching.jpg?itok=zIGSSV26)

>>

>> Photo: US Marine Corps

>>

>> Rising seas will increasingly flood many of our coastal military bases.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The US Military on the Front
Lines of Rising Seas >

>>  
>>

>> ## National landmarks at risk

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

impacts-flooding-annapolis-statue.jpg?itok=mWKSaxD8)_Photo: Alexis Bond_

>>

>> The growing consequences of climate change are putting many of the
country's most iconic and historic sites at risk, from Ellis Island to the
Everglades, Cape Canaveral to California's César Chávez National Monument.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * National Landmarks at Risk:
Rising Seas, Floods, and Wildfires

>>  
>>

>> Are Threatening the United States' Most Cherished Historic Sites

>>

>> ## Costly and growing health impacts

>>

>> ![girl using asthma

inhaler](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

impacts-health-girl-with-asthma-inhaler.jpg?itok=dMBSCiVK)

>>

>> _Photo: PixHouse/iStock_

>>

>> Climate change has significant implications for our health. Rising
temperatures will likely lead to increased air pollution, a longer and more
intense allergy season, the spread of insect-borne diseases, more frequent and
dangerous heat waves, and heavier rainstorms and flooding. All of these
changes pose serious, and costly, risks to public health.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate Change and Your Health

>>  
>>

>> ## An increase in extreme weather events

>>

>> ![jogger

sweating](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

images-extreme-weather-cars-covered-in-snow.jpg?itok=BdwmkxWa)

>>

>> Photo: Vadym Zaitsev/shutterstock

>>

>> Strong scientific evidence shows that global warming is increasing certain
types of extreme weather events, including heat waves, coastal flooding,
extreme precipitation events, and more severe droughts. Global warming also
creates conditions that can lead to more powerful hurricanes.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Infographic: Extreme Weather and
Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> ## Heavier precipitation and flooding

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-flooding-flooded-houses.jpg?itok=pxaOuRgE)

>>

>> _Photo: Brisbane/Shutterstock_

>>

>> As temperatures increase, more rain falls during the heaviest downpours,
increasing the risk of flooding events. Very heavy precipitation events,
defined as the heaviest one percent of storms, now drop 67 percent more
precipitation in the Northeast, 31 percent more in the Midwest and 15 percent
more in the Great Plains than they did 50 years ago.

>>

>> ## Destruction of marine ecosystems

>>

>> ![dead

coral](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

impacts-coral-reef-dead-staghorn-coral-in-seagrass.jpg?itok=uV-_6OBt)

>>

>> Photo: NOAA

>>

>> Higher concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere, due to the burning of
fossil fuels, is making oceans both warmer and more acidic. These two effects
threaten the survival of marine life. Corals, shellfish, and phytoplankton,
which are the base of the food chain, are particularly at risk.

>>

>> ## More severe droughts in some areas

>>

>> ![man looking at dry

ground](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-drought-man-examining-dry-ground.jpg?itok=x4HDJgPa)

>>

>> Photo: Brisbane/Shutterstock

>>

>> Climate change affects a variety of factors associated with drought and is
likely to increase drought risk in certain regions. As temperatures have
warmed, the prevalence and duration of drought has increased in the western
U.S. and climate models unanimously project increased drought in the American
Southwest.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Causes of Drought: What's the
Climate Connection?

>>  
>>

>> ## Widespread forest death

>>

>> in the Rocky Mountains

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

rocky-mountain-forest-destruction.jpg?itok=Z1U7yxsj)

>>

>> Photo: Jim Worrall/U.S. Forest Service

>>

>> Tens of millions of trees have died in the Rocky Mountains over the past 15
years, victims of a climate-driven triple assault of tree-killing insects,
wildfires, and stress from heat and drought.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Rocky Mountain Forests at Risk

>>  
>>

>> ## Increased pressure on groundwater supplies

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/12/gw-

impacts-groundwater-sprinkler-crop-irrigation.jpg?itok=6nHjHKmw)

>>

>> Photo: Rejané Claasen/Flickr

>>

>> As the climate changes in response to global warming, longer and more
severe droughts are projected for the western US. The resulting dry conditions
will increase the pressure on groundwater supplies as more is pumped to meet
demand even as less precipitation falls to replenish it. In California, water
and wastewater utilities have an opportunity to significantly increase clean
energy in the state's water sector.

>>

>> ## Growing risks to our electricity supply

>>

>> ![lone lamp in

window](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-electricity-supply-risks-light-in-window.jpg?itok=HjZvqHIl)

>>

>> Photo: vectorarts/iStock

>>

>> Our aging electricity infrastructure is increasingly vulnerable to the
growing consequences of global warming, including sea level rise, extreme
heat, heightened wildfire risk, and drought and other water supply issues.

>>

>> **Learn more:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Lights Out? Storm Surge,
Blackouts, and How Clean Energy Can

>>  
>>

>> Help >

>>

>> ## Changing seasons

>>

>> ![close up of

clock](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-changing-seasons-clock-closeup.jpg?itok=POTrfaJe)

>>

>> Photo: daneger/iStock

>>

>> Spring arrives much earlier than it used to — 10 days earlier on average in
the northern hemisphere. Snow melts earlier. Reservoirs fill too early and
water needs to be released for flood control. Vegetation and soils dry out
earlier, setting the stage for longer and more damaging wildfire seasons.

>>

>> ## Melting ice

>>

>> ![melting

glacier](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

impacts-melting-glaciers-snowless-mountain-scene-with-ice-in-

water.jpg?itok=bmSAZo0T)

>>

>> _Photo: Blake Handley/Flickr_

>>

>> Temperatures are rising in the planet's polar regions, especially in the
Arctic, and the vast majority of the world's glaciers are melting faster than
new snow and ice can replenish them. Scientists expect the rate of melting to
accelerate, with serious implications for future sea level rise.

>>

>> ## Disruptions to food supplies

>>

>> ![drought-stricken

corn](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-food-supply-risks-corn-in-drought.jpg?itok=I9f1eBbI)

>>

>> _Photo: cultura/corbis_

>>

>> Rising temperatures and the accompanying impacts of global warming —
including more frequent heat waves, heavier precipitation in some regions, and
more severe droughts in others — has significant implications for crop and
meat production. Global warming has the potential to seriously disrupt our
food supply, drive costs upward, and affect everything from coffee to cattle,
from staple food crops to the garden in your backyard.

>>

>> ## Plant and animal range shifts

>>

>> ![migrating

birds](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/09/gw-

impacts-migrating-birds-geese-flying-by-moon.jpg?itok=jpCUiYej)

>>

>> _Photo: Heather/Flickr_

>>

>> A changing climate affects the range of plants and animals, changing their
behavior and causing disruptions up and down the food chain. The range of some
warm-weather species will expand, while those that depend on cooler
environments will face shrinking habitats and potential extinction.

>>

>> ## The potential for abrupt climate change

>>

>> Scientists know that Earth's climate has changed abruptly in the past. Even
though it is unlikely to occur in the near future, global warming may increase
the risk of such events. One of the most significant potential mechanisms is a
shift in an ocean circulation pattern known as thermohaline circulation, which
would have widespread consequences for Europe and the U.S. East Coast.

>>

>> ## We Need Your Support

>>

>> to Make Change Happen

>>

>> We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * $25

>>  
>>                       * $50

>>  
>>                       * $100

>>  
>>                       * $250

>>  
>>                       * $1000

>>  
>>                       * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>  
>>                 >>                       * $25

>>  
>>                       * $50

>>  
>>                       * $100

>>  
>>                       * $250

>>  
>>                       * $1000

>>  
>>                       * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Share

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>

>> ## Related Content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Global Warming Science

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * National Landmarks at Risk: Global Warming is
Threatening the

>>  
>>

>> United States' Most Cherished Historic Sites (2014)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Rocky Mountain Forests at Risk:
Confronting climate-driven

>>  
>>

>> impacts from insects, wildfires, heat, and drought (2014)

>>

>> ## From our blogs

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr.
Jane Willenbring, Associate

>>  
>>

>> Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract
social scientistJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance
of Science, in One Comment

>>  
>>

>> Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on
the Dietary Guidelines for

>>  
>>

>> Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019

>>

>> More

>>

>> ## Video

>>

>> Video of When Rising Seas Hit Home

>>

>> ## On Twitter

>>

>> Tweets by @UCSUSA

>>

>> ## Infographic

>>

>> ## WHEN RISING SEAS HIT HOME

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2017/08/gw-

impacts-story-map-screenshot-play-arrow-thumbnail-308px.jpg)

>>

>> **INTERACTIVE MAP:** Explore the hundreds of US coastal communities that
will face chronic inundation and possible retreat as sea levels rise.

>>

>> ## WESTERN WILDFIRES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

>>

>> ![Western Wildfires and Climate

Change](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

western-wildfires-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=1BlISsgQ)

>>

>> Rising temperatures are increasing wildfire risk throughout the Western
U.S.

>>

>> ## LOCATIONS AT RISK FROM RISING SEAS

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/01/gw-impacts-

sea-level-rise-map-sidebar-thumbnail.jpg)

>>

>> Sea level rise threatens communities, homes, and critical infrastructure
along the US East Coast and Gulf of Mexico  
>

>>

>> ## SEA LEVEL RISE AND GLOBAL WARMING

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/11/gw-impacts-

sea-level-rise-infographic-sidebar-graphic-308px.jpg)

>>

>> Sea level is rising—at an accelerating rate—especially along the U.S. East
Coast and Gulf of Mexico.

>>

>> ## EXTREME WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE

>>

>> ![Extreme Weather and Climate Change

Infographic](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

extreme-weather-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=Ig86J4OV)

>>

>> Strong scientific evidence links climate change with increasing heat waves,
coastal flooding, and other extreme weather events.

>>

>> ## CLIMATE SCIENCE VS. FOSSIL FUEL FICTION

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2015/03/gw-

infographic-sidebar-thumbnail-climate-science-vs-fossil-fuel-fitction.jpg)

>>

>> Fossil fuel companies and their lobbying groups have been deceiving the
public for decades about the facts of global warming.

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/stand-up-for-

science-sidebar-image.jpg)

>>

>> We are closely monitoring the Trump administration—and fighting back
whenever science is attacked, undermined, or disregarded.

>>

>> ## Take Action

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-

air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)

>>

>> We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

>>

>> We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

>>

>> We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

>>

>> I Accept

>>

>> ![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

>>

>> ## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                         * UCS Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                         * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                         * History & Accomplishments

>>  
>>                         * Jobs & Internships

>>  
>>                         * News

>>  
>>                       * Issues

>>  
>>                         * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                         * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                         * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                         * Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                       * Our Podcast

>>  
>>                         * Got Science?

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * Reports & Analysis

>>  
>>                       * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                       * Action Center

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * State Disclosures

>>  
>>                       * Our Blogs

>>  
>>                         * The Equation

>>  
>>                         * All Things Nuclear

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * UCS Store

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * Donate

>>  
>>                         * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                         * Planned Gifts

>>  
>>                       * How to Help

>>  
>>                         * Become a Member

>>  
>>                         * Take Action

>>  
>>                         * Subscribe

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * A **Normal Font Size**

>>  
>>                       * A **Larger Font Size**

>>  
>>                       * A **Largest Font Size**

>>  
>>

>> **Union of Concerned Scientists**  
>  2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

>>

>> (C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
>  UCS is a 501c(3) organization

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

