
>

>> Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Strategy

>>  
>>                       * Life

>>  
>>                       * All

>>  
>>

>> ##### Tech

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Tech Insider

>>  
>>                         * Media

>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                         * Transportation

>>  
>>

>> ##### Finance

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Finance

>>  
>>                         * Markets Insider

>>  
>>                         * Retail

>>  
>>                         * Your Money

>>  
>>

>> ##### Politics

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Politics

>>  
>>                         * Military & Defense

>>  
>>

>> ##### Strategy

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Strategy

>>  
>>                         * Advertising

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>

>> ##### Life

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Life

>>  
>>                         * Coupons

>>  
>>                         * Entertainment

>>  
>>                         * Insider Picks

>>  
>>                         * Sports

>>  
>>

>> ##### Featured

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Better Capitalism

>>  
>>                         * Embracing Disruption

>>  
>>                         * Insider TV

>>  
>>

>> ##### Subscribe

>>  
>>                 >>                         * BI Intelligence

>>  
>>                         * BI Prime

>>  
>>

>> ##### About BI

>>  
>>                 >>                         * About

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                         * Advertise

>>  
>>                         * Contributors FAQ

>>  
>>                         * Corporate

>>  
>>                         * Corrections Policy

>>  
>>

>> ##### Follow BI

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Newsletters

>>  
>>                         * Events

>>  
>>                         * RSS

>>  
>>                         * Facebook

>>  
>>                         * Twitter

>>  
>>                         * Instagram

>>  
>>                         * YouTube

>>  
>>                         * LinkedIn

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>

>> World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

>>

>> Edition

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BI Prime

>>  
>>                       * Intelligence

>>  
>>

>> Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

>>

>> Edition

>>

>> International Editions:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * United States US

>>  
>>

>> Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * International INTL

>>  
>>                       * Deutschland DE

>>  
>>                       * Australia AUS

>>  
>>                       * France FR

>>  
>>                       * India IN

>>  
>>                       * Italy IT

>>  
>>                       * Japan JP

>>  
>>                       * Malaysia MY

>>  
>>                       * Netherlands NL

>>  
>>                       * Nordic SE

>>  
>>                       * Poland PL

>>  
>>                       * Singapore SG

>>  
>>                       * South Africa ZA

>>  
>>                       * Spain ES

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates,
"Click to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe,
indicating different international options."

>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Tech Enterprise  Science  advertising  Media
Transportation

>>  
>>

>> Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes
previous / next navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Finance Markets Insider  Retail
Your Money  Chevron icon It

>>  
>>

>> indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next
navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Politics Military & Defense
News  Chevron icon It indicates an

>>  
>>

>> expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation
options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Strategy Careers  Chevron icon
It indicates an expandable

>>  
>>

>> section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Life Entertainment  Travel
Sports  Chevron icon It indicates an

>>  
>>

>> expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation
options.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * All

>>  
>>                       * Coupons Target  Walmart  EBay  Nike  Container
Store

>>  
>>

>> Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It
often indicates a user profile.

>>

>> BI ACCOUNTS

>>  
>>                 >>                       * BUSINESS INSIDER

>>  
>>                       * BI PRIME SIGN OUT

>>  
>>                       * BI INTELLIGENCE

>>  
>>

>> World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

>>

>> Edition

>>

>> US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera. * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights
reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Terms of Service ,  Privacy
Policy and  Cookies Policy .

>>  
>>                       * Sitemap

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimer

>>  
>>                       * Commerce Policy

>>  
>>                       * Coupons

>>  
>>                       * Made in NYC

>>  
>>                       * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

>>  
>>

>> Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

>>

>> # A bizarre property of water is flooding coastal cities like New Orleans

>>

>> Dave Mosher

>>

>> Jun. 5, 2015, 4:04 PM

>>

>> Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It
symobilizes a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the
ability to send an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth,
tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

>>

>> More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon
Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

>>

>> You can squeeze and compress water all you want, and under normal
conditions its volume won't budge.

>>

>> But if you heat up water, its volume expands -- and it's precisely this
effect, which is playing out in Earth's oceans, that's helping flood coastal
cities like New Orleans.

>>

>> ![water ice volume temperature thermal

expansion](https://static.businessinsider.com/image/5571f413f7b1051d008b4b2c-750.jpg)As
water heats, its volume increases. (Except for one weird
anomaly.)wa.edu.auWater is weird. It's one of the only liquids that expands as
it freezes, at 0 degrees Celsius, yet contracts as you warm it up to 4 C.
(This is why _water_ ice floats while most other types of ice _sink_.)

>>

>> But if you warm up water beyond 4 C, the molecules violently push on one
another, expanding the total volume of liquid and making it take up more
space.

>>

>> Earth's surface has warmed by about 0.8 degrees C on average since 1880,
soon after the industrial revolution kicked off.

>>

>> This increase doesn't sound like much, explains NASA Earth Observatory, but
it has major consequences:

>>

>> A one-degree _global_ change is significant because it takes a vast amount
of heat to warm all the oceans, atmosphere, and land by that much. In the
past, a one- to two-degree drop was all it took to plunge the Earth into the
Little Ice Age. A five-degree drop was enough to bury a large part of North
America under a towering mass of ice 20,000 years ago.

>>

>> And our world is under going some extensive warming, especially in the
northern pole:

>>

>> The world is warming, and it's increasing the volume of ocean water.NASA
Earth ObservatoryThe Earth's oceans are especially at risk -- they have
responded to this increase by soaking up more and more heat as global
temperatures climb:

>>

>> The ocean is one of Earth's biggest heat sinks. NOAA

>>

>> And since water expands when heated, this excess heat absorption has
expanded the volume of Earth's oceans.

>>

>> As of right now, this volume increase by only a mere fraction of a percent
of the ocean's original volume.

>>

>> Yet applied to even part of **the planet's 335 million cubic miles of
water** , e.g. surface waters, this increase adds up to significant sea level
rise -- on top of increased water runoff from the world's melting ice
reserves.

>>

>> Global sea level rise since the Industrial Revolution.Union of Concerned
Scientists

>>

>> According to the Union of Concerned Scientists, sea levels rose about 8
inches from 1880 to 2009, with thermal expansion as the predominant cause.

>>

>> Again, this doesn't sound like much -- but any increase gives storm surges
that much of a leg up to overwhelm coastal marshes, topple levees, and cause
damage deeper and deeper inland.

>>

>> This is a simplistic illustration of what that looks like for coastal
cities, but it's a dangerous scenario:

>>

>> Union of Concerned Scientists

>>

>> What's more, the rate of sea level rise is only accelerating as oceans soak
up more heat, expand, and icebergs and glaciers continue to melt.

>>

>> What's contributing to sea level rise.NASA Earth Observatory

>>

>> Earth is maddeningly dynamic -- especially the oceans. That's partly why it
takes so long to reveal these trends in the first place; you have to take
measurements over long periods of time to see the trends.

>>

>> To that end, researchers are still uncertain about the interplay of surface
water and deep-ocean warming. But it's a given that if the planet keeps
warming, as it's on track to, and oceans continue to soak up heat, vulnerable
coastal cities like New Orleans are in a heap of trouble.

>>

>> ### SEE ALSO: New Orleans could be wiped off the map later this century

>>

>> ### NOW WATCH: Animated map shows what would happen to Asia if all the

>>

>> Earth's ice melted

>>

>> More: Environment Global Warming Climate Climate Change

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sea Levels

>>  
>>                       * Physics

>>  
>>                       * Ice

>>  
>>                       * Water

>>  
>>                       * Innovation

>>  
>>

>> Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes
previous / next navigation options.

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### Sorry, Apple's controversial $1,000 computer-screen stand isn't a rip-

>>

>> off — it's a missed opportunity

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### The Army ignored her warnings about a dangerous colleague — then he

>>

>> set her on fire

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### The riskiest vacation hot spots in the Caribbean, ranked

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### Jeff Bezos took the controls of some 'weirdly natural' giant robot

>>

>> hands but could not solve the riddle of a Rubik's cube

>>

>> ### Popular

>>

>> #### 'Siri, I'm getting pulled over': A shortcut for iPhones can

>>

>> automatically record the police

>>

>> Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close
an interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

>>

>> Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with
an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play
button in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

>>

>> Also check out: * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Terms of Service ,  Privacy
Policy and  Cookies Policy .

>>  
>>                       * Sitemap

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimer

>>  
>>                       * Commerce Policy

>>  
>>                       * Coupons

>>  
>>                       * Made in NYC

>>  
>>                       * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

>>  
>>

>> Edition

>>

>> International Editions:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * United States US

>>  
>>

>> Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * International INTL

>>  
>>                       * Deutschland DE

>>  
>>                       * Australia AUS

>>  
>>                       * France FR

>>  
>>                       * India IN

>>  
>>                       * Italy IT

>>  
>>                       * Japan JP

>>  
>>                       * Malaysia MY

>>  
>>                       * Netherlands NL

>>  
>>                       * Nordic SE

>>  
>>                       * Poland PL

>>  
>>                       * Singapore SG

>>  
>>                       * South Africa ZA

>>  
>>                       * Spain ES

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

