
>

> ![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=154643575315468&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

>

>> ![250 thistle

logo](https://cdn.britannica.com/mendel/250-anniversary/thistle-gradient-

half.png)

>>

>> ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA ![250 thistle

logo](https://cdn.britannica.com/mendel/250-anniversary/eb-mendel-

anniversary-11-13-18-a2-resized.png)

>>

>> START YOUR FREE TRIAL

>>

>> ![Subscribe!](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/header-subscribe.png)

>>

>> Log In * Join

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Demystified

>>  
>>                       * Quizzes

>>  
>>                       * #WTFact

>>  
>>                       * Lists

>>  
>>                       * On This Day

>>  
>>                       * Biographies

>>  
>>                       * Saving Earth

>>  
>>

>> START YOUR FREE TRIAL

>>

>> ![Subscribe!](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/header-subscribe.png)

>>

>> Search Britannica __

>>

>> What are you looking for?

>>

>> Search Click here to search __

>>

>> Browse popular topics:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sri Lanka

>>  
>>                       * Easter Island

>>  
>>                       * Chinese Civil War

>>  
>>                       * Barabbas

>>  
>>                       * Five-Year Plans

>>  
>>

>> Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. **Learn
More.** ![Chrome store logo](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/extension-

CHROME.png)

>>

>> # Cretaceous Period

>>

>> geochronology

>>

>> Written By:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Carl Fred Koch

>>  
>>                       * Thor Arthur Hansen

>>  
>>

>> See Article History

>>

>> **Cretaceous Period** , in geologic time, the last of the three periods of
the Mesozoic Era. The Cretaceous began 145.0 million years ago and ended 66
million years ago; it followed the Jurassic Period and was succeeded by the
Paleogene Period (the first of the two periods into which the Tertiary Period
was divided). The Cretaceous is the longest period of the Phanerozoic Eon.
Spanning 79 million years, it represents more time than has elapsed since the
extinction of the dinosaurs, which occurred at the end of the period.

>>

>> ![species of

apes](https://cdn.britannica.com/s:225x225/92/76392-004-11BD7A39.jpg)

>>

>> Read More on This Topic

>>

>> primate: Cretaceous

>>

>> The known temporal range of supposed primates was extended to about 65.5
million years ago (Late Cretaceous Epoch) by the discovery in Montana,…

>>

>> The name Cretaceous is derived from _creta_ , Latin for “chalk,” and was
first proposed by J.B.J. Omalius d’Halloy in 1822. D’Halloy had been
commissioned to make a geologic map of France, and part of his task was to
decide upon the geologic units to be represented by it. One of his units, the
Terrain Crétacé, included chalks and underlying sands. Chalk is a soft, fine-
grained type of limestone composed predominantly of the armourlike plates of
coccolithophores, tiny floating algae that flourished during the Late
Cretaceous. Most Cretaceous rocks are not chalks, but most chalks were
deposited during the Cretaceous. Many of these rocks provide clear and easily
accessed details of the period because they have not been deformed or eroded
and are relatively close to the surface—as can be seen in the white cliffs
bordering the Strait of Dover between France and England.

>>

>> ![geologic

time](https://cdn.britannica.com/s:700x450,q:1/67/73167-004-49C507E3.jpg)

>>

>> **geologic time** The stratigraphic chart of geologic time.Encyclopædia
Britannica, Inc. Source: International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS)

>>

>> The Cretaceous Period began with Earth’s land assembled essentially into
two continents, Laurasia in the north and Gondwana in the south. These were
almost completely separated by the equatorial Tethys seaway, and the various
segments of Laurasia and Gondwana had already started to rift apart. North
America had just begun pulling away from Eurasia during the Jurassic, and
South America had started to split off from Africa, from which India,
Australia, and Antarctica were also separating. When the Cretaceous Period
ended, most of the present-day continents were separated from each other by
expanses of water such as the North and South Atlantic Ocean. At the end of
the period, India was adrift in the Indian Ocean, and Australia was still
connected to Antarctica.

>>

>> The climate was generally warmer and more humid than today, probably
because of very active volcanism associated with unusually high rates of
seafloor spreading. The polar regions were free of continental ice sheets,
their land instead covered by forest. Dinosaurs roamed Antarctica, even with
its long winter night.

>>

>> Facts Matter. Support the truth and unlock all of Britannica’s content.
Start Your Free Trial Today

>>

>> The lengthy Cretaceous Period constitutes a major portion of the interval
between ancient life-forms and those that dominate Earth today. Dinosaurs were
the dominant group of land animals, especially “duck-billed” dinosaurs
(hadrosaurs), such as _Shantungosaurus_ , and horned forms, such as
_Triceratops_. Giant marine reptiles such as ichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, and
plesiosaurs were common in the seas, and flying reptiles (pterosaurs)
dominated the sky. Flowering plants (angiosperms) arose close to the beginning
of the Cretaceous and became more abundant as the period progressed. The Late
Cretaceous was a time of great productivity in the world’s oceans, as borne
out by the deposition of thick beds of chalk in western Europe, eastern
Russia, southern Scandinavia, the Gulf Coast of North America, and western
Australia. The Cretaceous ended with one of the greatest mass extinctions in
the history of Earth, exterminating the dinosaurs, marine and flying reptiles,
and many marine invertebrates.

>>

>> ## The Cretaceous environment

>>

>> ## Paleogeography

>>

>> The position of Earth’s landmasses changed significantly during the
Cretaceous Period—not unexpected, given its long duration. At the onset of the
period there existed two supercontinents, Gondwana in the south and Laurasia
in the north. South America, Africa (including the adjoining pieces of what
are now the Arabian Peninsula and the Middle East), Antarctica, Australia,
India, Madagascar, and several smaller landmasses were joined in Gondwana in
the south, while North America, Greenland, and Eurasia (including Southeast
Asia) formed Laurasia. Africa had split from South America, the last land
connection being between Brazil and Nigeria. As a result, the South Atlantic
Ocean joined with the widening North Atlantic. In the region of the Indian
Ocean, Africa and Madagascar separated from India, Australia, and Antarctica
in Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous times. Once separated from Australia and
Antarctica, India began its journey northward, which culminated in a later
collision with Asia during the Cenozoic Era. Madagascar broke away from Africa
during the Late Cretaceous, and Greenland separated from North America.
Australia was still joined to Antarctica. These were barely attached at the
junction of what are now North and South America.

>>

>> Sea level was higher during most of the Cretaceous than at any other time
in Earth history, and it was a major factor influencing the paleogeography of
the period. In general, world oceans were about 100 to 200 metres (330 to 660
feet) higher in the Early Cretaceous and roughly 200 to 250 metres (660 to 820
feet) higher in the Late Cretaceous than at present. The high Cretaceous sea
level is thought to have been primarily the result of water in the ocean
basins being displaced by the enlargement of midoceanic ridges.

>>

>> As a result of higher sea levels during the Late Cretaceous, marine waters
inundated the continents, creating relatively shallow epicontinental seas in
North America, South America, Europe, Russia, Africa, and Australia. In
addition, all continents shrank somewhat as their margins flooded. At its
maximum, land covered only about 18 percent of Earth’s surface, compared with
approximately 28 percent today. At times, Arctic waters were connected to the
Tethys seaway through the middle of North America and the central portion of
Russia. On several occasions during the Cretaceous, marine animals living in
the South Atlantic had a seaway for migration to Tethys via what is presently
Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Libya. Most of western Europe, eastern Australia,
parts of Africa, South America, India, Madagascar, Borneo, and other areas
that are now land were entirely covered by marine waters for some interval of
Cretaceous time.

>>

>> Detailed study indicates 5 to 15 different episodes of rises and falls in
sea level. The patterns of changes for the stable areas throughout history are
quite similar, although several differences are notable. During most of the
Early Cretaceous, parts of Arctic Canada, Russia, and western Australia were
underwater, but most of the other areas were not. During the middle
Cretaceous, east-central Australia experienced major inundations called
transgressions. In the Late Cretaceous, most continental landmasses were
transgressed but not always at the same time. One explanation for the lack of
a synchronous record is the concept of geoidal eustacy, in which, it is
suggested, as Earth’s continents move about, the oceans bulge at some places
to compensate. Eustacy would result in sea level being different from ocean
basin to ocean basin.

>>

>> Water circulation and mixing were not as great as they are today, because
most of the oceans (e.g., the developing North Atlantic) were constricted, and
the temperature differences between the poles and the Equator were minimal.
Thus, the oceans experienced frequent periods of anoxic (oxygenless)
conditions in the bottom waters that reveal themselves today as black shales.
Sometimes, particularly during the mid-Cretaceous, conditions extended to
epicontinental seas, as attested by deposits of black shales in the western
interior of North America.

>>

>> The Cretaceous world had three distinct geographic subdivisions: the
northern boreal, the southern boreal, and the Tethyan region. The Tethyan
region separated the two boreal regions and is recognized by the presence of
fossilized reef-forming rudist bivalves, corals, larger foraminiferans
(single-celled organisms known for their glasslike shells, or tests), and
certain ammonites (a group of extinct cephalopods known for their spiral
shells) that inhabited only the warmer Tethyan waters. Early in the
Cretaceous, North and South America separated sufficiently for the marine
connection between the Tethys Sea and the Pacific to deepen substantially. The
Tethys-to-Pacific marine connection allowed for a strong westward-flowing
current, which is inferred from faunal patterns. For example, as the
Cretaceous progressed, the similarity between rudist bivalves of the Caribbean
and western Europe decreased, while some Caribbean forms have been found on
Pacific seamounts, in Southeast Asia, and possibly in the Balkans.

>>

>> The remnants of the northern boreal realm in North America, Europe, Russia,
and Japan have been extensively studied. It is known, for instance, that
sediments in the southwestern Netherlands indicate several changes of
temperature during the Late Cretaceous. These temperature swings imply that
the boundary between the northern boreal areas and the Tethys region was not
constant with time. Russian workers recognize six paleobiogeographic zones:
boreal, which in this context is equivalent to Arctic; European;
Mediterranean, including the central Asian province; Pacific; and two
paleofloristic zonations of land. Southern boreal areas and the rocks
representing the southern Tethys margin lack this level of detail.

>>

>> Magnetically, the Cretaceous was quiet relative to the subsequent Paleogene
Period. In fact, magnetic reversals are not noted for a period of some 42
million years, from the early Aptian to the late Santonian ages. The lengths
of Earth’s months ( _see_ synodic period) have changed regularly for at least
the past 600 million years because of tidal friction and other forces that
slow Earth’s rotation. The rate of change in the synodic month was minimal for
most of the Cretaceous but has accelerated since. The reasons for these two
anomalies are not well understood.

>>

>> ![Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of

D-Day](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/WWII_Subscriber_Gallery_300X90.jpg)

>>

>> Cretaceous Period

>>

>> Quick Facts

>>

>> ![Cretaceous

paleogeography](https://cdn.britannica.com/s:300x300,q:1/44/136144-004-76AAB173.jpg)
View Media Page

>>

>> key people

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Gideon Algernon Mantell

>>  
>>

>> related topics

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Mesozoic Era

>>  
>>                       * Tyrannosaur

>>  
>>                       * Pterosaur

>>  
>>                       * Fossil

>>  
>>                       * K–T extinction

>>  
>>                       * Dromaeosaur

>>  
>>                       * Titanosaur

>>  
>>                       * Plesiosaur

>>  
>>                       * Sauropod

>>  
>>                       * Cycadeoidea

>>  
>>

>> **Load Next Page**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Introduction

>>  
>>                       * The Cretaceous environment

>>  
>>                         * Paleogeography

>>  
>>                         * Paleoclimate

>>  
>>                       * Cretaceous life

>>  
>>                         * Marine life

>>  
>>                         * Terrestrial life

>>  
>>                         * Mass extinction

>>  
>>                       * Cretaceous geology

>>  
>>                         * Economic significance of Cretaceous deposits

>>  
>>                         * Major subdivisions of the Cretaceous System

>>  
>>                         * Occurrence and distribution

>>  
>>                         * Types of Cretaceous rocks

>>  
>>                         * Correlation

>>  
>>

>> Cretaceous Period

>>

>> Additional Information

>>

>> ## Additional Reading

>>

>> ## External Websites

>>  
>>                 >>                       * University of California Museum
of Paleontology - The Cretaceous

>>  
>>

>> Period

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Palaeos - The Cretaceous Period
- 1

>>  
>>                       * LiveScience - Cretaceous Period: Animals, Plants &
Extinction

>>  
>>

>> Event

>>  
>>                 >>                       * National Geographic - Science
and Space - Cretaceous Period

>>  
>>

>> Britannica Websites

>>

>> Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school
students.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Cretaceous Period - Student
Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up)

>>  
>>

>> ## Article History

>>

>> ## Article Contributors

>>

>> **Inspire your inbox -** Sign up for daily fun facts about this day in
history, updates, and special offers.

>>

>> Subscribe

>>

>> By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to news, offers, and
information from Encyclopaedia Britannica.  
>  Click here to view our Privacy Notice. Easy unsubscribe links are provided
in every email.

>>

>> Thank you for subscribing!

>>

>> Be on the lookout for your Britannica newsletter to get trusted stories
delivered right to your inbox.

>>

>> Stay Connected

>>

>> Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest _Newsletters_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * About Our Ads

>>  
>>                       * Partner Program

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Notice

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>

>> (C)2019 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.

>>

>> ![250 thistle

logo](https://cdn.britannica.com/mendel/250-anniversary/thistle-gradient-

half.png)

>>

>> __

>>

>> Menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Demystified

>>  
>>                       * Quizzes

>>  
>>                       * #WTFact

>>  
>>                       * Lists

>>  
>>                       * On This Day

>>  
>>                       * Biographies

>>  
>>                       * Saving Earth

>>  
>>                       * * * *

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * **Login**

>>  
>>                       * **Join**

>>  
>>

>> __

>>

>> Contents

>>

>> Contents

>>

>> Cretaceous Period

>>

>> geochronology

>>

>> __Article __Media

>>

>> __

>>

>> Info

>>

>> __

>>

>> Print

>>

>> Print

>>

>> Please select which sections you would like to print:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Table Of Contents

>>  
>>

>> __

>>

>> Cite

>>

>> __

>>

>> Share

>>

>> SHARE

>>

>> Facebook Twitter

>>

>> __

>>

>> Feedback

>>

>> Feedback

>>

>> Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to
improve this article (requires login).

>>

>> Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other

>>

>> Submit Feedback

>>

>> Thank you for your feedback

>>

>> Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to
revise the article.

>>

>> Join **Britannica's Publishing Partner Program** and our community of
experts to gain a global audience for your work!

>>

>> __

>>

>> Share

>>

>> SHARE

>>

>> Facebook Twitter

>>

>> __

>>

>> __

>>

>> Search

>>

>> __

>>

>> ×

>>

>> close

>>

>> Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of D-Day

>>

>> ![](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/thistle-white.svg)

>>

>> ![Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of

D-Day](https://cdn.britannica.com/marketing/WWII_Slider.jpg)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

