
>

>> Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

>>

>> ![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2013/05/130522-tornado-climate-
change-oklahoma-science-global-warming.html

>>

>> (C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National
Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Photograph by Carsten Peter, National Geographic

>>

>> Read Caption

>>

>> Scientists can't say yet whether global warming will increase tornadoes.

>>

>> Photograph by Carsten Peter, National Geographic

>>

>> # Tornadoes and Global Warming: Is There a Connection?

>>

>> ## Will the future bring more twisters to Oklahoma and Tornado Alley?

>>

>> 4 Minute Read

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> By **Robert Kunzig** , National Geographic

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> PUBLISHED May 22, 2013

>>

>> **It sounds intuitive: Of course global warming should lead to more—and
more powerful—tornadoes.**

>>

>> We're adding energy to the atmosphere by trapping heat with greenhouse
gases, and tornadoes are the very picture of terrifying atmospheric energy.

>>

>> Linking any particular weather event to climate change is always tricky,
because weather is inherently random. But weather patterns can speak to a
warming planet. Scientists can detect that extreme rain events, for instance,
are already happening more often than they used to, and that a warmer
atmosphere with more water vapor in it is making such events more likely.

>>

>> Tornadoes are different. Global warming may well end up making them more
frequent or intense, as our intuition would tell us. But it might also
actually suppress them—the science just isn't clear yet.

>>

>> Neither is the historical record.

>>

>> There is no real evidence that tornadoes are happening more often. A lot
more are being recorded now than in 1950, but a closer look at the data shows
the increase is only in the weakest category, EF0. There's been no increase in
stronger twisters, and maybe even a slight decrease in EF4s and EF5s.

>>

>> That suggests we're just spotting more of the weak and short-lived
tornadoes than we did back when the country was emptier (the U.S. population
in 1950 was less than half what it is now), we didn't have Doppler radar, and
Oklahoma highways weren't jammed with storm-chasers.

>>

>> There is also no evidence that tornadoes have gotten more damaging,
according to a study by Roger Pielke, Jr., of the University of Colorado and
his colleagues. Even so, when you allow for inflation and increases in
population and wealth in the United States, 2011 becomes the third worst year
for tornado damage, after 1953 and 1965.

>>

>> When _National Geographic_ magazine asked "What's Up With the Weather" in a
cover story last September, we put a tornado photo on the cover and six pages
of twister pictures inside—including a large shot of the swath of destruction
that an EF4 tornado cut through Tuscaloosa, Alabama, in 2011, killing 64
people there and in Birmingham.

>>

>> But as writer Peter Miller made clear in that story, intuition is not a
reliable guide to tornadoes.

>>

>> Two Opposing Forces

>>

>> Since we're changing the climate, the historical record is no more certain
a guide to the future than intuition is. So what does physics tell us about
the future of tornadoes in a CO2-warmed world?

>>

>> "It really comes down to two ingredients in the atmosphere, in the
environment in which storms form," says Jeff Trapp, an atmospheric scientist
at Purdue University.

>>

>> Trapp has been on the road in Kansas and Oklahoma since last week,
launching weather balloons into supercells—large, tornado-producing
thunderstorms—as part of an effort to improve forecasting. He was 20 or 30
miles away from Moore when the tornado hit on Monday.

>>

>> The first ingredient needed to make a tornado, he explains, is energy in
the form of warm, moist, unstable air. In Oklahoma, that comes on southerly
winds off the Gulf of Mexico.

>>

>> The second ingredient is wind shear—a measure of how much the wind changes
speed and direction between the ground and higher levels of the atmosphere.
"Essentially that's determined by the strength of the jet stream," which blows
in from the west, says Trapp. Wind shear causes the warm, rising air inside a
supercell to start rotating, a necessary condition for organizing the storm
and allowing it to spawn funnel clouds.

>>

>> And that gets at the nub of the question surrounding a potential nexus
between warming and tornadoes: Although climate change is increasing the
energy in the atmosphere, it's also expected to reduce wind shear.

>>

>> That's because the jet stream is powered ultimately by the temperature
difference between Earth's hot tropics and its cold poles, and that difference
is decreasing with climate change, as the poles warm faster than the rest of
the planet. So the same phenomenon that is rapidly melting the Arctic ice cap
and marooning polar bears could lead to a weaker jet stream and fewer
tornadoes.

>>

>> But will it?

>>

>> Severe thunderstorms can happen even when wind shear is lower, says Trapp.
"Really it's the product of the two ingredients that matters most," he says.

>>

>> The big question, which he and a small number of other climate scientists
have been trying to answer with climate simulations, is what will happen to
the product of energy times wind shear—to the two ingredients combined—as CO2
continues to warm the world.

>>

>> "What we find in the models," Trapp says, "is there's actually an increase
in the product. The decrease in wind shear is more than compensated [for] by
the increase in energy. This tells us that the number of days that support
severe thunderstorms _generically_ should increase. "

>>

>> Still, that's just one study. And it says that the future environment
should favor the storms that create tornadoes—but not necessarily tornadoes
themselves. It's possible that in the future, severe thunderstorms will tend
to spend themselves in violent hail or in straight-line winds. Neither is a
pleasant prospect, but neither packs the damage potential of tornadoes.

>>

>> Trapp is now at work on a study that will combine a global climate model
with a local, high-resolution model, which will show tornadoes as if on a
virtual radar screen.

>>

>> This new study may offer a glimpse of what the future has in store for
Oklahoma and other parts of Tornado Alley. Meanwhile, he can say one thing
with certainty: "The last several days in Oklahoma, both the wind shear and
the energy have been incredibly large."

>>

>> Continue Reading

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

