
>

>> Renewable Energy Is Creating Jobs 12 Times Faster Than the Rest of the
Economy

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>

>> ![Subscribe](http://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

>>

>> Close

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 40 Under 40

>>  
>>                       * 100 Best Companies to Work For

>>  
>>                       * Fortune 500

>>  
>>                       * Global 500

>>  
>>                       * Most Powerful Women

>>  
>>                       * World's 50 Greatest Leaders

>>  
>>                       * World's Most Admired Companies

>>  
>>                       * All Rankings

>>  
>>                       * Automotive

>>  
>>                       * Careers

>>  
>>                       * Commentary

>>  
>>                       * Design

>>  
>>                       * Energy

>>  
>>                       * Entertainment

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Humor

>>  
>>                       * International

>>  
>>                       * Leadership

>>  
>>                       * Luxury

>>  
>>                       * Most Powerful Women

>>  
>>                       * Real Estate

>>  
>>                       * Retail

>>  
>>                       * Sports

>>  
>>                       * Technology

>>  
>>                       * The Ledger

>>  
>>                       * Travel

>>  
>>                       * Venture

>>  
>>                       * FORTUNE Communications

>>  
>>                       * Fortune Knowledge Group

>>  
>>                       * FORTUNE Membership

>>  
>>                       * Conferences

>>  
>>                       * Data Store

>>  
>>                       * Infographics

>>  
>>                       * Magazine

>>  
>>                       * Newsletters

>>  
>>                       * Photography

>>  
>>                       * Radio

>>  
>>                       * The 21st Century Corporation

>>  
>>                       * Brainstorm Reinvent

>>  
>>                       * Digital Health

>>  
>>                       * Discovering Luxury

>>  
>>                       * Innovation By Design

>>  
>>                       * Looking Forward

>>  
>>                       * Mastering the Market

>>  
>>                       * MPW Mentorship

>>  
>>                       * MPW Next Gen

>>  
>>                       * State of the Market

>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Give a Gift

>>  
>>                       * Customer Service

>>  
>>                       * EU Customer Service

>>  
>>                       * Work at Fortune

>>  
>>

>> Stay Connected

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Energy

>>  
>>                       2. Renewables

>>  
>>

>> # Renewable Energy Is Creating Jobs 12 Times Faster Than the Rest of the

>>

>> Economy

>>

>> By Kate Samuelson

>>

>> January 27, 2017

>>

>> The solar and wind industries are each creating jobs at a rate 12 times
faster than that of the rest of the U.S. economy, according to a new report.

>>

>> The study, published by the Environmental Defense Fund's (EDF) Climate
Corps program, says that solar and wind jobs have grown at rates of about 20%
annually in recent years, and sustainability now collectively represents four
to four and a half million jobs in the U.S., up from 3.4 million in 2011.

>>

>> The renewable energy sector has seen rapid growth over recent years, driven
largely by significant reductions in manufacturing and installation costs.
Building developers and owners have been fueled by state and local building
efficiency policies and incentives, the report explains.

>>

>> But, these gains are in contrast to Trump's support for fossil fuel
production, his climate change denial and his belief that renewable energy is
a "bad investment".

>>

>> "Trump's current approach is basically ignoring an entire industry that has
grown up over the last 10 years or so and is quite robust," Liz Delaney,
program director at EDF Climate Corps, told _Business Insider_.

>>

>> ### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

>>

>> ![](http://assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

>>

>> ### You May Like

>>

>> ### Read More

>>

>> ### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

>>

>> Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much
more.

>>

>> SUBSCRIBE

>>

>> EDIT POST

>>

>> ![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

>>

>> ![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

>>

>> ### Subscribe & Save

>>

>> Subscribe today and save 79% off the cover price.

>>

>> SUBSCRIBE NOW

>>

>> ![](https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/fortune-newsletter-

tout-footer.png)

>>

>> ### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

>>

>> Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much
more.

>>

>> SUBSCRIBE

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 40 Under 40

>>  
>>                       * 100 Best Companies to Work For

>>  
>>                       * Fortune 500

>>  
>>                       * Global 500

>>  
>>                       * Most Powerful Women in Business

>>  
>>                       * World's 50 Greatest Leaders

>>  
>>                       * World's Most Admired Companies

>>  
>>                       * Brainstorm Reinvent

>>  
>>                       * All Rankings

>>  
>>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Automotive

>>  
>>                       * Careers

>>  
>>                       * Design

>>  
>>                       * Energy & Environment

>>  
>>                       * Executive Travel

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Commentary

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * International

>>  
>>                       * Leadership

>>  
>>                       * Luxury

>>  
>>                       * Markets

>>  
>>                       * Most Powerful Women

>>  
>>                       * Retail

>>  
>>                       * Sports

>>  
>>                       * Technology

>>  
>>                       * The Ledger

>>  
>>                       * Venture

>>  
>>                       * Photography

>>  
>>                       * Podcasts

>>  
>>                       * Videos

>>  
>>                       * Newsletters

>>  
>>                       * Magazine

>>  
>>                       * Fortune Knowledge Group

>>  
>>                       * Fortune Data Store

>>  
>>                       * Fortune Conferences

>>  
>>                       * Customer Service

>>  
>>                       * EU Customer Service

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Advertising

>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Give a Gift

>>  
>>                       * Ad Choices

>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>                       * Your California Privacy Rights

>>  
>>

>> (C) 2018 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site
constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California
Privacy Rights).  
>  Fortune may receive compensation for some links to products and services on
this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.  
>  Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Interactive
Data. ETF and Mutual Fund data provided by Morningstar, Inc. Dow Jones Terms &
Conditions: http://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/html/tandc/indexestandcs.html.  
>  S&P; Index data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its
licensors. All rights reserved. Terms & Conditions. Powered and implemented by
Interactive Data Managed Solutions. | EU Data Subject Requests

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

