
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> ![Inside Climate News](/sites/all/themes/icn/images/icn-logo.png)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * About

>>  
>>                                   * Contact

>>  
>>                                   * Reporting Network

>>  
>>                                   * Newsletter Sign-Up

>>  
>>                                   * Whistleblowers

>>  
>>                                   * Awards

>>  
>>                                   * Membership

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>

>> A Pulitzer Prize-winning, non-profit, non-partisan news organization
dedicated to covering climate change, energy and the environment.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
*               *               *

>>  
>>

>>               * Menu

>>  
>>                             >>                                   * News

>>  
>>                                   * Investigations

>>  
>>                                     * Dangers Without Borders

>>  
>>                                     * Harvesting Peril

>>  
>>                                     * Choke Hold

>>  
>>                                     * Exxon: The Road Not Taken

>>  
>>                                     * The Dilbit Disaster

>>  
>>                                     * Big Oil + Bad Air

>>  
>>                                     * Clean Break

>>  
>>                                     * Bloomberg's Hidden Legacy

>>  
>>                                     * Keystone & Beyond

>>  
>>                                     * Meltdown: Terror at the Top of the
World

>>  
>>                                   * Topics

>>  
>>                                   * Today's Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Clean Economy

>>  
>>                                   * Videos

>>  
>>                                   * Infographics

>>  
>>                                     * Infographics

>>  
>>                                     * Documents

>>  
>>                                   * EBooks

>>  
>>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * About

>>  
>>                                   * Contact

>>  
>>                                   * Reporting Network

>>  
>>                                   * Newsletter Sign-Up

>>  
>>                                   * Whistleblowers

>>  
>>                                   * Awards

>>  
>>                                   * Membership

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                   *               *               *
*

>>  
>>

>>                 * ##### Hot Topics:

>>  
>>                                 >>                                   *
Arctic

>>  
>>                                   * Agriculture

>>  
>>                                   * Military

>>  
>>                                   * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                                   * Climate Science

>>  
>>                                   * Extreme Weather

>>  
>>                                   * Exxon Investigation

>>  
>>                                   * Home

>>  
>>

>> # The Most Powerful Evidence Climate Scientists Have of Global Warming

>>

>> ## The oceans hold the story of a planet warming as fossil fuels are

>>

>> burned. Here is what scientists have discovered, in four charts.

>>

>> #### By Sabrina Shankman and Paul Horn

>>

>> Oct 3, 2017

>>

>> ![Sea Surface Temperatures. Credit:

NOAA](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/sst-

ocean-heat_NOAA-NNVL.png?itok=BTXlVlf_)

>>

>> Hurricane forecasters look closely at ocean temperatures. Sea surface
temperatures above 78 degrees, shown here in yellow, orange and red, are
sufficiently warm to fuel hurricanes. Credit: NOAA

>>

>> _Sign up to receive our latest reporting on climate change, energy and
environmental justice, sent directly to your inbox. _Subscribe here_._

>>

>> Earth's temperature is rising, and it isn't just in the air around us. More
than 90 percent of the excess heat trapped by greenhouse gas emissions has
been absorbed into the oceans that cover two-thirds of the planet's surface.
Their temperature is rising, too, and it tells a story of how humans are
changing the planet.

>>

>> This accrued heat is "really the memory of past climate change," said Kevin
Trenberth, the head of climate analysis at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research and co-author of a new paper on ocean warming.

>>

>> It's not just the amount of warming that is significant—it's also the pace.

>>

>> ###### Sign up for InsideClimate News Weekly

>>

>> Our stories. Your inbox. Every weekend.

>>

>> **Please subscribe me to the following mailing lists**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Clean
Economy Wire

>>  
>>                                   * Today's Climate

>>  
>>                                   * ICN Articles

>>  
>>                                   * Weekly Newsletter

>>  
>>

>> I agree to InsideClimate News' Terms of Service and Privacy Policy

>>

>> The rate at which the oceans are heating up has nearly doubled since 1992,
and that heat is reaching ever deeper waters, according to a recent study. At
the same time, concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere have been
rising.

>>

>> The charts that follow show how the oceans are changing and what they're
telling us as a thermometer of global warming.

>>

>> ![Oceans Storing More Heat as CO2 Builds

Up](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/OceanWarming02a529px.png?itok=pnVHKL56)

>>

>> Scientists say the accumulation of heat in the oceans is the strongest
evidence of how fast Earth is warming due to heat-trapping gases released by
the burning of fossil fuels.

>>

>> Oceans have enormous capacity to hold heat. So ocean temperatures, unlike
temperatures on land, are slow to fluctuate from natural forces, such as El
Niño/La Niña patterns or volcanic eruptions. Think night and day, said
Trenberth. As night falls on land, so do air temperatures. But in the oceans,
temperatures vary little.

>>

>> This makes it easier to tease out the influence of human-caused climate
change from other possible causes of surging ocean heat.

>>

>> ![Global Warming, at a

Glance](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/OceanWarming01a529px.png?itok=tn4F4ae9)

>>

>> How much extra heat are we talking about? And what are the impacts on the
climate system? "On a day-to-day a basis, it's really quite small," Trenberth
said, but the cumulative effects are not.

>>

>> According to research by Trenberth and Lijing Cheng, of the Institute for
Atmospheric Physics in Beijing, the heat storage in the oceans during 2015 and
2016 amounted to a stunning force: an increase of 30.4 X 1022 joules of energy
roiling Earth's systems since 1960. The overload is helping throw off Earth's
energy balance, needed for the climate to be relatively stable. Put another
way: The excess energy amassed in the oceans since 1992 is roughly equivalent
to 2,000 times U.S. electricity generation during the past decade, the
researchers explained.

>>

>> ![InsideClimate News](/sites/all/themes/icn/images/icn-circle-logo.png)

>>

>> ### Your donation powers our nonprofit newsroom

>>

>> ##### Support a more-informed community on climate

>>

>> Donate Now

>>

>> Ocean temperatures have been rising about 0.12 degrees Celsius per decade
on average over the past 50 years. The higher temperatures are driving marine
life toward the poles in search of livable habitats, bleaching coral reefs,
and causing severe impacts on fisheries and aquacultures. They also contribute
to more frequent and intense extreme weather events. In the three back-to-back
deadly hurricanes of 2017—Harvey, Irma and Maria—warmer waters played a role
in worsening the storms.

>>

>> ![Ocean Temperatures: Warm and

Warmer](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/OceanWarming03529px.png?itok=yeZWhw_B)

>>

>> Though ocean temperature represents a clear signal of climate change, one
challenge for researchers is that the record only goes back so far. Since the
early 2000s, an international effort called Argo has launched nearly 4,000
ocean-going sensors that gather important data about the oceans, including
temperature.

>>

>> Meanwhile, as oceans heat up, thermal expansion causes sea levels that are
already rising from the melting of land ice (triggered by higher air and sea
temperatures) to rise even more. Nearly 50 percent of the sea level rise so
far has come from ocean warming, according to new work by Cheng and Trenberth.
Much of the rest comes from the melting of ice on Antarctica and Greenland.

>>

>> ![Oceans Warm and Expand — and the Seas

Rise](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/OceanWarming04529px.png?itok=4qXL4jvW)

>>

>> Ocean warming can impact sea level rise in another way, too. This year has
seen extensive losses from Antarctica's ice shelves. "It's most likely because
that ice is being undermined through warmer ocean underneath the ice, which is
contributing to the thinning of the ice and weakening of the shelf," Trenberth
said. The ice shelves themselves are already floating, but they are attached
to land and play a critical role in slowing the ocean-bound ice flow from the
massive ice sheets behind them. Scientists say the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
alone holds enough ice to raise global sea level by about 11 feet.

>>

>> Published Under:

>>

>> Climate Science

>>

>> Climate Change

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Email this
page

>>  
>>                                   * Printer-friendly version

>>  
>>

>> ###### Our stories. Your inbox. Every weekend.

>>

>> **Please subscribe me to the following mailing lists**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Clean
Economy Wire

>>  
>>                                   * Today's Climate

>>  
>>                                   * ICN Articles

>>  
>>                                   * Weekly Newsletter

>>  
>>

>> I agree to InsideClimate News' Terms of Service and Privacy Policy

>>

>> ![Your donation powers our nonprofit

newsroom.](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/ICNSpringCampaign475x278px_articlePage.png?itok=WlyOFbJU)

>>

>> ![ICN

Videos](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/ICNVideoBugv1b.png?itok=QHsZC1yK)

>>

>> #### Most Popular

>>

>> ![Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder. Credit: State of

Ohio](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/larry-

householder_state-ohio.jpg?itok=kxYeETZN)

>>

>> ##### Ohio’s Nuclear Bailout Plan Balloons to Embrace Coal (while Killing

>>

>> Renewable Energy Rules)

>>

>> By Dan Gearino

>>

>> ![A tornado on the ground in Kansas. Credit: Jason Weingart/Barcroft

Images/Barcroft Media via Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/tornado-

kansas-900_jason-weingart-barcroft-images-barcroft-media-via-

getty.jpg?itok=I9JyK3Yi)

>>

>> ##### Is Climate Change Fueling Tornadoes?

>>

>> By Bob Berwyn

>>

>> ![Young plaintiffs in the children's climate lawsuit are already feeling
the

effects of climate change. Credit: Robin

Loznak](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/childrens-

trust-youth-900_robin-loznak.jpg?itok=7nylT9mU)

>>

>> ##### Kids Face Rising Health Risks from Climate Change, Doctors Warn as

>>

>> Juliana Case Returns to Court

>>

>> By Nina Pullano

>>

>> ![Tufted puffins on St Paul Island in the Bering Sea off the Alaska coast.

Credit: Isaac Sanchez/CC-

BY-2.0](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/tufted-

puffins-st-paul-island-900_isaac-sanchez-cc-by-20.jpg?itok=OZa7Kf0z)

>>

>> ##### Mass Die-Off of Puffins Raises More Fears About Arctic's Warming

>>

>> Climate

>>

>> By Sabrina Shankman

>>

>> ![Joe Biden, campaigning here in New Hampshire in May, released a climate

change plan. Credit: Spencer Platt/Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/joe-

biden-new-hampshire-900_spencer-platt-getty.jpg?itok=d4T_BZSx)

>>

>> ##### Biden's Climate Plan Embraces Green New Deal, Goes Beyond Obama-Era

>>

>> Ambition

>>

>> By Marianne Lavelle , John H. Cushman Jr.

>>

>> ![A groundskeeper in Los Angeles sweats through a heat wave. Credit: Anne

Cusack/Los Angeles Times via Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/heat-

wave-0900_anne-cusack-la-times.jpg?itok=_zMv-cBA)

>>

>> ##### In These U.S. Cities, Heat Waves Will Kill Hundreds More as

>>

>> Temperatures Rise

>>

>> By Bob Berwyn

>>

>> ![A coal-fired power plant in Romeoville, Illinois, 30 miles outside

Chicago, has four unlined ponds holding coal ash waste. Credit: Scott

Olson/Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/romeoville-

illinois-coal-power-900_scott-olson-getty.jpg?itok=GFM1GmJt)

>>

>> ##### Illinois Passes Tougher Rules on Toxic Coal Ash Over Risks to Health

>>

>> and Rivers

>>

>> By Nina Pullano

>>

>> ![EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler. Credit: Mark Wilson/Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/andrew-

wheeler-900_mark-wilson-getty.jpg?itok=XkofjOHE)

>>

>> ##### EPA Science Advisers Push Back on Wheeler, Say He's Minimizing Their

>>

>> Role

>>

>> By Marianne Lavelle

>>

>> ![Exxon

Experiment](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/Exxon%20Experiment_Frontpage.jpg?itok=mA0Guf9-)

>>

>> ##### Exxon's Own Research Confirmed Fossil Fuels' Role in Global Warming

>>

>> Decades Ago

>>

>> By Neela Banerjee, Lisa Song and David Hasemyer

>>

>> ![West Virginia coal operation. Credit: Orjan F. Ellingvag/Corbis via Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/coal-

west-virginia-900_orjan-f-ellingvag-corbis-via-getty.jpg?itok=msggcey3)

>>

>> ##### Inside a Southern Coal Conference: Pep Rallies and Fears of an

>>

>> Industry's Demise

>>

>> By James Bruggers

>>

>> #### Follow

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
*               *               *

>>  
>>

>>               * #### Our Sponsors

>>

>> View all sponsors

>>

>>
![](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/ICN10thVideoBug529px.png?itok=abWRGYH-)

>>

>> #### Related

>>

>>
![](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/OceansGettyImages.jpg?itok=wJAuoeNK)

>>

>> ##### Rate of Ocean Warming Has Nearly Doubled Over Two Decades, Study Says

>>

>> By Bob Berwyn

>>

>> ![Data from ocean buoys shows consistent ocean warming over the past 50

years](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/Greenland2GettyImages.jpg?itok=OEXh-

RzH)

>>

>> ##### Already Debunked Global Warming 'Hiatus' Gets Another Dunking

>>

>> By Bob Berwyn

>>

>> ![Subscribe to Clean Economy

Weekly](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/icn_full_wrap_wide/public/CEWNewsletterRailBug298px.png?itok=8A4ndEgQ)

>>

>> ###### Want More Stories Like This One?

>>

>> ### Contribute To Our Staff

>>

>> Donate Now

>>

>> #### More Climate Science

>>

>> ![A tornado on the ground in Kansas. Credit: Jason Weingart/Barcroft

Images/Barcroft Media via Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/tornado-

kansas-900_jason-weingart-barcroft-images-barcroft-media-via-

getty.jpg?itok=I9JyK3Yi)

>>

>> ##### Is Climate Change Fueling Tornadoes?

>>

>> By Bob Berwyn

>>

>> ![In Boston, more developments are taking sea level rise into account by

building up the ground beneath buildings, installing extra-tall ground floors

and redoubling other flood-protection efforts. Credit: Jonathan Wiggs/The

Boston Globe via Getty

Images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/boston-

developer-sea-level_jonathan-wiggs-boston-globe-via-getty-900.jpg?itok=eE-

TXYlC)

>>

>> ##### Coasts Should Plan for 6.5 Feet Sea Level Rise by 2100 as Precaution,

>>

>> Experts Say

>>

>> By Sabrina Shankman

>>

>> ![Children run across a bayou bridge to reach their home in Isle de Jean

Charles. Credit: Julie Dermansky/Corbis via Getty

images](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/isle-

de-jean-charles-900_julie-dermansky-corbis-via-getty.jpg?itok=oqD0sSj4)

>>

>> ##### Louisiana's New Climate Plan Prepares for Resilience and Retreat as

>>

>> Sea Level Rises

>>

>> By Sabrina Shankman

>>

>> More on Climate Science

>>

>> #### Subscribe to InsideClimate News Email Newsletters

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * ####
Articles & Investigations

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * ####  Today's Climate

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * ####  Clean Economy

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * ####  Week in Review

>>  
>>

>> Subscribe

>>

>> #### More From The Author

>>

>>
![](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/Solar-

grid.jpg?itok=pmm2H0BD)

>>

>> ##### Coal Is On Its Way Out in Indiana. But What Replaces It and Who Will

>>

>> Own It?

>>

>> By Sarah Bowman and Emily Hopkins, Indianapolis Star

>>

>>
![](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/GettyImages-

PalmOilIndonesia.jpg?itok=vl76TFa-)

>>

>> ##### Humanity Faces a Biodiversity Crisis. Climate Change Makes It Worse.

>>

>> By Sabrina Shankman, Georgina Gustin, John H. Cushman Jr.

>>

>>
![](https://insideclimatenews.org/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75/public/article_images/GettyImages-

GreenNewDealAnnouncement.jpg?itok=4mJFXyFR)

>>

>> ##### The Green New Deal Lands in Congress

>>

>> By Marianne Lavelle , John H. Cushman Jr.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
Whistleblowers

>>  
>>                                   * Jobs & Freelance

>>  
>>                                   * Privacy Policy & Legal

>>  
>>                                   * Our E-Books

>>  
>>

>> ## Keep Environmental Journalism Alive

>>

>> Donate Now

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * News

>>  
>>                                   * Investigations

>>  
>>                                   * Topics

>>  
>>                                   * Today's Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Clean Economy

>>  
>>                                   * Videos

>>  
>>                                   * Infographics

>>  
>>                                   * EBooks

>>  
>>

>> Facebook Twitter Google Plus Email LinkedIn RSS RSS Instagram YouTube

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow _[↓]:
Down Arrow_ [XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow
  *[XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

