
>

>> __

>>

>> ![Grist](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/grist-

responsive/img/logos/logo-header.png)

>>

>> __

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Newsletters

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                   * Sections

>>  
>>                                   * Grist 50 2019

>>  
>>                                   * Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Justice

>>  
>>                                   * Politics

>>  
>>                                   * Advice

>>  
>>                                   * Science

>>  
>>                                   * Food

>>  
>>                                   * Video

>>  
>>                                   * Fix

>>  
>>                                   * More

>>  
>>                                   * About Grist

>>  
>>                                   * The Grist Team

>>  
>>                                   * Contact us

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                   * Fellowship Program

>>  
>>                                   * Jobs

>>  
>>                                   * Advertise

>>  
>>                                   * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                                   * Terms of Use

>>  
>>                                   * Follow

>>  
>>                                   * __Newsletters

>>  
>>                                   * __Facebook

>>  
>>                                   * __Twitter

>>  
>>                                   * __Instagram

>>  
>>                                   * __YouTube

>>  
>>                                   * __RSS Feed

>>  
>>                                   * __JSON feed

>>  
>>

>> Grist

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Grist 50
2019

>>  
>>                                   * Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Justice

>>  
>>                                   * Politics

>>  
>>                                   * Advice

>>  
>>                                   * Science

>>  
>>                                   * Food

>>  
>>                                   * Video

>>  
>>                                   * Fix

>>  
>>

>> __

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Newsletters

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>

>> __

>>

>> How to Talk to a Climate Skeptic

>>

>> # 'Natural emissions dwarf human emissions'-But emissions are only one side

>>

>> of the equation

>>

>> By Coby Beck on Dec 23, 2006

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> **Help us raise $35k by 6/8!** Every donation matched. Learn more.

>>

>> Donate Now

>>

>> (Part of the How to Talk to a Global Warming Skeptic guide)

>>

>> Objection: According to the IPCC, 150 billion tonnes of carbon go into the
atmosphere from natural processes every year. This is almost _30 times_ the
amount of carbon humans emit. What difference can we make?

>>

>> Answer: It's true that natural fluxes in the carbon cycle are much larger
than anthropogenic emissions. But for roughly the last 10,000 years, until the
industrial revolution, every gigatonne of carbon going into the atmosphere was
balanced by one coming out.

>>

>> What humans have done is alter one side of this cycle. We put approximately
6 gigatonnes of carbon into the air but, unlike nature, we are not taking any
out.

>>

>> Thankfully, nature is compensating in part for our emissions, because only
about half the CO2 we emit stays in the air. Nevertheless, since we began
burning fossil fuels in earnest over 150 years ago, the atmospheric
concentration that was relatively stable for the previous several thousand
years has now risen by over 35%.

>>

>> So whatever the total amounts going in and out "naturally," humans have
clearly upset the balance and significantly altered an important part of the
climate system.

>>

>> ##### Dig Our Work?

>>

>> **As a nonprofit news outlet, we rely on reader support to help fund our
award-winning journalism.** We’re one of the few news outlets dedicated
exclusively to people-focused environmental coverage, and we believe our
content should remain free and accessible to all. If you dig our mission and
agree news should never sit behind a paywall, donate today to help support our
work. Chip in what you can. **Every dollar will be matched between now and
June 8.**

>>

>> Donate Today!

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Grist's comments only work with JavaScript. Please enable and refresh the
page.

>>

>> Show comments

>>

>> ## Stories in this series:

>>

>> How to Talk to a Climate Skeptic

>>

>> ### 'There is no evidence' -- Yes, there is

>>

>> (Part of the How to Talk to a Climate Skeptic guide) Objection: Despite
what the computer models tell us, there is actually no evidence of significant
global warming. Answer: Global warming is not an output of computer models; it
is …

>>

>> How to Talk to a Climate Skeptic

>>

>> ### 'Mauna Loa is a volcano' -- CO2 rise is measured on top of a volcano!

>>

>> (Part of the How to Talk to a Global Warming Skeptic guide) Objection: CO2
levels are recorded on top of Mauna Loa ... a volcano! No wonder the levels
are so high. (image courtesty of Global Warming Art)

>>

>> How to Talk to a Climate Skeptic

>>

>> ### 'Warming is due to the Urban Heat Island effect' -- No, it isn't

>>

>> (Part of the How to Talk to a Global Warming Skeptic guide) Objection: The
apparent rise of global average temperatures is actually an illusion due to
the urbanization of land around weather stations, the Urban Heat Island
effect.

>>

>> See all articles in this series

>>

>> Help us reach our goal!

>>

>> 82%

>>

>> We’re looking to raise $35,000 by June 8. Make a donation now to support
our work. Every donation will be matched!

>>

>> ![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/membership-overlay.gif?w=300)

>>

>> Donate Now

>>

>> ## Recent Posts in Climate & Energy All Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/ratsss.jpg?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> package deal

>>

>> ### Is climate change really driving the ratpocalypse?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/gettyimages-674891358-e1559340152139.jpg?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> litmus protest

>>

>> ### Good news for climate activists: Marching might work

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/cnn-climate-

>>  
>>

>> justice-e1559340524856.png?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> Climate change ain’t colorblind

>>

>> ### CNN ran a 'climate justice' segment and this is progress

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/gettyimages-524293206-e1559172860943.jpg?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> let freedom rip

>>

>> ### Natural gas gets a Trump-friendly rebrand as ‘freedom gas’

>>

>> ## Can't Miss

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/11-more-

>>  
>>

>> years.jpg?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> student moans

>>

>> ### The life-altering, world-ending topic they’re still not teaching you

>>

>> about in school

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/san_bernadino.gif?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> cover story

>>

>> ### The town that online shopping built -- and women are trying to save

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/ratsss.jpg?w=640&h=360&crop=1)

>>

>> package deal

>>

>> ### Is climate change really driving the ratpocalypse?

>>

>> ###### Sections

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Grist 50
2019

>>  
>>                                   * Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Justice

>>  
>>                                   * Politics

>>  
>>                                   * Advice

>>  
>>                                   * Science

>>  
>>                                   * Food

>>  
>>                                   * Video

>>  
>>                                   * Fix

>>  
>>

>> ###### More

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * About Grist

>>  
>>                                   * The Grist Team

>>  
>>                                   * Contact us

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                   * Fellowship Program

>>  
>>                                   * Jobs

>>  
>>                                   * Advertise

>>  
>>                                   * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                                   * Terms of Use

>>  
>>

>> ###### Follow

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
__Newsletters

>>  
>>                                   * __Facebook

>>  
>>                                   * __Twitter

>>  
>>                                   * __Instagram

>>  
>>                                   * __YouTube

>>  
>>                                   * __RSS Feed

>>  
>>                                   * __JSON feed

>>  
>>

>> A Beacon in the Smog®

>>

>> (C) 1999-2019 Grist Magazine, Inc. All rights reserved. Grist is powered by
WordPress.com VIP.

>>

>> ### Only 2 days left!

>>

>> 82%

>>

>> **All gifts matched through June 8!** As a nonprofit news outlet, we rely
on readers like you to keep our work free and accessible. At Grist, that means
no paywall, no subscription, no nonsense. But producing this work isn’t free.
That’s why we’re aiming to raise $35,000 by June 8. **Help us finish strong by
donating today**.

>>

>> Donate now

>>

>> No thanks

>>

>> ×

>>

>> ![](https://grist.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/grist-spring-fund-drive.png)

>>

>> ## Help us raise $35,000 by June 8

>>

>> Become a member

>>

>> Don't show me this message again

>>

>> ×

>>

>> ![Quantcast](https://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-DnJbxjzf2YyXE.gif)

>>

>> ![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow _[↓]:
Down Arrow_ [XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow
  *[XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

