

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

  * Comments & replies 
  * Public profile 
  * Account details 
  * Emails & marketing 

* * *

  * Membership 
  * Contributions 
  * Subscriptions 

* * *

  * Sign out 

Search

  * switch to the International edition 
  * switch to the UK edition 
  * switch to the US edition 
  * switch to the Australia edition 

current edition: International edition

  * News 
  * Opinion 
  * Sport 
  * Culture 
  * Lifestyle 

Show More __

  * __News
    * World news 
    * UK news 
    * Science 
    * Cities 
    * Global development 
    * Football 
    * Tech 
    * Business 
    * Environment 
    * Obituaries 
  * __Opinion
    * The Guardian view 
    * Columnists 
    * Cartoons 
    * Opinion videos 
    * Letters 
  * __Sport
    * Football 
    * Cricket 
    * Rugby union 
    * Tennis 
    * Cycling 
    * F1 
    * Golf 
    * US sports 
  * __Culture
    * Books 
    * Music 
    * TV & radio 
    * Art & design 
    * Film 
    * Games 
    * Classical 
    * Stage 
  * __Lifestyle
    * Fashion 
    * Food 
    * Recipes 
    * Love & sex 
    * Health & fitness 
    * Home & garden 
    * Women 
    * Men 
    * Family 
    * Travel 
    * Money 

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

  * Make a contribution 
  * Subscribe 

  * __International edition

    * switch to the UK edition 
    * switch to the US edition 
    * switch to the Australia edition 
  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 
  * The Guardian app 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * Pictures 
  * Newsletters 
  * Today's paper 
  * Inside the Guardian 
  * The Observer 
  * Guardian Weekly 
  * Crosswords 
  * Facebook 
  * Twitter 

  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 

  * Environment 

  * Climate change 
  * Wildlife 
  * Energy 
  * Pollution 

More

Climate Consensus - the 97%

Climate change

# Global warming is melting Antarctic ice from below

Warming oceans melting Antarctic ice shelves could accelerate sea level rise

John Abraham

Wed 9 May 2018 11.00 BST

  * Share on Facebook
  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email

![A view of the leading edge of the remaining part of the Larsen B ice shelf

that extends into the northwest part of the Weddell Sea is seen in this

handout photo taken on March 4, 2008.

](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/2bec218bc996b7c108dfe09dcd5a90332516eaf2/0_105_2872_1723/master/2872.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=01669e33b47aaad7f6a2e9701a9a4bdb)

A view of the leading edge of the remaining part of the Larsen B ice shelf
that extends into the northwest part of the Weddell Sea is seen in this
handout photo taken on March 4, 2008. Photograph: HO/REUTERS

We all know intuitively that in a warmer world there will be less ice. And,
since the North and South Pole regions contain lots of ice, anyone who wants
to see evidence of climate change can look there.

But beyond this simplistic view, things can get pretty complex. First, it’s
important to recognize that the Arctic and the Antarctic are very different
places. In the Arctic, almost all the ice is floating on water – there is very
little land. So, we talk about ‘sea ice’ in the north, formed from frozen sea
water. On the other hand, Antarctica is a massive land mass that is covered by
ice formed from snowfall (called an ‘ice sheet’). There is some floating ice
around the perimeter of the land, but the vast majority of Antarctic ice is on
land.

This difference not only affects how these regions response to climate change,
but it also impacts their importance. We know that when floating ice melts,
the ocean levels will not rise, because the ice was already floating in the
water. But, when land ice melts, the liquid water flows into the ocean and
causes the water levels to rise. So, at least from a sea-level perspective,
land ice is more important than floating ice.

There are other differences between the north and south. One feature of the
south is that there is a strong current that travels around Antarctica and
partially shields it from waters elsewhere in the ocean. The Nasa Jet
Propulsion Laboratory provides a good summary of some of the differences
between the poles.

With global warming, both of the poles are warming quite quickly, and this
warming is causing ice to melt in both regions. When we think of ice melting,
we may think of it melting from above, as the ice is heated from the air, from
sunlight, or from infrared energy from the atmosphere. But in truth, a lot of
the melting comes from below. For instance, in the Antarctic, the ice shelves
extend from the land out over the water. The bottom of the ice shelf is
exposed to the ocean. If the ocean warms up, it can melt the underside of the
shelf and cause it to thin or break off into the ocean.

A new study, recently published in Science Advances, looked at these issues.
One of the goals of this study was to better understand whether and how the
waters underneath the shelf are changing. They had to deal with the buoyancy
of the waters. We know that the saltier and colder water is, the denser it is.

Around Antarctica, water at the ocean surface cools down and becomes saltier.
These combined effects make the surface waters sink down to the sea floor. But
as ice melt increases, fresh water flows into the ocean and interrupts this
buoyancy effect. This “freshening” of the water can slow down or shut down the
vertical mixing of the ocean. When this happens, the cold waters at the
surface cannot sink. The deeper waters retain their heat and melt the ice from
below.

The study incorporated measurements of both temperature and salinity
(saltiness) at three locations near the Dalton Iceberg Tongue on the Sabrina
Coast in East Antarctica. The measurements covered approximately an entire
year and gave direct evidence of seasonal variations to the buoyancy of the
waters. The researchers showed that a really important component to water-flow
patterns were ‘polynyas.’ These are regions of open water that are surrounded
by ice, typically by land ice on one side and sea ice on the other side.

A satellite photograph of a polynya is shown below. When waters from the
polynya are cold and salty, the waters sink downwards and form a cold curtain
around the ice shelf. However, when the waters are not salty (because fresh
water is flowing into the polynya), this protective curtain is disrupted and
warm waters can intrude from outside, leading to more ice melt.

![A polynya off the coast of Antarctica, near Ross Island and McMurdo Station

on November 16,

2011.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/2f8d06d567a1b6e0ef711d46c194e61f9eb533cf/0_0_800_1029/master/800.png?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=196fa79b4e33fb9e6381f565ddfaffef)

Facebook Twitter Pinterest

A polynya off the coast of Antarctica, near Ross Island and McMurdo Station on
November 16, 2011. Photograph: Jeff Schmaltz, LANCE/EOSDIS MODIS Rapid
Response Team at NASA GSFC.

Based on this study, we may see increased ice loss in the future – sort of a
feedback loop. That concerns us because it will mean more sea level rise
(which is already accelerating), and more damage to coastal communities. I
asked the lead author, Alesandro Silvano about this work:

![Lead author Alesandro

Silvano.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/3a8a04748c10354dbcdad6ae4e18ea498a73e4cd/0_90_1080_1350/master/1080.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=225ba89b53582c088f03696115889dca)

Facebook Twitter Pinterest

Lead author Alesandro Silvano.

> _We found that freshwater from melting ice shelves is already enough to stop
formation of cold and salty waters in some locations around Antarctica. This
process causes warming and freshening of Antarctic waters. Ocean warming
increases melting of the Antarctic Ice Sheet, causing sea level to rise.
Freshening of Antarctic waters weakens the currents that trap heat and carbon
dioxide in the ocean, affecting the global climate. In this way local changes
in Antarctica can have global implications. Multiple sources of evidence exist
now to show that these changes are happening. However, what will happen in
Antarctica in the next decades and centuries remains unclear and needs to be
understood._

This is just another reason to take scientists seriously and act to slow down
climate change before it is too late.

Topics

  * Climate change 
  * Climate Consensus - the 97% 

  * Sea level 

  * Polar regions 
  * Oceans 
  * Sea ice 
  * Antarctica 

  * Share on Facebook

  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email
  * Share on LinkedIn
  * Share on Pinterest
  * Share on WhatsApp
  * Share on Messenger

  * Reuse this content

## View all comments >

Order by

  * newest
  * oldest
  * recommendations

Show 25

  * 25
  * 50
  * 100
  * All

Threads

  * collapsed
  * expanded
  * unthreaded

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## Most popular

  * Environment 
  * Climate change 
  * Wildlife 
  * Energy 
  * Pollution 

  * Contact us

  * Complaints & corrections
  * SecureDrop
  * Work for us
  * Privacy policy
  * Cookie policy
  * Terms & conditions
  * Help

  * All topics

  * All writers
  * Digital newspaper archive
  * Facebook
  * Twitter

  * Advertise with us

  * Search UK jobs
  * Dating
  * Discount Codes

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Climate+change%2CSea+level%2CPolar+regions%2CEnvironment%2COceans%2CSea+ice%2CAntarctica%2CClimate+change%2CScience)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

