

  * MedicineNet 

  *     *       *         *           * SYMPTOM CHECKER
  * Disease & Conditions

    * Conditions A-Z
    * Procedures A-Z
    * Allergies
    * Alzheimer's
    * Arthritis
    * Asthma
    * Blood Pressure
    * Cancer
    * Cholesterol
    * Chronic Pain
    * Cold & Flu
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Digestion
    * Eyesight
    * Health & Living
    * Healthy Kids
    * Hearing & Ear
    * Heart
    * HIV/AIDS
    * Infectious Disease
    * Lung Conditions
    * Menopause
    * Men's Health
    * Mental Health
    * Migraine
    * Neurology
    * Oral Health
    * Pregnancy
    * Senior Health
    * Sexual Health
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep
    * Thyroid
    * Travel Health
    * Women's Health

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

hemorrhoids-update.jpg) Gastroenterology

#### Hemorrhoids

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

type-2-diabetes.jpg) Diabetes

#### Diabetes (Type 1 and Type 2)

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

bullying.jpg) Teen Health

#### Bullying

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

jock-itch.jpg) Dermatology

#### Jock Itch

  * Drugs & Supplements

    * Medications
    * Supplements and Vitamins

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-adult-

adhd.jpg) ADHD

#### Vyvanse vs. Strattera

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

avoid-insomnia-tips.jpg) Sleep Disorder

#### Benzodiazepines

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

depression.jpg) Depression

#### Zoloft

  * Health & Living

    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Exercise & Fitness
    * Nutrition, Food & Recipes
    * Prevention & Wellness

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

high-fiber-foods.jpg) Digestive Problems

#### Low Fiber Diet

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-exercise-and-

fitness-s.jpg) Fitness, Exercise, Sports

#### Aerobic Exercise

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-top-

foods-for-probiotics.jpg) Digestive Problems

#### Probiotics

  * Media

All  
Slideshows ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-weird-things-happen-to-your-skin-as-you-age.jpg)

#### Adult Skin Conditions

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-eye-

diseases.jpg)

#### Common Eye Problems and Infections

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

stds.jpg)

#### Sexually Transmitted Diseases

All  
Quizzes ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-best-diet-tips.jpg)

#### Diet and Nutrition Quiz

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

what-causes-heart-palpitations.jpg)

#### Heart Disease Quiz

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-kidney-

disease.jpg)

#### Kidney Disease Quiz

All  
Images ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-genital-warts-hpv.jpg)

#### Genital Warts

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

scabies.jpg)

#### Scabies

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

alopecia-areata-2.jpg)

#### Alopecia Areata

  * MedTerms Dictionary
  * Slideshows
  * Quizzes
  * Images

  * Privacy Policy

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Terms of Use
  * Advertising Policy

  * ![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct594277_s1.gif)

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/footer/badges/rgb_tag_registered.png)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)

  * ![](https://choices.truste.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

©1996-2018 MedicineNet, Inc. All rights reserved. Terms of Use.

MedicineNet does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See
additional information.

home/ neurology health center/neurology a-z list/brain aneurysm center /brain
aneurysm article

# Brain Aneurysm (Cerebral Aneurysm)

Facts What Is Symptoms Diagnosis Treatment Prognosis

  * Brain aneurysm facts

  * What is a brain aneurysm and what causes a brain aneurysm?

  * What are the signs and **symptoms** of brain aneurysm?

  * How is brain aneurysm diagnosed?

  * What is the **treatment** for brain aneurysm?

  * What are future directions for the treatment of brain aneurysm?

  * What is the outcome of brain aneurysm?

  * Medical Author: Benjamin Wedro, MD, FACEP, FAAEM

![Benjamin Wedro, MD, FACEP,

FAAEM](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/bio/wedro.png)

#### Benjamin Wedro, MD, FACEP, FAAEM

Dr. Ben Wedro practices emergency medicine at Gundersen Clinic, a regional
trauma center in La Crosse, Wisconsin. His background includes undergraduate
and medical studies at the University of Alberta, a Family Practice internship
at Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario and residency training in Emergency
Medicine at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center.

  * Medical Editor: Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD

![Melissa Conrad Stöppler,

MD](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/bio/stoppler.png)

#### Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD

Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD, is a U.S. board-certified Anatomic Pathologist
with subspecialty training in the fields of Experimental and Molecular
Pathology. Dr. Stoppler's educational background includes a BA with Highest
Distinction from the University of Virginia and an MD from the University of
North Carolina. She completed residency training in Anatomic Pathology at
Georgetown University followed by subspecialty fellowship training in
molecular diagnostics and experimental pathology.

Facts What Is Symptoms Diagnosis Treatment Prognosis CenterComments

  * Brain aneurysm facts

  * What is a brain aneurysm and what causes a brain aneurysm?

  * What are the signs and **symptoms** of brain aneurysm?

  * How is brain aneurysm diagnosed?

  * What is the **treatment** for brain aneurysm?

  * What are future directions for the treatment of brain aneurysm?

  * What is the outcome of brain aneurysm?

  * Brain Aneurysm (Cerebral Aneurysm) Center

  * Patient Comments: Brain Aneurysm - Describe Your Experience

  * Patient Comments: Brain Aneurysm - Symptoms and Signs
  * Patient Comments: Brain Aneurysm - Treatment

* * *

### Brain aneurysm facts

  * Four major blood vessels supply blood to the brain. They join together at the Circle of Willis at the base of the brain. Smaller arteries leave the circle and branch out to supply brain cells with oxygen and nutrients.
  * Artery junction points may become weak, causing a ballooning of the blood vessel wall to potentially form a small sac or aneurysm.
  * Cerebral aneurysms are common, but most are asymptomatic and are found incidentally at autopsy.
  * Aneurysms can leak or rupture causing symptoms from severe headache to stroke-like symptoms, or death.
  * The health care practitioner needs to maintain a high incidence of suspicion to make the diagnosis, since many patients may have an initial small leak of blood causing symptoms hours or days before a catastrophic bleed occurs.
  * Diagnosis of a brain aneurysm may require CT scans, lumbar puncture, or angiography.
  * Treatment to repair the aneurysm may involve neurosurgery to put a clip across the weak blood vessel wall. Instead of surgery, some patients may be treated by an interventional radiologist or neurologist who may use a coil to fill the aneurysm to prevent bleeding.

* * *

### What is a brain aneurysm and what causes a brain aneurysm?

  * Readers Comments **100**
  * Share Your Story

The Circle of Willis is the junction of the four major arteries, two carotid
arteries and two vertebral arteries, that supply the brain with nutrition
(especially oxygen and glucose). This loop of arteries is located at the base
of the brain and sends out smaller branch arteries to all parts of the brain.
The junctions where these arteries come together may develop weak spots. These
weak spots can balloon out and fill with blood, creating the outpouchings of
blood vessels known as aneurysms. These sac-like areas may leak or rupture,
spilling blood into surrounding brain tissue.

Aneurysms have a variety of causes including high blood pressure and
atherosclerosis, trauma, heredity, and abnormal blood flow at the junction
where arteries come together.

There are other rare causes of aneurysms. Mycotic aneurysms are caused by
infections of the artery wall. Tumors and trauma can also cause aneurysms to
form. Drug abuse, especially cocaine, can cause the artery walls to inflame
and weaken.

Brain aneurysms are a common occurrence. At autopsy, incidental aneurysms that
have never caused any symptoms or issues are found in more than 1% of people.
Most aneurysms remain small and are never diagnosed. Some, however, may
gradually become larger and exert pressure on surrounding brain tissue and
nerves and may be diagnosed because of stroke-like symptoms including:

  * headache,
  * numbness, or weakness of one side of the face,
  * a dilated pupil, or
  * change in vision.

The greater concern is a brain aneurysm that leaks or ruptures, and
potentially causes stroke or death. Blood may leak into one of the membranes
(meninges) that covers the brain and spinal canal and is known as a
subarachnoid hemorrhage (sub= beneath + arachnoid=one of the brain coverings +
hemorrhage=bleeding).

![Picture of a brain

aneurysm](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/illustrations/2011-brain-

aneurysm.jpg)

Picture of a brain aneurysm

![Brain Aneurysms Can Be

Deadly](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/featured/featured_seizure.jpg)

### Brain Aneurysm Symptoms and Signs

#### A brain aneurysm is a bulging area within the wall of an artery that

supplies the brain. In most cases, brain aneurysms do not produce symptoms.

In some cases, the aneurysm may cause symptoms by pushing on other areas of
the brain. Depending on the size of the aneurysm and the area involved, these
symptoms can include

  * headaches,
  * neck pain,
  * blurred vision, 
  * and speech changes. 

When a brain aneurysm ruptures, there is bleeding within the brain. Symptoms
of a ruptured brain aneurysm come on suddenly and include a severe, sudden
headache that is different from other headaches an individual has experienced.

Read more about brain aneurysm symptoms and signs »

* * *

### What are the signs and **symptoms** of brain aneurysm?

  * Readers Comments **87**
  * Share Your Story

The headache associated with a leaking aneurysm is severe. Blood is very
irritating to the brain and surrounding membranes and causes significant pain.
Patients may describe the "worst headache of their life," and the health care
practitioner needs to have an appreciation that a brain aneurysm may be the
potential cause of this type of pain. The headache may be associated with
nausea, vomiting, and change in vision. A subarachnoid hemorrhage also causes
pain and stiffness of the neck because the meninges become inflamed. However,
the "worst headache of their life" complaint needs to be matched with physical
findings to be considered a risk factor for a leaking aneurysm.

* * *

### How is brain aneurysm diagnosed?

The diagnosis of brain aneurysm begins with a high index of suspicion by the
health care practitioner. The history of the headache, an acute onset of the
headache, associated with a stiff neck and an ill-appearing patient on
physical examination, typically lead the health care practitioner to consider
the diagnosis and order a CT (computerized tomography) scan of the head. If
the CT scan is performed within 72 hours of the onset of the headache, it will
detect 93% to 100% of all aneurysms. In the few cases that are not recognized
by CT, the health care practitioner may consider performing a lumbar puncture
(LP, or spinal tap) to identify blood in the cerebrospinal fluid that runs in
the subarachnoid space. Some hospitals will consider CT angiography of the
brain instead of the LP.

If the CT or the LP reveals the presence of blood, angiography is performed to
identify where the aneurysm is located and to plan treatment. Angiography,
where a catheter is threaded into the arteries of the brain and dye is
injected while pictures are taken, can demonstrate the anatomy of the arteries
and uncover the presence and location of an aneurysm. CT angiography or MR
angiography may be performed without threading catheters into the brain as is
the case with a formal angiogram. There is some controversy as to which type
of angiogram is best to assess the patient, and the kind chosen depends upon
the patient's situation and condition.

Though the symptoms may suggest a brain aneurysm, other diagnoses may need to
be considered. Migraine headache, meningitis, tumor, and stroke all may cause
neurologic symptoms. Based on the patient's presentation, the health care
practitioner will need to decide which tests and studies to use in addition to
brain imaging to establish the correct diagnosis.

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/concussion/concussion-s1.jpg)

#### QUESTION

A concussion is a traumatic brain injury. See Answer

* * *

### What is the **treatment** for brain aneurysm?

  * Readers Comments **32**
  * Share Your Story

Treatment for a symptomatic aneurysm is to repair the blood vessels. Clipping
and coiling are two treatment options.

  * **Clipping:** A neurosurgeon can operate on the brain by cutting open the skull, identifying the damaged blood vessel and putting a clip across the aneurysm. This prevents blood from entering the aneurysm and causing further growth or blood leakage.
  * **Coiling:** An interventional neurologist, neurosurgeon, or interventional radiologist can thread a tube through the arteries, as with an angiogram, identify the aneurysm, and fill it with coils of platinum wire or with latex. This prevents further blood from entering the aneurysm and resolves the problem.

Both these options have the risk of damaging the blood vessel and causing more
bleeding, damaging nearby brain tissue, and causing the surrounding blood
vessels to go into spasm; depriving brain tissue of blood supply and causing a
stroke.

Prior, during, and after surgery, attention is paid to protect the brain and
its blood vessels from potential further damage. Vitals signs are monitored
frequently, and heart monitors are used to watch for abnormal heart rhythms.
Medications may be used to control high blood pressure and prevent blood
vessel spasm, seizure, agitation, and pain.

* * *

### What is the outcome of brain aneurysm?

Brain aneurysms are deadly. About 10% of patients with a ruptured aneurysm die
before receiving medical care. If untreated, another 50% will die within a
month, with a 20% risk of rebleed by the end of the first two weeks. Aside
from the bleeding issues, there is significant risk of artery spasm leading to
stroke.

Survival rates are increased in patients who present early to the hospital.
Early diagnosis, aneursym repair, and control of blood vessel spasms with
appropriate medications are all associated with increased survival.

### Latest Neurology News

  * FDA OKs First Nasal Spray for Seizure Clusters
  * The Best Exercises for Brain Health
  * Brief EMS Training Saves Lives After Brain Injury
  * Can Medical Marijuana Help Kids With Autism?
  * New Treatment Focuses on Tourette Syndrome
  * Want More News? Sign Up for MedicineNet Newsletters!

### Daily Health News

  * Heartburn Drugs Can Be Fatal
  * More Prostate Cancer Checkups
  * Diabetes Control No Heart Help
  * Anal Cancer Stigma and Awareness
  * Human Endurance Has Its Limits
  * ![XML](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/hp_icon_weeknews.gif) More Health News »

### Trending on MedicineNet

  * Measles (Rubeola)
  * Anal Cancer
  * Lewy Body Dementia
  * Legionnaires' Disease
  * Genital Warts (HPV)

* * *

### What are future directions for the treatment of brain aneurysm?

For those who survive an initial aneurysm rupture, blood vessel spasm
(vasospasm) may be the villain in causing continued brain damage. Experiments
to develop new drugs to control vasospasm are ongoing. Molecules that can
cause spasm are being identified, and antibodies may be able to be produced to
blunt their effect.

Studies are also looking at the possibility that brain aneurysms may be
hereditary, and perhaps screening of high-risk populations may be possible in
the future.

![](https://images.medicinenet.com//images/slideshow/concussions-and-brain-

injuries-s1-photo-of-brain-anatomy.jpg)

#### SLIDESHOW

Concussions & Brain Injuries: Symptoms, Tests, Treatment See Slideshow

## Health Solutions From Our Sponsors

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A;
  * 3 Migraine Essentials

  * Aneurysm (Brain) Center

_Medically Reviewed on 8/10/2018_

References

Medically reviewed by Jon Glass, MD; Board Certificate: Neurology

REFERENCE:

Tintinalli, J., et al. _Tintinalli's Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study
Guide_. 7th edition. McGraw-Hill Professional. 2010.

### Related Article

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/large-thumb-slideshow/lg-

thumb-brain-food.jpg)

## Brain Food Pictures: What to Eat to Boost Focus

Can brain foods really help you concentrate, or boost memory? Increase your
chances of maintaining a healthy brain by adding these "smart" foods and
beverages to your diet.

Read more: Brain Food Pictures: What to Eat to Boost Focus

### Patient Comments

  * Brain Aneurysm - Describe Your Experience

Please describe your experience with brain aneurysm.

Post View 100 Comments

  * Brain Aneurysm - Symptoms and Signs

What symptoms and signs did you experience with your brain aneurysm?

Post View 87 Comments

  * Brain Aneurysm - Treatment

What was the treatment for a brain aneurysm in you, a friend, or relative?

Post View 32 Comments

Complete List

### Top Brain Aneurysm Related Articles

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-autopsy.jpg)

#### Autopsy

An autopsy is the examination of the body of a dead person and is performed
primarily to determine the cause of death, to identify or characterize the
extent of disease states that the person may have had, or to determine whether
a particular medical or surgical treatment has been effective. A physician
cannot order an autopsy on a patient without the consent of the next-of-kin. A
medical examiner can order an autopsy without the consent of the next-of-kin.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-birth-defects.jpg)

#### Birth Defects

Birth defects have many causes and currently, are the leading cause of death
for infants in the first year of life. Some of the causes of birth defects
include genetic or chromosome problems. Exposure of the mother to rubella or
German measles during pregnancy, or using drugs or alcohol during pregnancy.
The treatment for birth defects depends upon the condition of the effected
child.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-brain-layers-illustration.jpg)

#### Brain Layers Picture

That part of the central nervous system that is located within the cranium
(skull). See a picture of Brain Layers and learn more about the health topic.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-ct-scan.jpg)

#### CAT Scan

A CT scan is an X-ray procedure that combines many X-ray images with the aid
of a computer to generate cross-sectional and three-dimensional images of
internal organs and structures of the body. A CT scan is a low-risk procedure.
Contrast material may be injected into a vein or the spinal fluid to enhance
the scan.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-concussions-and-brain-injuries.jpg)

#### Brain Injuries Slides

Concussions are a common type of traumatic brain injury. Read more about
symptoms of a concussion, how to treat head injuries, and learn about tests
used to diagnose concussions.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-high-blood-pressure-2.jpg)

#### High Blood Pressure Hypertension

High blood pressure (hypertension) is a disease in which pressure within the
arteries of the body is elevated. About 75 million people in the US have
hypertension (1 in 3 adults), and only half of them are able to manage it.
Many people do not know that they have high blood pressure because it often
has no has no warning signs or symptoms.

Systolic and diastolic are the two readings in which blood pressure is
measured. The American College of Cardiology released new guidelines for high
blood pressure in 2017. The guidelines now state that blood normal blood
pressure is 120/80 mmHg. If either one of those numbers is higher, you have
high blood pressure.

The American Academy of Cardiology defines high blood pressure slightly
differently. The AAC considers 130/80 mm Hg. or greater (either number) stage
1 hypertension. Stage 2 hypertension is considered 140/90 mm Hg. or greater.

If you have high blood pressure you are at risk of developing life threatening
diseases like stroke and heart attack.

REFERENCE: CDC. High Blood Pressure. Updated: Nov 13, 2017.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-magnetic-resonance-imaging-scan-mri.jpg)

#### MRI Scan

MRI (or magnetic resonance imaging) scan is a radiology technique which uses
magnetism, radio waves, and a computer to produce images of body structures.
MRI scanning is painless and does not involve X-ray radiation. Patients with
heart pacemakers, metal implants, or metal chips or clips in or around the
eyes cannot be scanned with MRI because of the effect of the magnet.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-parathyroidectomy.jpg)

#### Parathyroidectomy

Parathyroidectomy is the removal of one or more of the parathyroid glands to
treat hyperparathyroidism. Risks of parathyroidectomy include:

    
    
    * paralysis of the vocal cords, 
    * difficulty swallowing thin liquids, 
    * difficulty breathing, 
    * and drug reactions.
    

Possible complications of parathyroidectomy include:

    
    
    * damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve,
    * bleeding or hematoma,
    * problems maintaining calcium levels in the blood,
    * need for further and more aggressive surgery,
    * need for a limited or total thyroidectomy,
    * prolonged pain, 
    * impaired healing, 
    * and recurrence of the tumor.
    

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-polycystic-kidney-disease.jpg)

#### Polycystic Kidney Disease

Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is characterized by numerous cysts in the
kidneys. Polycystic kidney disease is a genetic disorder. There are two major
inherited forms of PKD, autosomal dominant PKD, and autosomal recessive PKD.
Symptoms include headaches, urinary tract infections, blood in the urine,
liver and pancreatic cysts, abnormal heart valves, high blood pressure, kidney
stones, aneurysms, and diverticulosis. Diagnosis of PKD is generally with
ultrasound, CT or MRI scan. There is no cure for PKD, so treatment of symptoms
is usually the general protocol.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-pseudotumor-cerebr.jpg)

#### Pseudotumor Cerebri

Pseudotumor Cerebri (intracranial hypertension) is a condition where there is
an increase in pressure of fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord
(cerebrospinal fluid or CSF) mimicing a brain tumor. The cause is unknown. The
most common symptom is headache but also include eye-pain, vision loss and
double vision. Pseudotumor cerebri is diagnosed with MRI or CAT scans and
treated by discontinuing offending medications (if applicable), weight loss
and diuretic medications. The condition can also be helped by repeated
drainage of spinal fluid using the lumbar puncture.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-visual-guide-to-stroke.jpg)

#### Stroke Slideshow

What is a stroke? Learn about stroke symptoms like sudden numbness or
weakness, confusion, vision problems, or problems with coordination. Discover
causes and recovery of a stroke.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-stroke-2.jpg)

#### Stroke Symptoms and Treatment

A stroke is an interruption of the blood supply to part of the brain caused by
either a blood clot (ischemic) or bleeding (hemorrhagic).

Symptoms of a stroke may include:

    
    
    * weakness, 
    * numbness, 
    * double vision or vision loss, 
    * confusion, 
    * vertigo, 
    * difficulty speaking or understanding speech.
    

A physical exam, imaging tests, neurological exam, and blood tests may be used
to diagnose a stroke. Treatment may include administration of clot-busting
drugs, supportive care, and in some instances, neurosurgery. The risk of
stroke can be reduced by controlling high blood pressure, high cholesterol,
diabetes, and stopping smoking.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-ultrasound.jpg)

#### Ultrasound

Ultrasound (and ultrasonography) is imaging of the body used in the medical
diagnosis and screening of diseases and conditions such as:

    
    
    * TIAs,
    * stroke, 
    * aneurysm's,
    * heart valve irregularities,
    * carotid artery disease, 
    * heart disease, 
    * gallstones, 
    * kidney stones, 
    * liver disease, 
    * diseases of the female reproductive, and 
    * diseases of the male reproductive organs.
    

CONTINUE SCROLLING FOR RELATED SLIDESHOW

### Featured Slideshows

  * ![Protect Your Eyesight: Warning Signs of Common Eye Conditions](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-type-1-diabetes.jpg)

Type 2 DiabetesCan you reverse type 2 diabetes?

  * ![Migraine or Headache, What's the Difference?](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-rheumatoid-arthritis.jpg)

Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)What's the difference between RA and arthritis?

  * ![Psoriasis: See what it looks like and how to treat it](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-deep-vein-thrombosis.jpg)

Deep Vein ThrombosisHow to know if you have a blood clot in your leg

Recognize These Skin Conditions?

What Bit Me?

What is Crohn's Disease?

Strep Throat vs. Sore Throat

Warning Signs of Type 2 Diabetes

19 Eye Conditions You Need to Know

Why Do I Pee So Often?

What Can Turmeric Do for You?

Low-T: A Normal Part of Aging?

Is It an STD?

Who's at Risk for Hepatitis C?

Breast Cancer: What Happens Next

Schizophrenia and Mental Health

Early Signs of Thyroid Problems

17 Worst Belly Fat Foods

How to Get Rid of Hemorrhoids

Living With AFib

See a Baby Develop in the Womb

What is Deep Vein Thrombosis?

Put an End to Nail Fungus

Ringworm Means I’ve Got Worms?

How Do You Get Scabies?

13 Baking Soda Uses for Your Body

Coping With IBS

Telltale Signs of Child ADHD

The Stigma of Psoriasis

Cancer Symptoms Not to Ignore

What Feet Say About Your Health

Most Expensive Medical Conditions

Early Signs of Heart Disease

Clues You Could Have MS

How to Lower Your Cholesterol

Which Fruits Have the Most Sugar?

14 Healthy Foods on a Budget

ADHD in Adults

What Poop Type and Color Mean

  *     *       *         * MedicineNet
  * ![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct594277_s1.gif) ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/footer/badges/rgb_tag_registered.png)

  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)

  * ![](https://choices.truste.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C)1996-2018 MedicineNet, Inc. All rights reserved. Terms of Use.

MedicineNet does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See
additional information.

#### Health Categories

  * Medical Slideshows
  * Diseases & Conditions
  * Symptoms & Signs
  * Procedures & Tests
  * Medications
  * Healthy Living
  * Vitamins & Supplements
  * Image Collection
  * Quizzes
  * MedTerms Dictionary
  * Pet Health

#### Popular Health Centers

  * Allergies
  * Arthritis
  * Blood Pressure
  * Cancer
  * Chronic Pain
  * Cold & Flu
  * Depression
  * Diabetes
  * Digestion
  * Health & Living
  * Healthy Kids
  * Hearing & Ear

  * Heart

  * HIV/AIDS
  * Infectious Disease
  * Men's Health
  * Mental Health
  * Neurology
  * Pregnancy
  * Sexual Health
  * Skin
  * Thyroid
  * Women's Health
  * More...

#### MedicineNet

  * Privacy Policy
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Site Map
  * WebMD Corporate
  * WebMD
  * WebMDRx
  * Medscape
  * Medscape Reference
  * eMedicineHealth
  * RxList
  * OnHealth

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

