

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

  * Our Work
    * Clean Energy
    * Clean Vehicles
    * Food & Agriculture
    * Global Warming
    * Nuclear Power
    * Nuclear Weapons
    * Center for Science and Democracy
  * About
    * Accomplishments & History
    * Leadership & Experts
    * Funding & Financials
    * Ways to Give
    * News Center
    * Jobs at UCS
    * Contact Us
    * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
  * Take Action
    * Science Network
  * Subscribe
  * Donate
    * Renew Your Membership
    * Become a Member
    * Give Monthly
    * Make a Planned Gift
    * More Ways to Give
    * Gifts in Honor or Memory
    * Gift Memberships
  * Science Network Leaders

**search**

## You are here

  1. Global Warming
  2. » Global Warming Science

# Why Does CO2 get Most of the Attention When There are so Many Other Heat-

Trapping Gases?

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/GW-science-

co2-bubbles.jpg)

Carbon dioxide bubbles in a beverage.  
Image: Heather CC-BY-2.0 (Flickr)

Climate change is primarily a problem of too much carbon dioxide (CO2) in the
atmosphere. This carbon overload is caused mainly when we burn fossil fuels
like coal, oil and gas or cut down and burn forests.

There are many heat-trapping gases (from methane to water vapor), but CO2 puts
us at the greatest risk of irreversible changes if it continues to accumulate
unabated in the atmosphere. There are two key reasons why.

### CO2 has caused most of the warming and its influence is expected to

continue

CO2 has contributed more than any driver to climate change between 1750 and
2011.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) issued a global climate
assessment in 2013 that compared the influence of three changes to the
environment resulting from human activity between 1750 and 2011: the emission
of key heat-trapping gases and tiny particles known as aerosols, as well as
land use change.

By measuring the abundance of heat-trapping gases in ice cores, the
atmosphere, and other climate drivers along with models, the IPCC calculated
the “radiative forcing” (RF) of each climate driver—in other words, the net
increase (or decrease) in the amount of energy reaching Earth’s surface
attributable to that climate driver.

Positive RF values represent average surface warming and negative values
represent average surface cooling. In total, CO2 has the highest positive RF
(see Figure 1) of all the human-influenced climate drivers compared by the
IPCC.

Other gases have more potent heat-trapping ability molecule per molecule than
CO2 (e.g. methane), but are simply far less abundant in the atmosphere.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

co2-compared.jpg)

Figure 1. How does carbon dioxide compare to other climate drivers? Carbon
dioxide (CO2), more than any other climate driver, has contributed the most to
climate change between 1750 and 2011. Radiative forcing units are expressed as
the power (watts) per square meter surface area of Earth.  
Image: IPCC AR5

### CO2 sticks around

CO2 remains in the atmosphere longer than the other major heat-trapping gases
emitted as a result of human activities. It takes about a decade for methane
(CH4) emissions to leave the atmosphere (it converts into CO2) and about a
century for nitrous oxide (N2O).

After a pulse of CO2 is emitted into the atmosphere, 40% will remain in the
atmosphere for 100 years and 20% will reside for 1000 years, while the final
10% will take 10,000 years to turn over. This literally means that the heat-
trapping emissions we release today from our cars and power plants are setting
the climate our children and grandchildren will inherit.

### What about water vapor?

Water vapor is the most abundant heat-trapping gas, but rarely discussed when
considering human-induced climate change. The principal reason is that water
vapor has a short cycle in the atmosphere (10 days on average) before it is
incorporated into weather events and falls to Earth, so it cannot build up in
the atmosphere in the same way as carbon dioxide does. However, a vicious
cycle exists with water vapor, in which as more CO2 is emitted into the
atmosphere and the Earth’s temperature rises, more water evaporates into the
Earth’s atmosphere, which increases the temperature of the planet. The higher
temperature atmosphere can then hold more water vapor than before.

### Too much of a good thing: the carbon overload

Earth receives energy that travels from the sun in a variety of wavelengths,
some of which we see as sunlight and others that are invisible to the naked
eye, such as shorter- wavelength ultraviolet radiation and longer-wavelength
infrared radiation.

As this energy passes through Earth’s atmosphere, some is reflected back into
space by clouds and small particles such as sulfates; some is reflected by
Earth’s surface; and some is absorbed into the atmosphere by substances such
as soot, stratospheric ozone, and water vapor (See yellow arrows in Figure 2
for relative proportions). The remaining solar energy is absorbed by the Earth
itself, warming the planet’s surface.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-heat-

trapping.png)

Figure 2. The Earth’s current average energy budget. The numbers represent the
amount of energy associated with each source in watts per square meter. The
numbers in parentheses represent the range of uncertainty surrounding the
measurements.  
Image: IPCC AR5

If all the energy emitted from the Earth’s surface (orange “thermal up
surface” arrow in Figure 2) escaped into space, the planet would be too cold
to sustain human life.

Fortunately, as depicted in Figure 2 (orange “thermal down surface” arrow),
some of this energy does stay in the atmosphere, where it is sent back toward
Earth by clouds, released by clouds as they condense to form rain or snow, or
absorbed by atmospheric gases composed of three or more atoms, such as water
vapor (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), and methane (CH4).

Long-wave radiation absorbed by these gases in turn is re-emitted in all
directions, including back toward Earth, and some of this re-emitted energy is
absorbed again by these gases and re-emitted in all directions.

The net effect is that most of the outgoing radiation is kept within the
atmosphere instead of escaping into space.

Heat-trapping gases, in balanced proportions, act like a blanket surrounding
Earth, keeping temperatures within a range that enables life to thrive on a
planet with liquid water.

Unfortunately, these gases—especially CO2—are accumulating in the atmosphere
at increasing concentrations due to human activities such as the burning of
fossil fuel in cars and power plants industrial processes, and the clearing of
forests for agriculture or development.

As a result, the insulating blanket is getting too thick and overheating the
Earth as less energy (heat) escapes into space.

### Long-term perspective

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/GW-science-

co2-concentrations.jpg)

Figure 3. Bottom: Atmospheric CO2 concentration over the last 65 million years
in parts per million (ppm). Top: Detail of atmospheric CO2 concentration (ppm)
between 800,000 years ago - 2017.  
Images Top to Bottom: EPA, IPCC AR 5

Antarctic ice core records vividly illustrate that atmospheric CO2 levels
today are higher than levels recorded over the past 800,000 years (see Figure
3).

Atmospheric CO2 levels rose 40 percent between 1750 and 2011. (In 2013,
atmospheric CO2 levels surpassed 400 million parts per million for the first
time in human history.) Half of human-related CO2 emissions occurred only in
the last 40 years. CO2 (and other gases emitted from industrial and
agricultural sources) trap heat in the atmosphere, so it is no surprise that
we are now witnessing an increase in global average temperature.

In the same way that CO2 emitted long ago is now contributing to the changes
in climate we are already experiencing today, the emissions we are currently
releasing will help determine the climate future our children and
grandchildren experience.

Last revised date: August 3, 2017

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

  * $25
  * $50
  * $100
  * $250
  * $1000
  * Other

Donate

  * $25
  * $50
  * $100
  * $250
  * $1000
  * Other

Donate

## Share

  * __
  * __
  * __

## Related Content

  * The Causes of Global Warming: A Global Warming FAQ 

  * Past, Present, and Future Temperatures: the Hockeystick FAQ 

  * Sun's Effect on Climate FAQ

  * Global Warming Solutions: Reduce Emissions

## From our blogs

  * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
  * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
  * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/stand-up-for-

science-sidebar-image.jpg)

We are closely monitoring the Trump administration—and fighting back whenever
science is attacked, undermined, or disregarded.

## WHEN RISING SEAS HIT HOME

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2017/08/gw-

impacts-story-map-screenshot-play-arrow-thumbnail-308px.jpg)

**INTERACTIVE MAP:** Explore the hundreds of US coastal communities that will
face chronic inundation and possible retreat as sea levels rise.

## Take Action

  * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

  * About Us

    * UCS Leadership & Experts
    * Funding & Financials
    * History & Accomplishments
    * Jobs & Internships
    * News
  * Issues
    * Clean Energy
    * Clean Vehicles
    * Food & Agriculture
    * Global Warming
    * Nuclear Power
    * Nuclear Weapons
  * Our Podcast
    * Got Science?
  * Publications
  * Reports & Analysis
  * Center for Science and Democracy
  * Action Center
  * Privacy Policy
  * State Disclosures
  * Our Blogs
    * The Equation
    * All Things Nuclear
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us
  * UCS Store

  * Ways to Give

    * Donate
    * Give Monthly
    * Planned Gifts
  * How to Help

    * Become a Member
    * Take Action
    * Subscribe
  * A **Normal Font Size**

  * A **Larger Font Size**
  * A **Largest Font Size**

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

