

![Search](/assets/search-

blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg)

  * Agenda
  * Initiatives
  * Reports
  * Events
  * About 

About

    
    
    * Our Mission
    * Leadership and Governance
    * Our Members and Partners
    * Communities
    * Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
    * Our Impact
    * History
    * Centre for Cybersecurity
    * Klaus Schwab
    * Pictures
    * Media
    * Contact Us
    * Mapping Global Transformations 
    * Careers
    * World Economic Forum LLC
    * Code of Conduct
    * World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 
    * Sustainability
    

  * ![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg) English 

![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg)
English

    
    
    * English
    * Español
    * Français
    * 中文
    * 日本語
    

  * Login to TopLink 

We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By using our website
you consent to all cookies in accordance with our updated Cookie Notice.

I accept

![](/assets/hamburger-6894591f25ff937d4e3fbf0b0886003ccd245ff4bd6a9318abfea2ae51339584.svg)

  * ![](/assets/logo-b66768797e3f785791fd157ffc33c27eeca6d5100b7f34d418f50d206f1a8004.svg)

  * Agenda

  * Initiatives
  * Reports
  * Events
  * About

  * ![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg) English 

    * English
    * Español
    * Français
    * 中文
    * 日本語
  * TopLink 

  * ![](/assets/search-blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg) ![](/assets/cancel-a69fead62c801216b4d5c3dde8ec0462d9e6225435a8186f0dd5d185d06fbb07.svg)

![Search](/assets/search-

blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg)

  * Global Agenda
  * Environment and Natural Resource Security
  * Future of Economic Progress
  * Sustainable Development

# How each country’s share of global CO2 emissions changes over time

![A view of Duke Energys Marshall Power Plant in Sherrills Ford, North

Carolina, U.S. November 29, 2018.  Picture taken November 29, 2018. To match

Special Report USA-COAL/POLLUTION. REUTERS/Chris Keane -

RC16A0EA31A0](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/large_uXzDCMlfEoqKcrAU07-HB2ue0K6A13EoxWuBIiLLmA8.jpg)

CO2 emissions rose in 2017 for the first time in three years

Image: REUTERS/Chris Keane

10 Jan 2019

  1. Johnny Wood Writer, Formative Content

Join our WhatsApp group

![](https://assets.weforum.org/tout/image/medium_V82gBeF1Ow7kp21o5LBE3TB3ui7YrRflRS5W6X3z67k.png)

Sign up here ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

Most Popular

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_YJ4OXPzjOGdfCtVBbgDJnhNZjQ0MRUAqR3w5tx83hTA.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_YJ4OXPzjOGdfCtVBbgDJnhNZjQ0MRUAqR3w5tx83hTA.jpg)

### Sweden has invented a word to encourage people not to fly. And it’s

working

Douglas Broom 05 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_No3r7W1iRMK0QmvtSmzLHJf86skXVlZwZ6r8cEyXQnU.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_No3r7W1iRMK0QmvtSmzLHJf86skXVlZwZ6r8cEyXQnU.jpg)

### Who gains when the US and China fight over trade?

Douglas Broom 04 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_0iRdH4AWNcikuV1yJrHUfG5epnCnIFbPXlY5Or9wtks.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_0iRdH4AWNcikuV1yJrHUfG5epnCnIFbPXlY5Or9wtks.jpg)

### 10 facts about air pollution on World Environment Day

Megan Rowling · Thomson Reuters Foundation trust.org 05 Jun 2019

More on the agenda ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow-

bfad9408ee3740806b4f6bb7f013062c5bb120da9f659d07d500a6978ad2056d.svg)

Explore context

![](/assets/tmap-

icon-c04cb0e1c304860258a35c69ffcf9000b05af20e7e4d1baaefeab57b0937061d.svg)

Environment and Natural Resource Security

![](https://assets.weforum.org/topic/transformation_map_image/medium_o0kXFnbX9J9WKu0W2bQ8NCcEGHUCt9onL7xzgBPqIEU.png)

Explore the latest strategic trends, research and analysis
![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

While it’s still technically possible to limit global warming to within the
limits set by the Paris Agreement, rising carbon emissions present a grave
threat to the planet.

Less than 200 years ago there was hardly any CO2 in the atmosphere. In the
mid-1700s, the Industrial Revolution, driven by the burning of fossil fuels,
started a process that would have serious repercussions for the world we live
in today.

In the early industrial era consumption of fossil fuels was comparatively low,
and the UK was responsible for 100% of industrial carbon emissions. However,
Britain’s model soon spread to US cities and major European economies, which
led to rising emissions.

**The biggest emitters**  
Although industrialization came late to China, it now emits more CO2 than any
other country. Excluding emissions from international aviation and shipping,
China was responsible for more than 29% of global CO2 emissions in 2016.

Interactive maps and charts from the Our World in Data website depict
countries’ shares of global CO2 emissions.

As the chart below shows, China’s share of global CO2 emissions was almost
double that of the US, the next-largest polluter. In 2016 the US accounted for
more than 15% of the total, and India almost 7%. Together, these three
economies generate more than half of the world’s CO2 emissions.

![

](https://assets.weforum.org/editor/nKlAU07_vOLeEXIcrlOcFHeTrkDkKxqBTm4fcd3J-nY.PNG)

Image: Our World in Data

With the exception of Russia, Japan and Germany, other countries each
accounted for less than 2% of global emissions. Energy-rich nations like
Canada, Saudi Arabia and Iran each generated between 1.6% and 1.9%, while the
remaining countries’ shares were less than 1.5% each.

### Have you read?

  * 5 tech innovations that could save us from climate change 
  * The world will exceed its "carbon budget" in 12 years, according to UN report 
  * The world’s first 'negative emissions' plant has begun operation 

**Future shock**

Despite growing global awareness of the dangers posed by climate change, CO2
emissions rose in 2017 for the first time in three years, pushed up by global
economic growth.

The UN Emissions Gap Report analyses scientific studies on present and future
greenhouse gas emissions. Its 2018 report records the widest difference
between where the world is now and where it needs to be to keep global
temperatures within safe limits.

According to the UN data, greenhouse gas emissions in 2030 would need to be
55% lower than current levels to keep the global temperature increase within
the 1.5°C goal set by the Paris Agreement.

While most countries are not doing enough to bridge the “emissions gap”, there
is huge potential to curb emissions at local, city and regional government
level, and for businesses and private organizations to contribute to rolling
back the impact of climate change.

More than 7,000 cities, 245 regions and 6,000 companies have committed to take
action, with many taking part in international cooperation initiatives. But
current national and international initiatives involve less than 20% of the
global population, which leaves plenty of scope for improvement.

Governments also have the option of imposing carbon taxes or carbon trading
systems on heavy polluters. Taxing fossil fuels and subsidizing low-emission
alternatives provides incentives to accelerate the transition to carbon-
neutral energy sources.

Share

Written by

Johnny Wood , Writer, Formative Content

The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the
World Economic Forum.

Join our WhatsApp group

![](https://assets.weforum.org/tout/image/medium_V82gBeF1Ow7kp21o5LBE3TB3ui7YrRflRS5W6X3z67k.png)

Sign up here ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

Explore context

![](/assets/tmap-

icon-c04cb0e1c304860258a35c69ffcf9000b05af20e7e4d1baaefeab57b0937061d.svg)

Environment and Natural Resource Security

![](https://assets.weforum.org/topic/transformation_map_image/medium_o0kXFnbX9J9WKu0W2bQ8NCcEGHUCt9onL7xzgBPqIEU.png)

Explore the latest strategic trends, research and analysis
![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

**Subscribe for updates**

A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda

## Featured: Environment and Natural Resource Security View all

![](/assets/thin-

chevron-491f10d0cb058e9bd64f4cd5fa76b85e5b6c532f8cc93b3dd84dee080e91fd03.svg)

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/small_6soPIq34xoRGsEKn_jqCkJ29QKQkJBIh0UcIFZAYc2w.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_6soPIq34xoRGsEKn_jqCkJ29QKQkJBIh0UcIFZAYc2w.jpg)

### This UK supermarket is selling a range of goods with no packaging

Douglas Broom 06 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/small_Z2Vb3sQkKo9_Hk2zA3ZYdAvcsvAwAHZVYsWx4vGpLsE.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_Z2Vb3sQkKo9_Hk2zA3ZYdAvcsvAwAHZVYsWx4vGpLsE.jpg)

### 5 reasons to be more cheerful about the future of the oceans

Joe Myers 06 Jun 2019

### The world's first vaccine for humans and livestock is being developed

George Warimwe · The Conversation 06 Jun 2019

### Chart of the day: This is what happened to CO2 emissions in the EU last

year

Douglas Broom 05 Jun 2019

### Sweden has invented a word to encourage people not to fly. And it’s

working

Douglas Broom 05 Jun 2019

### Scoring for the environment: what Mathieu Flamini’s top-flight football

career taught him about leadership

Beatrice Di Caro and Mathieu Flamini 05 Jun 2019

### 10 facts about air pollution on World Environment Day

Megan Rowling · Thomson Reuters Foundation trust.org 05 Jun 2019

**Subscribe for updates**

A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda

Follow Us

About

Our Mission

Leadership and Governance

Our Members and Partners

Globalization 4.0

The Fourth Industrial Revolution

Communities

Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution

Our Impact

History

Centre for Cybersecurity

Klaus Schwab

Pictures

Media

Contact Us

Mapping Global Transformations

Careers

Open Forum

World Economic Forum LLC

Code of Conduct

World Economic Forum Privacy Policy

Sustainability

Media

News

Accreditation

Subscribe to our news

Members & Partners

Member login to TopLink

Strategic Partners' area

Partner Institutes' area

Global sites

Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution

Centre for Cybersecurity

Open Forum

Global Shapers

Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship

EN ES FR 中文 日本語

© 2019 World Economic Forum

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service

